The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies announced today that they will request public comment on a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) that would implement new risk-based capital requirements in the United States for large, internationally active banking organizations. The NPR details the agencies' plans for implementing the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision's (BCBS) new capital accord (Basel II) that was issued in 2004. The agencies also will request comment on proposed Basel II supervisory reporting templates. The Federal Reserve Board (Board), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) first adopted risk-based capital standards in 1989. Those standards were based on the Basel Capital Accord that the BCBS originally issued in 1988 (Basel I). For banking organizations that meet qualifying criteria, the Basel II NPR would replace U.S. rules implementing Basel I. The proposed framework would be mandatory for large, internationally active banking organizations and optional for others. In March of this year, the Board released a preliminary draft of the Basel II NPR. The version being made available today differs in some respects from the March draft. For example, the agencies have responded to certain requests from the industry to seek comment on alternative risk-based capital approaches and have clarified that in evaluating credit risk, banking organizations should not rely on the possibility of U.S. government financial assistance, except for the financial assistance that the government has legally committed to provide. The final document, which will be published in the Federal Register shortly, should be used as the basis for comments. Separately, the agencies announced that they will request comment on proposed revisions to the market risk capital rules that the OCC, Board, and FDIC have used since 1997 for banking organizations with significant exposure to market risk. Under the market risk capital rule, certain banking organizations are required to calculate a capital requirement for the general market risk of their covered positions and the specific risk of their covered debt and equity positions. The proposed revisions would enhance the rule's risk sensitivity and would require public disclosures of certain qualitative and quantitative market risk information. The notice of proposed rulemaking on the market risk capital rule would implement changes the BCBS approved in 2005 and also would apply to certain savings associations, which currently are not covered under the rule. The agencies will also seek comment on proposed supervisory reporting templates related to the market risk capital rule. The Board, FDIC, OCC and OTS request comments on the proposals within 120 days of publication in the Federal Register. The proposals are attached. The agencies remain committed to issuing in the near future additional proposed revisions to their existing risk-based capital rules, known as Basel IA, in a timeframe that will allow for overlapping comment periods for both the Basel II NPR and the NPR for the proposed Basel IA revisions. Basel IINotice of proposed rulemakingDraft Federal Register notice and supervisory reporting templates (501 KB PDF) Market riskNotice of proposed rulemaking (291 KB PDF)Notice of proposed rulemaking (161 KB TXT)Draft Federal Register notice and supervisory reporting templates (71 KB PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application filed by First National Bank Group, Inc., Edinburg, to acquire up to 9.9 percent of the voting shares of Southside Bancshares, Incorporated, Tyler, both in Texas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application by Fédération Nationale du Crédit Agricole and SAS Rue La Boétie, both of Paris, France, to become bank holding companies and to retain control of Espirito Santo Bank, Miami, Florida, through their subsidiary in Paris, Crédit Agricole S.A. The Board also approved the application by Calyon, S.A., a foreign bank subsidiary also in Paris of Crédit Agricole S.A., to establish a branch in Los Angeles, California. Attached are the Board's Orders relating to these actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application filed by Glacier Bancorp, Inc., Kalispell, to acquire Citizens Development Company, Billings, and its subsidiary banks: First Citizens Bank of Billings, Billings; First National Bank of Lewistown, Lewistown; Western Bank of Chinook National Association, Chinook; First Citizens Bank, National Association, Columbia Falls; and Citizens State Bank, Hamilton, all of Montana. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the notice filed by Wachovia Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina, to acquire all the voting shares of Golden West Financial Corporation ("Golden West"), Oakland, California, and thereby acquire World Savings Bank FSB, Oakland, California, and World Savings Bank FSB (Texas), Houston, Texas, and the other nonbanking subsidiaries of Golden West. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application filed by Passumpsic Bancorp, St. Johnsbury, Vermont, to merge with The Siwooganock Holding Company, Inc. ("Siwooganock") and acquire its subsidiary bank, The Siwooganock Bank, and Siwooganock's ownership of 10 percent of the voting shares of The Lancaster National Bank, all of Lancaster, New Hampshire. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Governor Susan Schmidt Bies Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Bachus, Representative Sanders, and members of the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, I thank you for the opportunity to discuss the developments relating to bank regulatory capital requirements in the United States, including the U.S. implementation of Basel II and updates to regulatory capital rules for market risk, as well as the regulatory agencies' proposed guidance on commercial real estate (CRE) concentration risk. Developments Related to Regulatory Capital Requirements in the United StatesAs Subcommittee members may know, last week there were some very positive developments in the process to revise regulatory capital requirements for large, internationally active U.S. banking institutions. First, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation board approved theBasel II notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR)on the advanced capital adequacy framework, commonly referred to as Basel II. At the same time, the FDIC board approved anNPR that would update the U.S. regulatory capital rules for market risk exposures. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision took similar actions on the same day. Together with the Federal Reserve's approval of the draft Basel II NPR in March and the market risk NPR in August, these steps complete all necessary approvals for the two NPRs to be published in theFederal Registerfor formal public comment. Proposed templates for regulatory reporting requirements associated with the two NPRs will be published in theFederal Registerfor comment at the same time. Regarding market risk exposures, that NPR is based on a set of revisions developed jointly by the Basel Committee and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) in 2005 to update the Market Risk Amendment (MRA), developed a decade ago by the Basel Committee. These amendments would apply to any banking organization that has significant trading book activity, whether it stays on Basel I or moves to Basel II in the United States. The market risk NPR is intended to improve the risk sensitivity of the market risk capital framework. Further, it will serve to level the playing field between U.S. banking organizations and securities firms that are subject to similar capital requirements. Moving to the main focus of today's hearing, the Basel II framework represents an important effort by supervisors to integrate modern risk-management practices with regulatory capital requirements. We are pleased that the four federal banking agencies have reached consensus to move ahead with the process for Basel II and the market risk update. We recognize the significance of this development to the industry, the Congress, and others who have waited for greater specificity about U.S. efforts to implement Basel II. It has taken quite a bit of work to reach this point. I would like to thank my colleagues here at this table and their staffs, as well as the Fed's own staff, for their tireless efforts. Overview of Proposed RulemakingsThe Basel II NPR is designed to improve the risk sensitivity of U.S. bank regulatory capital requirements and to enhance the risk-measurement and -management practices of large, internationally active U.S. banking organizations. The NPR is based on the 2004 capital adequacy framework released by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. That framework contains the now-familiar "three pillars" of minimum capital requirements for credit and operational risk (Pillar 1), supervisory review (Pillar 2) and public disclosure (Pillar 3). As you are aware, the agencies propose to adopt all three pillars in the United States. In Pillar 1 as proposed by the Basel II NPR, only the most advanced internal ratings-based approach (A-IRB) for credit risk and the advanced measurement approaches (AMA) for operational risk would be available, and the framework as a whole would be required only for the largest, most complex, internationally active U.S. institutions. In contrast, in many other countriesallbanking organizations are required to adopt Basel II because Basel I will be dropped when Basel II takes effect. To make Basel II appropriate for the wide variety of financial institutions, three credit risk and three operational risk approaches were developed in the 2004 framework. The A-IRB approach for credit risk in the Basel II NPR requires institutions to estimate key risk parameters for each type of credit exposure, subject to supervisory review, and to calculate a capital requirement by using those risk parameters as inputs. The AMA approach for operational risk requires institutions to calculate a capital requirement based on their individual operational risk profile--again, subject to supervisory review. The Basel II NPR also specifies, as part of Pillar 2, that each institution must develop a rigorous internal process for assessing its overall or total capital adequacy in relation to its risk profile for other types of risk and through economic cycles. These internal assessments will enable each institution to determine the appropriate level of capital for its unique long-term business strategy. These internal capital assessments are, we believe, critically important, and are also subject to supervisory review. Finally, institutions must publicly disclose key information relating to credit and operational risks, under Pillar 3, to ensure adequate transparency for market participants, customers, and counterparties, so that market discipline can also work effectively to differentiate risk exposures among banking organizations. I would like to stress that the Basel II framework has three Pillars and note that Pillars 2 and 3 are critical components of the overall framework. They should not be overlooked. To accompany the Basel II and market risk proposals, the agencies plan to publish in theFederal Registerreporting requirements for institutions planning to adopt Basel II and the updated market risk rules in the United States. Each institution that qualifies for and applies the Basel II capital rules and the updated market risk rules would file quarterly regulatory data, some of which would remain confidential, for the agencies' use in assessing and monitoring the levels and components of each reporting entity's risk-based capital requirements and the adequacy of the entity's capital. These data also would support the agencies' efforts to analyze the quantitative impact and competitive implications of the Basel II capital rules and the updated market risk rules on individual reporting entities and on an industrywide basis. In addition, the reporting schedules will help clarify for these entities our expectations surrounding the systems and other infrastructure necessary for implementation and validation of the two proposals. The submitted data would supplement on-site examination processes, and the data released publicly would provide other interested parties with information about banks' risk profiles and capital adequacy. Importance of the Regulatory Capital ProposalsWhile our reasons for moving to Basel II have not changed since we began this endeavor, I believe they are worth reiterating. Our core reason is that the current Basel I framework is inadequate for the largest, most complex U.S. banking organizations. The current Basel I capital requirements simply are not able to capture the full array of risks facing these organizations. For example, they do not explicitly recognize the operational risk embedded in many of the services from which the largest institutions generate a good portion of their revenues today. Further, Basel I does not differentiate the riskiness of assets within the major asset types based on either borrower creditworthiness or the presence of collateral or other risk mitigants. This lack of sophistication can lead to significant distortions and capital arbitrage. The capital required for the various types of exposures should reflect the unique business strategy of each institution, rather than be based on an assumed homogeneous risk position. As banks consciously choose to take higher risk exposures, Basel II requires them to hold additional capital to reflect their business choice. Basel I capital is fixed throughout economic and business credit cycles, and as such, does not require banks to increase capital as their potential for losses rises. Basel II addresses this by including in Pillar 2 the requirement that the bank have a plan in place to ensure that sufficient capital will be available in the downturn of the economic cycle. Thus, for the largest organizations, we need to move beyond Basel I to a more risk-sensitive and more comprehensive framework for assessing capital adequacy. Basel II represents the concerted efforts of the international and U.S. supervisory community, in consultation with banks and other stakeholders, to develop such a framework, drawing upon well-known economic capital concepts that the largest banks already employ as part of their risk management efforts. In addition to its supervisory authority, the Federal Reserve, as the nation's central bank, has responsibility for maintaining stable financial markets and ensuring a strong financial system. That responsibility mandates that we require banking organizations to operate in a safe and sound manner with adequate capital that appropriately supports the risks they take. This is especially critical in today's environment where we have a growing number of banking institutions with more than $1 trillion in assets, complex balance sheets, opaque off-balance sheet transactions, and far-reaching operations that pose significant risk-management challenges that are fundamentally different from those faced by smaller institutions. Naturally, we must also ensure that our regulations and supervisory oversight are in tune with bank practice, are able to identify the risks being taken by banks today, and have enough flexibility that they will continue to be prudent and relevant in an ever-changing risk environment. As Chairman Bernanke has noted, a regulatory and supervisory system that is not in tune with the financial marketplace may increase the costs of regulation, stifle efficiency and innovation, and ultimately be less effective in mitigating the moral hazard problems associated with the federal safety net. The advanced approaches of Basel II are much more risk sensitive, cover more areas of potential risk facing banking organizations, and provide incentives for these institutions to improve risk measurement and management. In addition, Basel II provides supervisors with a more conceptually consistent and more transparent framework for evaluating systemic risk in the banking system, particularly through credit cycles. In sum, Basel II will establish a more coherent relationship between regulatory measures of capital adequacy and day-to-day supervision of banks, enabling examiners to better evaluate whether banks are holding prudent levels of capital given their risk profiles. Continuing the Implementation ProcessThe agencies' proposed rulemakings, representing our view about how Basel II should be implemented in the United States, are being published in theFederal Registerfor review by the industry, the Congress, and the general public. The core goal of Basel II, as noted earlier, is to promote the stability of the U.S. financial system by ensuring the safety and soundness of U.S. banks. As Chairman Bernanke has said, the ability of Basel II to promote safety and soundness is the first criterion on which the proposed Basel II framework should be judged. The agencies have presented proposals and will now engage in a continuing dialogue with all interested parties as to whether those proposals meet our stated objectives and can be improved. During the entire process to develop our proposed rulemakings, the agencies have been engaged in a dialogue with the industry, the Congress, and others about both the direction that U.S. Basel II implementation should take and specific implementation details. Many of the comments received to date have been incorporated into our proposals. In that respect, we have been carefully considering comments received so far and discussing among ourselves how to address them. In addition, we have conducted extensive analysis of other information we have been collecting, such as the results of quantitative impact studies (QIS), and those results have helped shape the proposals as well. In making adjustments to our proposals based on comments and new information, we have been as transparent as possible. Going forward, we will seriously consider all comments on the proposals. For example, the proposals contain a number of specific questions soliciting comments in key areas. With these questions, the agencies are trying to highlight areas on which the agencies would like additional information. The agencies will continue to carefully consider all comments received and thoroughly analyze all relevant information as we work to develop a final rule for Basel II. I also want to acknowledge that the agencies have received comments from several banks and other parties suggesting that banks should have more choices with regard to both credit and operational risk in Basel II in the United States. We have taken these comments seriously and the NPR now includes a specific question on whether the U.S. version of Basel II should include a so-called "standardized" approach to credit risk. We look forward to receiving detailed comments on this and all aspects of the proposals. The agencies' proposals contain certain transitional safeguards beyond what is contained in the 2004 framework. Indeed, these proposed safeguards reflect our intent to ensure that there are no material weaknesses in our proposals prior to full operation. First, we continue to monitor institutions' progress toward satisfaction of the Basel II risk-measurement and -management infrastructure standards. In addition, our proposals contain a parallel-run period in which we will have the ability to analyze and directly compare capital requirements under existing rules and those produced by Basel II while institutions remain subject to the current rules. Beyond the parallel run, the agencies have proposed a three-year transitional floor period, more stringent than that in the 2004 Basel II framework, to prevent an unwarranted decline in capital levels. In addition, current supervisory safeguards, such as the existing leverage ratio and prompt corrective action, will continue to provide an important backstop against a potential unwarranted decline in bank capital levels. In general, if we at the Federal Reserve see that the U.S. Basel II proposals are not working as intended, we will seek modifications to them. Proposals to Amend Existing Basel I RulesAt this point, I would like to say just a few words about ongoing efforts to revise the existing Basel I regulatory capital rules for non-Basel II institutions. We expect only one or two dozen institutions to move to the U.S. version of Basel II in the near term, meaning that the vast majority of U.S. institutions will continue to operate under Basel I-based rules, which we intend to amend through a separate rulemaking process. The U.S. Basel I framework has already been amended more than twenty-five times since its introduction in response to changes in banking products and the banking environment and as a result of a better understanding of the risks of individual products and services. The agencies believe that now is another appropriate time to propose modifications to our Basel I rules. The agencies have issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) discussing possible changes to increase the risk sensitivity of the U.S. Basel I rules and to mitigate competitive distortions that might be created by introducing Basel II. We are now reviewing comments on the ANPR and working on a notice of proposed rulemaking. We are mindful that amendments to the Basel I rules should not be too complex or too burdensome for the large number of small- and mid-sized institutions to which the revised rules might apply. Indeed, a number of those commenting on the ANPR advocated leaving existing rules unchanged. With regard to both the Basel II proposals and the proposed Basel I amendments, we understand the need for full transparency. For that reason, we expect to have overlapping comment periods for the Basel II NPR and the NPR for the proposed Basel I amendments. In fact, we want all interested parties to compare, contrast, and comment on the two proposals in overlapping timeframes. Accordingly, either of our proposals could change as a result of comments received or new information gathered. ConclusionFrom the Federal Reserve's perspective, the forthcoming publication of interagency proposals relating to Basel II is a very positive development and demonstrates the ability of the agencies to work cooperatively to modernize our regulatory capital framework. The Federal Reserve's commitment to the Basel II process remains as strong as ever, even as we recognize that the proposals remain subject to further comment and that there is likely much more work to be done. We encourage comments from all interested parties and will give them careful consideration. I would like to emphasize the Federal Reserve desires to ensure that the final rule for Basel II is a substantial enhancement over existing Basel I rules, appropriately capturing the risks of our largest, most complex banks, and encouraging continual improvement in risk-measurement and -management systems. We look forward to working with the other agencies as we enter into the final rule phase of the Basel II process. We recognize that many institutions have been diligently preparing for Basel II implementation and we understand our obligation, as supervisors, to support institutions wanting to adopt Basel II at the first available date. We suggest that those institutions continue to move forward with implementation planning, including identification of gaps in their own preparation. Finally, I would like to assure the Subcommittee members that we at the Federal Reserve are pursuing Basel II because we believe it will help to preserve the safety and soundness of our nation's banking system. In our dual role as central bank and supervisor of banks, bank holding companies, and financial holding companies, the Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that the Basel II framework delivers a strong and risk-sensitive base of capital for our largest and most complex banking institutions. That is why we stand behind the additional safeguards contained in the Basel II NPR to ensure strong capital levels during the transition to the new framework. We will remain vigilant, on an ongoing basis, in monitoring and assessing the impact of Basel II on both individual and aggregate minimum regulatory capital requirements and in employing rigorous and thorough analysis to support our evaluation. By so doing, we believe that the proposals being discussed today can be implemented responsibly and in a safe and sound manner. Proposed Interagency Guidance on Commercial Real Estate Concentration RiskThe four federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies issued joint proposed guidance in January 2006 on the sound risk management of commercial real estate concentrations. The comment period closed in April. The proposed guidance generated significant interest. The Federal Reserve received more than 1,600 comment letters on the proposed guidance. Typically, the comments raised concerns about the intent and purpose of the proposed guidance. Over the past few months, the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies have been reviewing these comments carefully and have met with industry trade groups and individual bankers. In my testimony today, I would like to provide some perspective on why the agencies are concerned about CRE concentrations and the risks they may pose, and why we saw the need to issue the proposed guidance. I will also address the intent of the proposed guidance and some misconceptions that have arisen. First, I would like to explain how we define commercial real estate. For purposes of this guidance, CRE loans include land development and construction loans (both commercial and 1- to-4 family residential construction) and loans secured by raw land, multi-family property, or nonfarm nonresidential property where the primary or a significant source of repayment is derived from rental income associated with the property or the proceeds of the sale, refinancing, or permanent financing of the property. The proposed guidance does not apply to owner-occupied CRE loans where the majority of repayment comes from income from the borrower's business operations. Over the past dozen years, the agencies have observed a material rise in CRE concentrations at many banks. For small- to medium-sized banks, in particular, the growth in CRE concentrations has been significant. This growth in CRE concentrations is understandable as community-based banks have experienced increasing competitive pressure from larger banks and other financial services institutions in other lending areas. We recognize that asset concentrations can, on a practical basis, be difficult to avoid due to an institution's marketplace, area of expertise, or competitive environment. However, as experience has amply demonstrated, large and growing asset concentrations such as we are seeing today in some banks can adversely affect banks' earnings and capital, and indeed banks' safety and soundness, if not properly managed. For that reason, prudent banks have long understood the importance of managing credit concentration risks--it is one of the basic tenets of banking that the Federal Reserve has long emphasized. So what exactly are concentrations of credit and what risks do they pose to institutions? Concentrations of credit are generally defined as groups or classes of loans or other credit exposures that share common risk characteristics or sensitivity to adverse economic, financial or business developments. For a given concentration, when weaknesses develop in a common risk factor or factors, loans within that concentration may be adversely affected, even if every individual loan has been underwritten prudently. As bank supervisors, we have seen the dangers of credit concentrations in previous CRE credit cycles. Let me provide you with some details on the trend we have observed. CRE concentrations have almost doubled between 1992 and 2005 for all commercial and savings banks with assets between $100 million and $10 billion. During this period, for those banks with assets between $100 million and $1 billion, CRE concentrations rose from 160 percent to 294 percent of capital, while for those with assets between $1 billion and $10 billion, CRE concentrations rose from 143 percent to 266 percent of capital. Why are the agencies focusing on CRE concentration risk? The agencies are concerned that the high CRE concentrations would make institutions more vulnerable to adverse changes in CRE markets. CRE markets tend to be among the most cyclical, prone to boom and bust economic cycles. This is because a poorly underwritten project or overbuilding in a market can have significant negative effects on CRE loans that are soundly underwritten. To increase occupancy rates, weaker projects may lower rents and provide more generous terms to attract tenants. This in turn can reduce cash flow to stronger properties and put those credits at risk. As you know, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, concentrations in CRE lending, coupled with weak underwriting and depressed CRE markets, contributed to large credit losses at some banks, significant numbers of bank failures, and financial stress at many other banks. After recovering from the severe credit losses of that CRE downturn, most U.S. CRE markets have enjoyed very benign conditions. But investment in CRE is again growing strongly, and we expect banks to assess the vulnerabilities of their portfolios to loss in expectation of the next downturn. Compounding our concern about rising CRE concentrations is feedback from our examiners that some institutions' risk-management practices have not kept pace with the growth in their CRE concentrations. Supervisory staff have found weaknesses in fundamental risk-management areas such as board and management oversight, risk assessment, and monitoring. In addition, examiners have observed that institutions have not always sufficiently addressed CRE concentration risk in their strategic and capital planning. We are also carefully monitoring underwriting standards. While the U.S. CRE market is generally performing well, underwriting terms and conditions have been softening over the past couple of years, albeit not to the extent seen in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Loosening loan covenants, expanding interest-only periods, and extending amortizations are some examples of the weakening underwriting terms that we are currently observing. Capitalization rates of CRE projects--which measure the expected investor return on real estate investments--are also near historical lows, which raises concerns about collateral values and loan-to-value ratios in the event capitalization rates should return to historical mean levels. Many bankers have argued that the agencies already have the supervisory tools available to address concerns about concentrations at individual banks and that the guidance would add unnecessary regulatory burden. Our current real estate lending guidelines were issued in 1993 under the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act. The issuance of guidance to banks and examiners is one of our most important supervisory tools for focusing attention on emerging risk issues before they become larger problems and for articulating supervisory expectations to our institutions. Given the rising concentration levels, and the current stage of this CRE cycle, we believe that there is now a need for additional CRE guidance to reinforce and build upon our existing guidance and to ensure a consistent supervisory approach. It is important to stress that the intent of the proposed guidance is not to restrict CRE lending but rather to provide a framework for a safe and sound CRE lending program. The agencies recognize that financial institutions play a vital role in providing credit to their communities. The main message in the proposed guidance is that banking institutions need to identify and manage credit-concentration risks appropriately. Under the proposed guidance, we would expect banks to strengthen their management practices as their concentration risks grow. The proposed guidance sets forth risk management practices that are well within the capabilities of many institutions and, in fact, a number of institutions already have many of these practices in place. Not surprisingly, the establishment of explicit thresholds in the proposal has generated significant controversy. Bankers have argued that the thresholds are arbitrary and will be viewed as hard lending limits by examiners and the industry. I want to re-emphasize that the agencies' intent in proposing these thresholds was not to limit an institution's CRE lending but to ensure that risk-management practices are commensurate with this activity. Rather, the thresholds should be viewed as supervisory screens that examiners should use to identify banks with potential CRE concentration risk. Examiners would expect organizations to strengthen their portfolio risk management as CRE concentrations grow. Institutions are expected to conduct their own analyses of CRE concentration risk and establish their own concentration limits. Institutions, after all, are in the best position to identify and understand their concentration risk. Another significant concern expressed in the comment letters by bankers is that the proposed guidance will be implemented in an inconsistent manner, creating an uneven playing field with some banks facing higher supervisory expectations. Issuing the guidance on an interagency basis should encourage a consistent supervisory approach. Further, the agencies are also developing interagency training materials about the new guidance for their examiners to support more effective and consistent implementation. Another concern expressed by bankers is that examiners will take a "one-size-fits-all" supervisory approach and will not consider a bank's specific portfolio characteristics and risk-management practices when applying the guidance. The supervisory evaluation of institutions' CRE concentration risk would always be conducted on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration the institution's own analysis of its CRE concentration risk. The diversity of an institution's CRE portfolio, the effectiveness of an institution's risk-management practices, and the presence of any other factors that mitigate its risks would be key considerations in the supervisory evaluation of the level of an institution's CRE concentration risk. Bankers in their comments also have expressed concern about how examiners will evaluate capital adequacy for banks with a CRE concentration. The proposed guidance addresses capital adequacy in a principles-based manner, noting that institutions should hold capital commensurate with the level and nature of all their risk, including their concentration risk. This message is entirely consistent with the agencies' existing capital adequacy guidelines. In evaluating capital adequacy, the agencies will consider, for example, the level and nature of inherent risk in an institution's CRE portfolio as well as management expertise, historical performance, underwriting standards, risk-management practices, market conditions, and any loan loss reserves allocated for CRE concentration risk. Moreover, the quality of institutions' risk-management practices will be a significant consideration in the evaluation of capital adequacy. Our concerns about capital adequacy will be reduced if an institution has strong risk-management practices. On the other hand, if an institution has inadequate risk management and no prospects for near-term improvement, there could be a concern that the institution may not have sufficient capital to serve as a buffer against unexpected losses from CRE concentrations. Finally, bankers' comments have expressed concerns about how the issuance of the proposed guidance might affect the availability of CRE credit. The proposed CRE concentration guidance is not intended to limit or discourage institutions' CRE lending. We recognize that such lending is an important business activity for banks. We also believe that CRE concentration risk can be safely managed. In that regard, the proposed guidance is simply intended to reinforce and build upon existing guidance on risk-management practices for addressing the risks arising from concentrations in CRE lending. In conclusion, although it is sometimes an unpopular strategy when loan performance is good, we believe that it is far more prudent, and indeed our responsibility, to work proactively to address small but emerging issues to help prevent their evolution into larger problems for the banking industry and the economy as a whole. That is why we feel it is important to issue this guidance at this time. Thank you very much for your attention. I welcome any comments you may have and will be happy to answer any questions.
Governor Susan Schmidt Bies Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Chairman Shelby, Senator Sarbanes, and members of the Committee, I thank you for the opportunity to discuss recent developments relating to bank regulatory capital requirements in the United States, including the U.S. implementation of Basel II and updates to regulatory capital rules for market risk. As Committee members may know, in the past three weeks there have been some very positive developments in the process to revise regulatory capital requirements for large, internationally active U.S. banking institutions. First, the board of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on September 5th approved the Basel II notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR). At the same time, the FDIC board approved an NPR that would update the U.S. regulatory capital rules for market risk exposures. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision took similar actions on the same day. Together with the Federal Reserve’s approval of the draft Basel II NPR in March and the market risk NPR in August, these steps completed all necessary approvals for the two NPRs. Then just yesterday, the two NPRs were published in theFederal Register, initiating the process for formal public comment. Proposed templates for regulatory reporting requirements associated with the two NPRs were also published for comment yesterday in theFederal Register. The market risk NPR is based on a set of revisions developed jointly by the Basel Committee and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) in 2005 to update the Market Risk Amendment (MRA) developed a decade ago by the Basel Committee. The revised market risk rule would apply to any banking organization that has significant trading book activity, whether it stays on Basel I or moves to Basel II in the United States. The market risk NPR is intended to improve the risk sensitivity of the market risk capital framework and to reduce the incidence of arbitrage between the banking book and the trading book. Further, the NPR will serve to level the playing field between U.S. banking organizations and securities firms that are subject to similar capital requirements. Moving to the main focus of today’s hearing, the Basel II framework represents an important effort by bank supervisors to integrate modern risk-management practices with regulatory capital requirements. We are pleased that the four federal banking agencies have reached consensus to move ahead with the process for Basel II implementation. We recognize the significance of this development to the industry, the Congress, and others who have waited for greater specificity about U.S. efforts to implement Basel II. It has taken quite a bit of work to reach this point. I would like to thank my colleagues here at this table and their staffs, as well as the Fed’s own staff, for their tireless efforts. Overview of Proposed RulemakingsThe Basel II NPR is designed to improve the risk sensitivity of U.S. bank regulatory capital requirements and to enhance the risk-measurement and -management practices of large, internationally active U.S. banking organizations. The NPR is based on the 2004 capital adequacy framework released by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. That framework contains the now-familiar “three pillars” of regulatory capital requirements for credit and operational risk (Pillar 1), supervisory review (Pillar 2) and public disclosure (Pillar 3). As you are aware, the agencies propose to adopt all three pillars in the United States. Pillar 1 of Basel II provides banks with three options for computing credit risk capital requirements and three options for computing operational risk capital requirements. In Pillar 1 as proposed by the Basel II NPR, however, only the advanced internal ratings-based approach (A-IRB) for credit risk and the advanced measurement approaches (AMA) for operational risk would be available, and the framework as a whole would be required only for the largest, most complex, internationally active U.S. institutions. The A-IRB approach for credit risk in the Basel II NPR requires institutions to estimate key risk parameters for each type of credit exposure, subject to supervisory review, and to calculate a capital requirement by using those risk parameters as inputs to supervisory formulas. The AMA approach for operational risk requires institutions to calculate a capital requirement based on their individual operational risk profile--again, subject to supervisory review. The Basel II NPR also specifies, as part of Pillar 2, that each institution must develop a rigorous internal process for assessing its overall capital adequacy in relation to its total risk profile through the economic cycle. These internal assessments will enable each institution to determine the appropriate level of capital for its unique long-term business strategy. These Pillar 2 internal capital assessments are, we believe, critically important, and are also subject to supervisory review. Finally, institutions must publicly disclose key information relating to credit and operational risks, under Pillar 3, to ensure adequate transparency for market participants, customers, and counterparties, so that market discipline can also work effectively to differentiate risk exposures among banking organizations. I would like to stress that the Basel II framework has three Pillars and note that Pillars 2 and 3 are critical components of the overall framework. They should not be overlooked. As I noted, proposed reporting requirements for institutions planning to adopt Basel II and the updated market risk rules in the United States were also recently published in theFederal Register. Each institution that qualifies for and applies the Basel II capital rules and the updated market risk rules would file quarterly regulatory data, some of which would remain confidential, for the agencies’ use in assessing and monitoring the levels and components of each reporting entity’s risk-based capital requirements and the adequacy of the entity’s capital. These data also would support the agencies’ efforts to analyze the quantitative impact and competitive implications of the Basel II capital rules and the updated market risk rules on individual reporting entities and on an industrywide basis. In addition, the reporting schedules will help clarify for these entities our expectations surrounding the systems and other infrastructure necessary for implementation and validation of the two proposals. The submitted data would supplement on-site examination processes, and the data released publicly would provide other interested parties with information about banks’ risk profiles and capital adequacy. Importance of the Regulatory Capital ProposalsWhile our reasons for moving to Basel II have not changed since we began this endeavor, I believe they are worth reiterating. Our core reason is that the current Basel I framework is inadequate for the largest, most complex U.S. banking organizations. The current Basel I capital requirements simply are not able to capture the full array of risks facing these organizations. For example, they do not explicitly recognize the operational risk embedded in many of the services from which the largest institutions generate a good portion of their revenues today. Further, Basel I does not differentiate the riskiness of assets within the major asset types based on either borrower creditworthiness or the presence of collateral or other risk mitigants. This lack of sophistication can lead to significant distortions and capital arbitrage. The capital required for each exposure should reflect the credit risk of that particular exposure. As banks consciously choose to take higher risk exposures, Basel II requires them to hold additional capital to reflect their business choice. Basel I capital is fixed throughout economic and business credit cycles, and as such, does not require banks to increase capital as their potential for losses rises. Basel II addresses this by including in Pillar 2 the requirement that the bank have a plan in place to ensure that sufficient capital will be available in the downturn of the economic cycle. Thus, for the largest organizations, we need to move beyond Basel I to a more risk-sensitive and more comprehensive framework for assessing capital adequacy. Basel II represents the concerted efforts of the international and U.S. supervisory community, in consultation with banks and other stakeholders, to develop such a framework, drawing upon well-known economic capital concepts that the largest banks already employ as part of their risk management efforts. In addition to its supervisory authority, the Federal Reserve, as the nation’s central bank, has responsibility for maintaining stable financial markets and ensuring a strong financial system. That responsibility mandates that we require banking organizations to operate in a safe and sound manner with adequate capital that appropriately supports the risks they take. This is especially critical in today’s environment where we have a growing number of banking institutions with more than $1 trillion in assets, complex balance sheets, opaque off-balance sheet transactions, and far-reaching operations that pose significant risk-management challenges that are fundamentally different from those faced by smaller institutions. Naturally, we must also ensure that our regulations and supervisory oversight are in tune with bank practice, are able to identify the risks being taken by banks today, and have enough flexibility that they will continue to be prudent and relevant in an ever-changing risk environment. As Chairman Bernanke has noted, a regulatory and supervisory system that is not in tune with the financial marketplace may increase the costs of regulation, stifle efficiency and innovation, and ultimately be less effective in mitigating the moral hazard problems associated with the federal safety net. The advanced approaches of Basel II are much more risk sensitive, cover more areas of potential risk facing banking organizations, and provide better incentives for institutions to improve risk measurement and management. In addition, Basel II provides supervisors with a more conceptually consistent and more transparent framework for evaluating systemic risk in the banking system, particularly through credit cycles. In sum, Basel II will establish a more coherent relationship between regulatory measures of capital adequacy and day-to-day supervision of banks, enabling examiners to better evaluate whether banks are holding prudent levels of capital given their risk profiles. Continuing the Implementation ProcessThe agencies’ proposed rulemakings, representing our view about how Basel II should be implemented in the United States, have now been published in theFederal Registerfor review by the industry, the Congress, and the general public. The core goal of Basel II, as noted earlier, is to promote the stability of the U.S. financial system by ensuring the safety and soundness of U.S. banks. As Chairman Bernanke has said, the ability of Basel II to promote safety and soundness is the first criterion on which the proposed Basel II framework should be judged. The agencies have presented proposals and will now engage in a continuing dialogue with all interested parties as to whether those proposals meet our stated objectives and how they can be improved. During the entire process to develop our proposed rulemakings, the agencies have been engaged in a dialogue with the industry, the Congress, and others about both the general direction that U.S. Basel II implementation should take and specific implementation details. Many of the comments received to date have been incorporated into our proposals. In that respect, we have been carefully considering comments received so far and discussing among ourselves how to address them. In addition, we have conducted extensive analysis of other information we have collected, such as the results of quantitative impact studies (QIS), and those results have helped shape the proposals as well. In making adjustments to our proposals based on comments and new information, we have been as transparent as possible. Going forward, we will seriously consider all comments on the proposals. For example, the proposals contain a number of specific questions soliciting comments in key areas. With these questions, the agencies are trying to highlight areas on which we would like additional information. The agencies will continue to carefully consider all comments received and thoroughly analyze all relevant information as we work to develop a final rule for Basel II. The agencies’ Basel II proposals contain certain transitional safeguards beyond what is contained in the 2004 Basel Committee framework. Indeed, these proposed safeguards reflect our intent to ensure that there are no material weaknesses in our proposals prior to full operation. In the coming years, we will continue to monitor institutions’ progress toward satisfaction of the Basel II risk-measurement and -management infrastructure standards. In addition, our proposals contain a parallel-run period of at least one year in which we will have the ability to analyze and directly compare capital requirements under existing rules and those produced by Basel II while institutions remain subject to the current rules. Beyond the parallel run, the agencies have proposed a three-year transitional floor period, more stringent than that in the 2004 Basel II framework, to prevent an unwarranted decline in capital levels. In addition, current supervisory safeguards, such as the existing leverage ratio and prompt corrective action, will continue to provide an important backstop against a potential unwarranted decline in bank capital levels. In general, if we at the Federal Reserve see that the U.S. Basel II proposals are not working as intended, we will seek modifications to them. Providing Alternative ApproachesI also want to acknowledge that the agencies have received comments from several banks and other parties suggesting that banks should have more choices with regard to both credit and operational risk in the U.S. implementation of Basel II. We have taken these suggestions seriously, and the NPR now includes a specific question on whether the U.S. version of Basel II should include a so-called “standardized” approach. As you may know, in many other countriesallbanking organizations are required to adopt Basel II because Basel I will be dropped when Basel II takes effect. Since Basel II will then apply to a wide variety of banking organizations, the 2004 framework provides for alternative approaches. The possibility of introducing a standardized option for credit risk, similar to that set forth in the original Basel II 2004 framework raises some difficult public policy issues, which I hope will be addressed by commenters. Foremost is whether such a standardized option is sufficiently risk-sensitive for the largest, most complex, internationally active U.S. banking organizations and whether related disclosures would contribute to better market discipline. While it is true that large international banks in the other G-10 countries theoretically have a choice among the various Basel II credit risk and operational risk approaches, in practice it appears these banks will be adopting the more risk-sensitive advanced approaches. Indeed, the Basel Committee’s report on the results of the fifth Quantitative Impact Study (QIS-5) shows that although the Basel II standardized approaches are available in the G-10 countries other than the United States, no large internationally active bank in those countries has indicated that it plans to adopt the standardized credit risk approach. All fifty-six of the large, non-U.S. banks in the sample said they are most likely to adopt the internal-ratings based approaches for credit risk.1 A second public policy issue is how to address the potential for cherry-picking that could accompany a standardized option for credit risk. A number of banks have suggested that their ideal Basel II capital rule would allow them to mix and match elements of both the standardized and advanced approaches--perhaps the standardized approach for wholesale and retail credits, the AMA for operational risk, and the expected positive exposure approach for derivatives and securities financing transactions. Allowing such customization or cherry-picking, where a bank is allowed to select a different approach for each portfolio in order to minimize its aggregate capital requirement, could materially weaken the regulatory capital framework for U.S. banks and, along with it, the effectiveness of prompt corrective action policies. Clearly, there is a natural tension between the private interests of banks in maximizing shareholder profits, on the one hand, and the public interest in protecting the federal safety net and promoting bank safety and soundness, on the other hand. Lastly, some have suggested that perhaps Basel IA could serve as a standardized approach for our core Basel II banks. Unfortunately, the agencies have been designing Basel IA with the very different risk profiles and economic resources of our smaller banks in mind, and in particular to address competitive concerns between smaller banks and the Basel II banks. We hope that comments on the Basel IA NPR will give us guidance in this area also. In sum, the Federal Reserve believes strongly that very careful consideration will need to be given to the possible design and implementation of any standardized approach for Basel II in the United States should the agencies decide ultimately to move in that direction. We look forward to getting more detailed comments on how a standardized approach might fit into the U.S. Basel II framework. Proposals to Amend Existing Basel I RulesAt this point, I would like to say just a few words about ongoing efforts to revise the existing Basel I regulatory capital rules for non-Basel II institutions. We expect only one or two dozen institutions to move to the U.S. version of Basel II in the near term, meaning that the vast majority of U.S. institutions will continue to operate under Basel I-based rules, which we intend to amend through a separate rulemaking process. The U.S. Basel I framework has already been amended more than twenty-five times since its introduction in response to changes in banking products and the financial services marketplace. The agencies believe that now is another appropriate time to propose modifications to our Basel I rules. The agencies have issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) discussing possible changes to increase the risk sensitivity of the U.S. Basel I rules and to mitigate competitive distortions that might be created by introducing Basel II. We have reviewed comments on the ANPR and are working on a notice of proposed rulemaking. We are mindful that amendments to the Basel I rules should not be too complex or too burdensome for the large number of small- and mid-sized institutions to which the revised rules might apply. Indeed, a number of those commenting on the ANPR advocated leaving existing rules unchanged. With regard to both the Basel II proposals and the proposed Basel I amendments, we understand the need for full transparency. For that reason, we expect to have overlapping comment periods for the Basel II NPR and the NPR for the proposed Basel I amendments. In fact, we want all interested parties to compare, contrast, and comment on the two proposals in overlapping timeframes. Accordingly, either of our proposals could change as a result of comments received or new information gathered. ConclusionFrom the Federal Reserve’s perspective, the publication of interagency proposals relating to Basel II is a very positive development and demonstrates the ability of the agencies to work cooperatively to modernize our regulatory capital framework. The Federal Reserve’s commitment to the Basel II process remains as strong as ever, even as we recognize that the proposals remain subject to further comment and that there is likely much more work to be done. We encourage comments from all interested parties and will give them careful consideration. I would like to emphasize that the Federal Reserve desires to ensure that the final rule for Basel II is a substantial enhancement over existing Basel I rules, appropriately capturing the risks of our largest, most complex banks, and encouraging continual improvement in risk-measurement and -management systems. We look forward to working with the other agencies as we enter into the final rule phase of the Basel II process. We recognize that many institutions have been diligently preparing for Basel II implementation and we understand our obligation, as supervisors, to support institutions wanting to adopt Basel II at the first available date. We suggest that those institutions continue to move forward with implementation planning, including identification of gaps in their own preparation. Finally, I would like to assure the Committee members that we at the Federal Reserve are pursuing Basel II because we believe it will help to preserve the safety and soundness of our nation’s banking system. In our dual role as the central bank and supervisor of banks, bank holding companies, and financial holding companies, the Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that the Basel II framework delivers a strong and risk-sensitive base of capital for our largest and most complex banking institutions. That is why we stand behind the additional safeguards contained in the Basel II NPR to ensure strong capital levels during the transition to the new framework. We will remain vigilant, on an ongoing basis, in monitoring and assessing the impact of Basel II on both individual and aggregate regulatory capital requirements and in employing rigorous and thorough analysis to support our evaluation. By so doing, we believe that the proposals being discussed today can be implemented responsibly and in a safe and sound manner. Thank you very much for your attention. I welcome any comments you may have and will be happy to answer any questions. Footnotes 1.See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, "Results of the Fifth Quantitative Impact Study (QIS5)," Table 3, The Bank for International Settlements.Return to text
Governor Susan Schmidt Bies Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Chairman Shelby, Senator Sarbanes, and members of the Committee, I thank you for the opportunity to discuss recent developments relating to bank regulatory capital requirements in the United States, including the U.S. implementation of Basel II and updates to regulatory capital rules for market risk. As Committee members may know, in the past three weeks there have been some very positive developments in the process to revise regulatory capital requirements for large, internationally active U.S. banking institutions. First, the board of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on September 5th approved the Basel II notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR). At the same time, the FDIC board approved an NPR that would update the U.S. regulatory capital rules for market risk exposures. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision took similar actions on the same day. Together with the Federal Reserve’s approval of the draft Basel II NPR in March and the market risk NPR in August, these steps completed all necessary approvals for the two NPRs. Then just yesterday, the two NPRs were published in theFederal Register, initiating the process for formal public comment. Proposed templates for regulatory reporting requirements associated with the two NPRs were also published for comment yesterday in theFederal Register. The market risk NPR is based on a set of revisions developed jointly by the Basel Committee and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) in 2005 to update the Market Risk Amendment (MRA) developed a decade ago by the Basel Committee. The revised market risk rule would apply to any banking organization that has significant trading book activity, whether it stays on Basel I or moves to Basel II in the United States. The market risk NPR is intended to improve the risk sensitivity of the market risk capital framework and to reduce the incidence of arbitrage between the banking book and the trading book. Further, the NPR will serve to level the playing field between U.S. banking organizations and securities firms that are subject to similar capital requirements. Moving to the main focus of today’s hearing, the Basel II framework represents an important effort by bank supervisors to integrate modern risk-management practices with regulatory capital requirements. We are pleased that the four federal banking agencies have reached consensus to move ahead with the process for Basel II implementation. We recognize the significance of this development to the industry, the Congress, and others who have waited for greater specificity about U.S. efforts to implement Basel II. It has taken quite a bit of work to reach this point. I would like to thank my colleagues here at this table and their staffs, as well as the Fed’s own staff, for their tireless efforts. Overview of Proposed RulemakingsThe Basel II NPR is designed to improve the risk sensitivity of U.S. bank regulatory capital requirements and to enhance the risk-measurement and -management practices of large, internationally active U.S. banking organizations. The NPR is based on the 2004 capital adequacy framework released by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. That framework contains the now-familiar “three pillars” of regulatory capital requirements for credit and operational risk (Pillar 1), supervisory review (Pillar 2) and public disclosure (Pillar 3). As you are aware, the agencies propose to adopt all three pillars in the United States. Pillar 1 of Basel II provides banks with three options for computing credit risk capital requirements and three options for computing operational risk capital requirements. In Pillar 1 as proposed by the Basel II NPR, however, only the advanced internal ratings-based approach (A-IRB) for credit risk and the advanced measurement approaches (AMA) for operational risk would be available, and the framework as a whole would be required only for the largest, most complex, internationally active U.S. institutions. The A-IRB approach for credit risk in the Basel II NPR requires institutions to estimate key risk parameters for each type of credit exposure, subject to supervisory review, and to calculate a capital requirement by using those risk parameters as inputs to supervisory formulas. The AMA approach for operational risk requires institutions to calculate a capital requirement based on their individual operational risk profile--again, subject to supervisory review. The Basel II NPR also specifies, as part of Pillar 2, that each institution must develop a rigorous internal process for assessing its overall capital adequacy in relation to its total risk profile through the economic cycle. These internal assessments will enable each institution to determine the appropriate level of capital for its unique long-term business strategy. These Pillar 2 internal capital assessments are, we believe, critically important, and are also subject to supervisory review. Finally, institutions must publicly disclose key information relating to credit and operational risks, under Pillar 3, to ensure adequate transparency for market participants, customers, and counterparties, so that market discipline can also work effectively to differentiate risk exposures among banking organizations. I would like to stress that the Basel II framework has three Pillars and note that Pillars 2 and 3 are critical components of the overall framework. They should not be overlooked. As I noted, proposed reporting requirements for institutions planning to adopt Basel II and the updated market risk rules in the United States were also recently published in theFederal Register. Each institution that qualifies for and applies the Basel II capital rules and the updated market risk rules would file quarterly regulatory data, some of which would remain confidential, for the agencies’ use in assessing and monitoring the levels and components of each reporting entity’s risk-based capital requirements and the adequacy of the entity’s capital. These data also would support the agencies’ efforts to analyze the quantitative impact and competitive implications of the Basel II capital rules and the updated market risk rules on individual reporting entities and on an industrywide basis. In addition, the reporting schedules will help clarify for these entities our expectations surrounding the systems and other infrastructure necessary for implementation and validation of the two proposals. The submitted data would supplement on-site examination processes, and the data released publicly would provide other interested parties with information about banks’ risk profiles and capital adequacy. Importance of the Regulatory Capital ProposalsWhile our reasons for moving to Basel II have not changed since we began this endeavor, I believe they are worth reiterating. Our core reason is that the current Basel I framework is inadequate for the largest, most complex U.S. banking organizations. The current Basel I capital requirements simply are not able to capture the full array of risks facing these organizations. For example, they do not explicitly recognize the operational risk embedded in many of the services from which the largest institutions generate a good portion of their revenues today. Further, Basel I does not differentiate the riskiness of assets within the major asset types based on either borrower creditworthiness or the presence of collateral or other risk mitigants. This lack of sophistication can lead to significant distortions and capital arbitrage. The capital required for each exposure should reflect the credit risk of that particular exposure. As banks consciously choose to take higher risk exposures, Basel II requires them to hold additional capital to reflect their business choice. Basel I capital is fixed throughout economic and business credit cycles, and as such, does not require banks to increase capital as their potential for losses rises. Basel II addresses this by including in Pillar 2 the requirement that the bank have a plan in place to ensure that sufficient capital will be available in the downturn of the economic cycle. Thus, for the largest organizations, we need to move beyond Basel I to a more risk-sensitive and more comprehensive framework for assessing capital adequacy. Basel II represents the concerted efforts of the international and U.S. supervisory community, in consultation with banks and other stakeholders, to develop such a framework, drawing upon well-known economic capital concepts that the largest banks already employ as part of their risk management efforts. In addition to its supervisory authority, the Federal Reserve, as the nation’s central bank, has responsibility for maintaining stable financial markets and ensuring a strong financial system. That responsibility mandates that we require banking organizations to operate in a safe and sound manner with adequate capital that appropriately supports the risks they take. This is especially critical in today’s environment where we have a growing number of banking institutions with more than $1 trillion in assets, complex balance sheets, opaque off-balance sheet transactions, and far-reaching operations that pose significant risk-management challenges that are fundamentally different from those faced by smaller institutions. Naturally, we must also ensure that our regulations and supervisory oversight are in tune with bank practice, are able to identify the risks being taken by banks today, and have enough flexibility that they will continue to be prudent and relevant in an ever-changing risk environment. As Chairman Bernanke has noted, a regulatory and supervisory system that is not in tune with the financial marketplace may increase the costs of regulation, stifle efficiency and innovation, and ultimately be less effective in mitigating the moral hazard problems associated with the federal safety net. The advanced approaches of Basel II are much more risk sensitive, cover more areas of potential risk facing banking organizations, and provide better incentives for institutions to improve risk measurement and management. In addition, Basel II provides supervisors with a more conceptually consistent and more transparent framework for evaluating systemic risk in the banking system, particularly through credit cycles. In sum, Basel II will establish a more coherent relationship between regulatory measures of capital adequacy and day-to-day supervision of banks, enabling examiners to better evaluate whether banks are holding prudent levels of capital given their risk profiles. Continuing the Implementation ProcessThe agencies’ proposed rulemakings, representing our view about how Basel II should be implemented in the United States, have now been published in theFederal Registerfor review by the industry, the Congress, and the general public. The core goal of Basel II, as noted earlier, is to promote the stability of the U.S. financial system by ensuring the safety and soundness of U.S. banks. As Chairman Bernanke has said, the ability of Basel II to promote safety and soundness is the first criterion on which the proposed Basel II framework should be judged. The agencies have presented proposals and will now engage in a continuing dialogue with all interested parties as to whether those proposals meet our stated objectives and how they can be improved. During the entire process to develop our proposed rulemakings, the agencies have been engaged in a dialogue with the industry, the Congress, and others about both the general direction that U.S. Basel II implementation should take and specific implementation details. Many of the comments received to date have been incorporated into our proposals. In that respect, we have been carefully considering comments received so far and discussing among ourselves how to address them. In addition, we have conducted extensive analysis of other information we have collected, such as the results of quantitative impact studies (QIS), and those results have helped shape the proposals as well. In making adjustments to our proposals based on comments and new information, we have been as transparent as possible. Going forward, we will seriously consider all comments on the proposals. For example, the proposals contain a number of specific questions soliciting comments in key areas. With these questions, the agencies are trying to highlight areas on which we would like additional information. The agencies will continue to carefully consider all comments received and thoroughly analyze all relevant information as we work to develop a final rule for Basel II. The agencies’ Basel II proposals contain certain transitional safeguards beyond what is contained in the 2004 Basel Committee framework. Indeed, these proposed safeguards reflect our intent to ensure that there are no material weaknesses in our proposals prior to full operation. In the coming years, we will continue to monitor institutions’ progress toward satisfaction of the Basel II risk-measurement and -management infrastructure standards. In addition, our proposals contain a parallel-run period of at least one year in which we will have the ability to analyze and directly compare capital requirements under existing rules and those produced by Basel II while institutions remain subject to the current rules. Beyond the parallel run, the agencies have proposed a three-year transitional floor period, more stringent than that in the 2004 Basel II framework, to prevent an unwarranted decline in capital levels. In addition, current supervisory safeguards, such as the existing leverage ratio and prompt corrective action, will continue to provide an important backstop against a potential unwarranted decline in bank capital levels. In general, if we at the Federal Reserve see that the U.S. Basel II proposals are not working as intended, we will seek modifications to them. Providing Alternative ApproachesI also want to acknowledge that the agencies have received comments from several banks and other parties suggesting that banks should have more choices with regard to both credit and operational risk in the U.S. implementation of Basel II. We have taken these suggestions seriously, and the NPR now includes a specific question on whether the U.S. version of Basel II should include a so-called “standardized” approach. As you may know, in many other countriesallbanking organizations are required to adopt Basel II because Basel I will be dropped when Basel II takes effect. Since Basel II will then apply to a wide variety of banking organizations, the 2004 framework provides for alternative approaches. The possibility of introducing a standardized option for credit risk, similar to that set forth in the original Basel II 2004 framework raises some difficult public policy issues, which I hope will be addressed by commenters. Foremost is whether such a standardized option is sufficiently risk-sensitive for the largest, most complex, internationally active U.S. banking organizations and whether related disclosures would contribute to better market discipline. While it is true that large international banks in the other G-10 countries theoretically have a choice among the various Basel II credit risk and operational risk approaches, in practice it appears these banks will be adopting the more risk-sensitive advanced approaches. Indeed, the Basel Committee’s report on the results of the fifth Quantitative Impact Study (QIS-5) shows that although the Basel II standardized approaches are available in the G-10 countries other than the United States, no large internationally active bank in those countries has indicated that it plans to adopt the standardized credit risk approach. All fifty-six of the large, non-U.S. banks in the sample said they are most likely to adopt the internal-ratings based approaches for credit risk.1 A second public policy issue is how to address the potential for cherry-picking that could accompany a standardized option for credit risk. A number of banks have suggested that their ideal Basel II capital rule would allow them to mix and match elements of both the standardized and advanced approaches--perhaps the standardized approach for wholesale and retail credits, the AMA for operational risk, and the expected positive exposure approach for derivatives and securities financing transactions. Allowing such customization or cherry-picking, where a bank is allowed to select a different approach for each portfolio in order to minimize its aggregate capital requirement, could materially weaken the regulatory capital framework for U.S. banks and, along with it, the effectiveness of prompt corrective action policies. Clearly, there is a natural tension between the private interests of banks in maximizing shareholder profits, on the one hand, and the public interest in protecting the federal safety net and promoting bank safety and soundness, on the other hand. Lastly, some have suggested that perhaps Basel IA could serve as a standardized approach for our core Basel II banks. Unfortunately, the agencies have been designing Basel IA with the very different risk profiles and economic resources of our smaller banks in mind, and in particular to address competitive concerns between smaller banks and the Basel II banks. We hope that comments on the Basel IA NPR will give us guidance in this area also. In sum, the Federal Reserve believes strongly that very careful consideration will need to be given to the possible design and implementation of any standardized approach for Basel II in the United States should the agencies decide ultimately to move in that direction. We look forward to getting more detailed comments on how a standardized approach might fit into the U.S. Basel II framework. Proposals to Amend Existing Basel I RulesAt this point, I would like to say just a few words about ongoing efforts to revise the existing Basel I regulatory capital rules for non-Basel II institutions. We expect only one or two dozen institutions to move to the U.S. version of Basel II in the near term, meaning that the vast majority of U.S. institutions will continue to operate under Basel I-based rules, which we intend to amend through a separate rulemaking process. The U.S. Basel I framework has already been amended more than twenty-five times since its introduction in response to changes in banking products and the financial services marketplace. The agencies believe that now is another appropriate time to propose modifications to our Basel I rules. The agencies have issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) discussing possible changes to increase the risk sensitivity of the U.S. Basel I rules and to mitigate competitive distortions that might be created by introducing Basel II. We have reviewed comments on the ANPR and are working on a notice of proposed rulemaking. We are mindful that amendments to the Basel I rules should not be too complex or too burdensome for the large number of small- and mid-sized institutions to which the revised rules might apply. Indeed, a number of those commenting on the ANPR advocated leaving existing rules unchanged. With regard to both the Basel II proposals and the proposed Basel I amendments, we understand the need for full transparency. For that reason, we expect to have overlapping comment periods for the Basel II NPR and the NPR for the proposed Basel I amendments. In fact, we want all interested parties to compare, contrast, and comment on the two proposals in overlapping timeframes. Accordingly, either of our proposals could change as a result of comments received or new information gathered. ConclusionFrom the Federal Reserve’s perspective, the publication of interagency proposals relating to Basel II is a very positive development and demonstrates the ability of the agencies to work cooperatively to modernize our regulatory capital framework. The Federal Reserve’s commitment to the Basel II process remains as strong as ever, even as we recognize that the proposals remain subject to further comment and that there is likely much more work to be done. We encourage comments from all interested parties and will give them careful consideration. I would like to emphasize that the Federal Reserve desires to ensure that the final rule for Basel II is a substantial enhancement over existing Basel I rules, appropriately capturing the risks of our largest, most complex banks, and encouraging continual improvement in risk-measurement and -management systems. We look forward to working with the other agencies as we enter into the final rule phase of the Basel II process. We recognize that many institutions have been diligently preparing for Basel II implementation and we understand our obligation, as supervisors, to support institutions wanting to adopt Basel II at the first available date. We suggest that those institutions continue to move forward with implementation planning, including identification of gaps in their own preparation. Finally, I would like to assure the Committee members that we at the Federal Reserve are pursuing Basel II because we believe it will help to preserve the safety and soundness of our nation’s banking system. In our dual role as the central bank and supervisor of banks, bank holding companies, and financial holding companies, the Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that the Basel II framework delivers a strong and risk-sensitive base of capital for our largest and most complex banking institutions. That is why we stand behind the additional safeguards contained in the Basel II NPR to ensure strong capital levels during the transition to the new framework. We will remain vigilant, on an ongoing basis, in monitoring and assessing the impact of Basel II on both individual and aggregate regulatory capital requirements and in employing rigorous and thorough analysis to support our evaluation. By so doing, we believe that the proposals being discussed today can be implemented responsibly and in a safe and sound manner. Thank you very much for your attention. I welcome any comments you may have and will be happy to answer any questions. Footnotes 1.See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, "Results of the Fifth Quantitative Impact Study (QIS5)," Table 3, The Bank for International Settlements.Return to text
Governor Susan Schmidt Bies Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Chairman Shelby, Senator Sarbanes, and members of the Committee, I thank you for the opportunity to discuss recent developments relating to bank regulatory capital requirements in the United States, including the U.S. implementation of Basel II and updates to regulatory capital rules for market risk. As Committee members may know, in the past three weeks there have been some very positive developments in the process to revise regulatory capital requirements for large, internationally active U.S. banking institutions. First, the board of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on September 5th approved the Basel II notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR). At the same time, the FDIC board approved an NPR that would update the U.S. regulatory capital rules for market risk exposures. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision took similar actions on the same day. Together with the Federal Reserve’s approval of the draft Basel II NPR in March and the market risk NPR in August, these steps completed all necessary approvals for the two NPRs. Then just yesterday, the two NPRs were published in theFederal Register, initiating the process for formal public comment. Proposed templates for regulatory reporting requirements associated with the two NPRs were also published for comment yesterday in theFederal Register. The market risk NPR is based on a set of revisions developed jointly by the Basel Committee and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) in 2005 to update the Market Risk Amendment (MRA) developed a decade ago by the Basel Committee. The revised market risk rule would apply to any banking organization that has significant trading book activity, whether it stays on Basel I or moves to Basel II in the United States. The market risk NPR is intended to improve the risk sensitivity of the market risk capital framework and to reduce the incidence of arbitrage between the banking book and the trading book. Further, the NPR will serve to level the playing field between U.S. banking organizations and securities firms that are subject to similar capital requirements. Moving to the main focus of today’s hearing, the Basel II framework represents an important effort by bank supervisors to integrate modern risk-management practices with regulatory capital requirements. We are pleased that the four federal banking agencies have reached consensus to move ahead with the process for Basel II implementation. We recognize the significance of this development to the industry, the Congress, and others who have waited for greater specificity about U.S. efforts to implement Basel II. It has taken quite a bit of work to reach this point. I would like to thank my colleagues here at this table and their staffs, as well as the Fed’s own staff, for their tireless efforts. Overview of Proposed RulemakingsThe Basel II NPR is designed to improve the risk sensitivity of U.S. bank regulatory capital requirements and to enhance the risk-measurement and -management practices of large, internationally active U.S. banking organizations. The NPR is based on the 2004 capital adequacy framework released by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. That framework contains the now-familiar “three pillars” of regulatory capital requirements for credit and operational risk (Pillar 1), supervisory review (Pillar 2) and public disclosure (Pillar 3). As you are aware, the agencies propose to adopt all three pillars in the United States. Pillar 1 of Basel II provides banks with three options for computing credit risk capital requirements and three options for computing operational risk capital requirements. In Pillar 1 as proposed by the Basel II NPR, however, only the advanced internal ratings-based approach (A-IRB) for credit risk and the advanced measurement approaches (AMA) for operational risk would be available, and the framework as a whole would be required only for the largest, most complex, internationally active U.S. institutions. The A-IRB approach for credit risk in the Basel II NPR requires institutions to estimate key risk parameters for each type of credit exposure, subject to supervisory review, and to calculate a capital requirement by using those risk parameters as inputs to supervisory formulas. The AMA approach for operational risk requires institutions to calculate a capital requirement based on their individual operational risk profile--again, subject to supervisory review. The Basel II NPR also specifies, as part of Pillar 2, that each institution must develop a rigorous internal process for assessing its overall capital adequacy in relation to its total risk profile through the economic cycle. These internal assessments will enable each institution to determine the appropriate level of capital for its unique long-term business strategy. These Pillar 2 internal capital assessments are, we believe, critically important, and are also subject to supervisory review. Finally, institutions must publicly disclose key information relating to credit and operational risks, under Pillar 3, to ensure adequate transparency for market participants, customers, and counterparties, so that market discipline can also work effectively to differentiate risk exposures among banking organizations. I would like to stress that the Basel II framework has three Pillars and note that Pillars 2 and 3 are critical components of the overall framework. They should not be overlooked. As I noted, proposed reporting requirements for institutions planning to adopt Basel II and the updated market risk rules in the United States were also recently published in theFederal Register. Each institution that qualifies for and applies the Basel II capital rules and the updated market risk rules would file quarterly regulatory data, some of which would remain confidential, for the agencies’ use in assessing and monitoring the levels and components of each reporting entity’s risk-based capital requirements and the adequacy of the entity’s capital. These data also would support the agencies’ efforts to analyze the quantitative impact and competitive implications of the Basel II capital rules and the updated market risk rules on individual reporting entities and on an industrywide basis. In addition, the reporting schedules will help clarify for these entities our expectations surrounding the systems and other infrastructure necessary for implementation and validation of the two proposals. The submitted data would supplement on-site examination processes, and the data released publicly would provide other interested parties with information about banks’ risk profiles and capital adequacy. Importance of the Regulatory Capital ProposalsWhile our reasons for moving to Basel II have not changed since we began this endeavor, I believe they are worth reiterating. Our core reason is that the current Basel I framework is inadequate for the largest, most complex U.S. banking organizations. The current Basel I capital requirements simply are not able to capture the full array of risks facing these organizations. For example, they do not explicitly recognize the operational risk embedded in many of the services from which the largest institutions generate a good portion of their revenues today. Further, Basel I does not differentiate the riskiness of assets within the major asset types based on either borrower creditworthiness or the presence of collateral or other risk mitigants. This lack of sophistication can lead to significant distortions and capital arbitrage. The capital required for each exposure should reflect the credit risk of that particular exposure. As banks consciously choose to take higher risk exposures, Basel II requires them to hold additional capital to reflect their business choice. Basel I capital is fixed throughout economic and business credit cycles, and as such, does not require banks to increase capital as their potential for losses rises. Basel II addresses this by including in Pillar 2 the requirement that the bank have a plan in place to ensure that sufficient capital will be available in the downturn of the economic cycle. Thus, for the largest organizations, we need to move beyond Basel I to a more risk-sensitive and more comprehensive framework for assessing capital adequacy. Basel II represents the concerted efforts of the international and U.S. supervisory community, in consultation with banks and other stakeholders, to develop such a framework, drawing upon well-known economic capital concepts that the largest banks already employ as part of their risk management efforts. In addition to its supervisory authority, the Federal Reserve, as the nation’s central bank, has responsibility for maintaining stable financial markets and ensuring a strong financial system. That responsibility mandates that we require banking organizations to operate in a safe and sound manner with adequate capital that appropriately supports the risks they take. This is especially critical in today’s environment where we have a growing number of banking institutions with more than $1 trillion in assets, complex balance sheets, opaque off-balance sheet transactions, and far-reaching operations that pose significant risk-management challenges that are fundamentally different from those faced by smaller institutions. Naturally, we must also ensure that our regulations and supervisory oversight are in tune with bank practice, are able to identify the risks being taken by banks today, and have enough flexibility that they will continue to be prudent and relevant in an ever-changing risk environment. As Chairman Bernanke has noted, a regulatory and supervisory system that is not in tune with the financial marketplace may increase the costs of regulation, stifle efficiency and innovation, and ultimately be less effective in mitigating the moral hazard problems associated with the federal safety net. The advanced approaches of Basel II are much more risk sensitive, cover more areas of potential risk facing banking organizations, and provide better incentives for institutions to improve risk measurement and management. In addition, Basel II provides supervisors with a more conceptually consistent and more transparent framework for evaluating systemic risk in the banking system, particularly through credit cycles. In sum, Basel II will establish a more coherent relationship between regulatory measures of capital adequacy and day-to-day supervision of banks, enabling examiners to better evaluate whether banks are holding prudent levels of capital given their risk profiles. Continuing the Implementation ProcessThe agencies’ proposed rulemakings, representing our view about how Basel II should be implemented in the United States, have now been published in theFederal Registerfor review by the industry, the Congress, and the general public. The core goal of Basel II, as noted earlier, is to promote the stability of the U.S. financial system by ensuring the safety and soundness of U.S. banks. As Chairman Bernanke has said, the ability of Basel II to promote safety and soundness is the first criterion on which the proposed Basel II framework should be judged. The agencies have presented proposals and will now engage in a continuing dialogue with all interested parties as to whether those proposals meet our stated objectives and how they can be improved. During the entire process to develop our proposed rulemakings, the agencies have been engaged in a dialogue with the industry, the Congress, and others about both the general direction that U.S. Basel II implementation should take and specific implementation details. Many of the comments received to date have been incorporated into our proposals. In that respect, we have been carefully considering comments received so far and discussing among ourselves how to address them. In addition, we have conducted extensive analysis of other information we have collected, such as the results of quantitative impact studies (QIS), and those results have helped shape the proposals as well. In making adjustments to our proposals based on comments and new information, we have been as transparent as possible. Going forward, we will seriously consider all comments on the proposals. For example, the proposals contain a number of specific questions soliciting comments in key areas. With these questions, the agencies are trying to highlight areas on which we would like additional information. The agencies will continue to carefully consider all comments received and thoroughly analyze all relevant information as we work to develop a final rule for Basel II. The agencies’ Basel II proposals contain certain transitional safeguards beyond what is contained in the 2004 Basel Committee framework. Indeed, these proposed safeguards reflect our intent to ensure that there are no material weaknesses in our proposals prior to full operation. In the coming years, we will continue to monitor institutions’ progress toward satisfaction of the Basel II risk-measurement and -management infrastructure standards. In addition, our proposals contain a parallel-run period of at least one year in which we will have the ability to analyze and directly compare capital requirements under existing rules and those produced by Basel II while institutions remain subject to the current rules. Beyond the parallel run, the agencies have proposed a three-year transitional floor period, more stringent than that in the 2004 Basel II framework, to prevent an unwarranted decline in capital levels. In addition, current supervisory safeguards, such as the existing leverage ratio and prompt corrective action, will continue to provide an important backstop against a potential unwarranted decline in bank capital levels. In general, if we at the Federal Reserve see that the U.S. Basel II proposals are not working as intended, we will seek modifications to them. Providing Alternative ApproachesI also want to acknowledge that the agencies have received comments from several banks and other parties suggesting that banks should have more choices with regard to both credit and operational risk in the U.S. implementation of Basel II. We have taken these suggestions seriously, and the NPR now includes a specific question on whether the U.S. version of Basel II should include a so-called “standardized” approach. As you may know, in many other countriesallbanking organizations are required to adopt Basel II because Basel I will be dropped when Basel II takes effect. Since Basel II will then apply to a wide variety of banking organizations, the 2004 framework provides for alternative approaches. The possibility of introducing a standardized option for credit risk, similar to that set forth in the original Basel II 2004 framework raises some difficult public policy issues, which I hope will be addressed by commenters. Foremost is whether such a standardized option is sufficiently risk-sensitive for the largest, most complex, internationally active U.S. banking organizations and whether related disclosures would contribute to better market discipline. While it is true that large international banks in the other G-10 countries theoretically have a choice among the various Basel II credit risk and operational risk approaches, in practice it appears these banks will be adopting the more risk-sensitive advanced approaches. Indeed, the Basel Committee’s report on the results of the fifth Quantitative Impact Study (QIS-5) shows that although the Basel II standardized approaches are available in the G-10 countries other than the United States, no large internationally active bank in those countries has indicated that it plans to adopt the standardized credit risk approach. All fifty-six of the large, non-U.S. banks in the sample said they are most likely to adopt the internal-ratings based approaches for credit risk.1 A second public policy issue is how to address the potential for cherry-picking that could accompany a standardized option for credit risk. A number of banks have suggested that their ideal Basel II capital rule would allow them to mix and match elements of both the standardized and advanced approaches--perhaps the standardized approach for wholesale and retail credits, the AMA for operational risk, and the expected positive exposure approach for derivatives and securities financing transactions. Allowing such customization or cherry-picking, where a bank is allowed to select a different approach for each portfolio in order to minimize its aggregate capital requirement, could materially weaken the regulatory capital framework for U.S. banks and, along with it, the effectiveness of prompt corrective action policies. Clearly, there is a natural tension between the private interests of banks in maximizing shareholder profits, on the one hand, and the public interest in protecting the federal safety net and promoting bank safety and soundness, on the other hand. Lastly, some have suggested that perhaps Basel IA could serve as a standardized approach for our core Basel II banks. Unfortunately, the agencies have been designing Basel IA with the very different risk profiles and economic resources of our smaller banks in mind, and in particular to address competitive concerns between smaller banks and the Basel II banks. We hope that comments on the Basel IA NPR will give us guidance in this area also. In sum, the Federal Reserve believes strongly that very careful consideration will need to be given to the possible design and implementation of any standardized approach for Basel II in the United States should the agencies decide ultimately to move in that direction. We look forward to getting more detailed comments on how a standardized approach might fit into the U.S. Basel II framework. Proposals to Amend Existing Basel I RulesAt this point, I would like to say just a few words about ongoing efforts to revise the existing Basel I regulatory capital rules for non-Basel II institutions. We expect only one or two dozen institutions to move to the U.S. version of Basel II in the near term, meaning that the vast majority of U.S. institutions will continue to operate under Basel I-based rules, which we intend to amend through a separate rulemaking process. The U.S. Basel I framework has already been amended more than twenty-five times since its introduction in response to changes in banking products and the financial services marketplace. The agencies believe that now is another appropriate time to propose modifications to our Basel I rules. The agencies have issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) discussing possible changes to increase the risk sensitivity of the U.S. Basel I rules and to mitigate competitive distortions that might be created by introducing Basel II. We have reviewed comments on the ANPR and are working on a notice of proposed rulemaking. We are mindful that amendments to the Basel I rules should not be too complex or too burdensome for the large number of small- and mid-sized institutions to which the revised rules might apply. Indeed, a number of those commenting on the ANPR advocated leaving existing rules unchanged. With regard to both the Basel II proposals and the proposed Basel I amendments, we understand the need for full transparency. For that reason, we expect to have overlapping comment periods for the Basel II NPR and the NPR for the proposed Basel I amendments. In fact, we want all interested parties to compare, contrast, and comment on the two proposals in overlapping timeframes. Accordingly, either of our proposals could change as a result of comments received or new information gathered. ConclusionFrom the Federal Reserve’s perspective, the publication of interagency proposals relating to Basel II is a very positive development and demonstrates the ability of the agencies to work cooperatively to modernize our regulatory capital framework. The Federal Reserve’s commitment to the Basel II process remains as strong as ever, even as we recognize that the proposals remain subject to further comment and that there is likely much more work to be done. We encourage comments from all interested parties and will give them careful consideration. I would like to emphasize that the Federal Reserve desires to ensure that the final rule for Basel II is a substantial enhancement over existing Basel I rules, appropriately capturing the risks of our largest, most complex banks, and encouraging continual improvement in risk-measurement and -management systems. We look forward to working with the other agencies as we enter into the final rule phase of the Basel II process. We recognize that many institutions have been diligently preparing for Basel II implementation and we understand our obligation, as supervisors, to support institutions wanting to adopt Basel II at the first available date. We suggest that those institutions continue to move forward with implementation planning, including identification of gaps in their own preparation. Finally, I would like to assure the Committee members that we at the Federal Reserve are pursuing Basel II because we believe it will help to preserve the safety and soundness of our nation’s banking system. In our dual role as the central bank and supervisor of banks, bank holding companies, and financial holding companies, the Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that the Basel II framework delivers a strong and risk-sensitive base of capital for our largest and most complex banking institutions. That is why we stand behind the additional safeguards contained in the Basel II NPR to ensure strong capital levels during the transition to the new framework. We will remain vigilant, on an ongoing basis, in monitoring and assessing the impact of Basel II on both individual and aggregate regulatory capital requirements and in employing rigorous and thorough analysis to support our evaluation. By so doing, we believe that the proposals being discussed today can be implemented responsibly and in a safe and sound manner. Thank you very much for your attention. I welcome any comments you may have and will be happy to answer any questions. Footnotes 1.See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, "Results of the Fifth Quantitative Impact Study (QIS5)," Table 3, The Bank for International Settlements.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board announced Friday that the Consumer Advisory Council will hold its next meeting on Thursday, October 26. The meeting will take place in Dining Room E, Terrace level, in the Board's Martin Building. The session will begin at 9:00 a.m. EDT and is open to the public. Anyone planning to attend the meeting should, for security purposes, register no later than Tuesday, October 24, by completing the form found on-line at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/secure/forms/cacregistration.cfm. Additionally, attendees must present photo identification to enter the building. The Council's function is to advise the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under various consumer financial services laws and on other matters. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics:Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACT Act)Nontraditional Mortgage ProductsAffordable HousingReports by committees and other matters initiated by the Council members may also be discussed. The Board invites comments from the public on any of these matters.The Board's notice is attached.Attachment Reports by committees and other matters initiated by the Council members may also be discussed. The Board invites comments from the public on any of these matters. The Board's notice is attached.
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Western Payments Alliance 2006 Payments Symposium, Las Vegas, Nevada I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak at this symposium examining the continuing convergence of paper and electronic payments. Today marks the fifth anniversary of the September 11th terrorist attacks on the United States. On that day, as our nation came to grips with the terrible events it had just witnessed, the Federal Reserve remained open and operating, in part to help ensure that the nation’s payments system continued to function. In the aftermath of the attacks, the financial industry has taken many steps to strengthen the resilience of our nation’s critical payments infrastructures. For the retail payments system, the September 11th attacks highlighted the banking industry's extensive reliance on air transportation as planes came to a standstill and the collection of checks slowed dramatically. This prompted a heightened focus on how electronic processing technologies could be applied to the check-collection system to reduce the reliance on air transportation and improve check-processing efficiency more generally. My remarks today, which reflect my own thoughts and not necessarily those of the other members of the Federal Reserve Board, will focus on the future of the check-collection system and the future role of the Federal Reserve in retail payments services.1 A Period of Transition in the Retail Payments SystemToday, shifts in consumer behavior and rapid industry innovation, along with legal and regulatory change, are dramatically reshaping our retail payments system. Because of the increasing availability and declining cost of convenient electronic payment alternatives, many payments that were until recently being made in paper form are today being made electronically. In addition, new electronic technologies are now being harnessed to improve the processing of checks. The 2003 Federal Reserve study on the use of retail payment instruments revealed dramatic changes in consumer behavior. It found that, for the first time ever, the number of electronic payments in the United States--such as credit card, debit card, and automated clearinghouse (ACH) payments--exceeded check payments. A range of data indicates that electronic payments have continued to increase and that check payments have continued to decline. Debit cards, primarily used by consumers for everyday purchases, are the fastest growing segment of the retail payments system. Consumers seem to view debit cards as a natural progression from cash and checks because they are a convenient electronic means of making payments without incurring the additional debt often associated with credit card use. In fact, on at least one major network, debit card payments are reported to have surpassed credit card payments. This shift in payment behavior can be attributed in part to changes in the rules and regulations governing the ACH network, which have facilitated the use of this network for one-time, nonrecurring payments. As you know, in the past the ACH was used mainly for recurring payments, such as payroll and mortgage payments. Today, consumer purchases at stores, over the telephone, and on the Internet can be completed using the ACH. Regulatory and rule changes have also facilitated the use of the ACH to convert checks that consumers mail to businesses or provide at the point of sale into electronic payments. These new uses of the ACH for one-time payments have driven the continuing double-digit growth rates of ACH transaction volume. Given these dynamic changes in the payments system, the Federal Reserve is planning to repeat its triennial survey of retail payments use next year to take another snapshot of the nation’s retail payments system. The Federal Reserve’s Experience with Check 21Not only are more payments being made electronically, but more check payments are also being processed electronically, in part because of the Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act, or Check 21.2Clearly, Check 21 has begun to diminish the importance of geography and physical transportation in check processing, and banks have started to reengineer their backroom processes to accommodate end-to-end electronic check clearing. Since October 28, 2004, the date Check 21 took effect, the Reserve Banks’ Check 21 volume has grown rapidly, reflecting a trend that will lead to the widespread electronic processing of checks in the not-too-distant future. Private-sector service providers that offer Check 21 services are also experiencing rapid growth in volume as the banking industry becomes more interested in and capable of using Check 21 authority to clear checks. Today, about 17 percent of the checks deposited with the Federal Reserve Banks, or slightly over 6 million checks a day valued at about $20 billion, are deposited using the Reserve Banks’ Check 21 product suite. As expected, depository institutions have been somewhat slower in agreeing to accept their check presentments electronically because of the complexity of integrating such presentments into back-office processing and risk-management systems. As a result, the use of substitute checks is widespread. Nevertheless, in July 2006 almost 4 percent of the Reserve Banks’ daily volume, or about one and a half million checks, was presented to paying banks in electronic Check 21 files, and this volume is growing rapidly. Thus, banks are starting to realize many of the benefits of the end-to-end electronic check processing that were envisioned when Check 21 was enacted, including efficiency gains and cost savings. In addition, they are beginning to offer their customers new and better services. For example, some banks are offering their business customers the ability to truncate checks and deposit them electronically. Also, banks are now able to set a later-in-the-day cutoff hour for check deposits because they can transmit checks electronically from their branches to their central processing facilities for collection. As a result, banks should be able to provide customers with improved funds availability, more efficient cash management services, and better access to services for their geographically remote customers. The Evolution of Electronic Check CollectionHow will electronic check collection evolve in the years to come? The industry is discussing several possible models. In the first, check images are transmitted to the paying bank along with the MICR-line payment information.3In the second, the MICR information is transmitted to the paying bank while the check images are stored in remote archives that can be accessed on demand. Both models are already being used to some extent and each has its advantages and disadvantages. I suspect that, as the industry gains greater experience with electronic check collection, the superiority of one of the models may become clearer. Those who favor the first model believe that it allows paying banks to better manage their risks and customer relationships. Paying banks would not have to rely on multiple image archive providers, with whom they may have no direct contractual relationship, to obtain check images for customer online banking services and backroom operations. Others believe that a small number of centralized check-image archives, as envisioned in the second model, would be more cost-effective and would not appreciably increase risk or degrade customer service. In this model, the MICR information on a check could be transmitted over a dedicated network or, as recently suggested by some bankers, the ACH. The ACH is seen as a potentially attractive option because it is an electronic system that reaches all depository institutions and could eliminate the need to print substitute checks. The flow of check information over the ACH system raises the legal question of whether the payments should be characterized as checks or electronic fund transfers. If the payments were characterized as checks, under current check law banks can choose whether to receive presentments electronically or in paper form. A key principle underlying Check 21 was to maintain this choice bypermittingbanks to participate in electronic check processing when their business case justified doing so.Requiringbanks to accept electronic check presentment simply because they participate in the ACH system and have agreed to abide by NACHA rules might be viewed as contrary to this principle. Alternatively, if the payments were characterized as electronic funds transfers, then how would banks obtain the authorizations required under Regulation E to convert the transactions into ACH payments? When evaluating the relative benefits of using the ACH network for these payments, we must consider these threshold legal questions. A Perspective on the Future U.S. Check SystemThe checkless society has been predicted for decades; however, as we near 2007, we know that even though checks are used less frequently, they are still used widely. Industry experts are understandably wary of predicting what lies ahead for the U.S. check system. However, as we engage in strategic discussions on the future of checks and contemplate investments in check-processing infrastructure, we need to consider how the check system might evolve. Let me take a first step and offer one perspective. The decline in check use has already caused the Reserve Banks to reduce by half the number of offices at which they process paper checks. In 2003, the Reserve Banks had forty-five check-processing offices nationwide, versus the twenty-two they have today and the eighteen that they will have by early 2008. Further consolidations are likely as check volumes continue to decline and as checks are increasingly processed electronically. Ultimately, perhaps sometime late in the next decade, the Reserve Banks might process checks at only a single office nationwide. These changes in the Federal Reserve’s check-processing infrastructure will benefit bank customers by entitling them to earlier funds availability on their check deposits, because all checks will eventually become local checks, which are generally subject to a maximum permissible hold period of two business days. This will present risk-management challenges for banks because a bank seldom learns that a local check is unpaid before it must make the funds available to the customer for withdrawal. Moreover, while some checks are being collected faster as a result of electronic processing, in the future other checks might be collected more slowly. We have already seen some banks decide to process large- and small-dollar checks differently. Specifically, many banks are expediting the collection of larger-dollar checks by taking advantage of the Check 21 authority. On the other hand, banks are continuing to collect smaller-dollar checks in paper form, using physical transportation networks, because the value of collecting these smaller-dollar checks faster does not justify the cost of doing so. As larger-dollar checks are increasingly cleared electronically, the use of relatively expensive dedicated check-transportation networks to clear the aggregate value of the remaining checks will be harder and harder to justify economically. As a result, it is quite possible that it will take longer to collect smaller-dollar checks as dedicated, high-cost check-transportation networks are scaled back or eliminated and these checks are transported using slower, less costly means. The Federal Reserve is now studying whether overall improvements in the check-collection system would be sufficient in the near term to justify the Board’s use of its authority under the Expedited Funds Availability Act to reduce maximum hold periods.4The likely slowing of the collection of smaller-value checks could make any change problematic in the near term. Nonetheless, as I have already noted, recent and future consolidations of Federal Reserve check-processing regions have benefited, and will continue to benefit, bank customers as many nonlocal checks become local and therefore subject to shorter maximum holds. If the payments system evolves as I have just outlined, then it is possible that in the next ten to twenty years the Reserve Banks will accept only checks that are deposited electronically and that can be presented electronically; any remaining paper checks may have to be cleared through other channels. In this scenario, the current paper-check infrastructure of the Federal Reserve that is heavily reliant on physical transportation will be replaced by an electronic-processing infrastructure with a production data center and a few backup sites, not unlike today’s ACH network. The Role of the Reserve Banks in the Provision of Retail Payments ServicesThe changes I have just described could very well have implications for the role of the Federal Reserve in the payments system. From its inception in 1913, the Federal Reserve has not only been closely involved in overseeing the nation’s payments system but has also been an important operational component of that system. This latter role has involved competing with the private sector to provide certain retail payments. Congress originally wanted the Federal Reserve to play this operational role to reduce inefficiencies in the payments arena. This role has changed considerably over the past century, with some changes resulting from the enactment of statutes such as the Monetary Control Act, or the MCA. The MCA went a long way toward establishing a relatively level playing field on which the Reserve Banks and private-sector payments providers have competed over the past quarter century. However, because of the inherent differences between the central bank and private-sector service providers, a truly level playing field will never be entirely possible. The Reserve Banks enjoy certain advantages, such as an unsurpassed credit rating, that makes them an attractive service provider in times of financial stress. On the other hand, the Reserve Banks do not have the flexibility enjoyed by their competitors to negotiate fees and other service terms with individual customers. Because of these differences, it is incumbent on us from time to time to reexamine our operational role in the payments system. These assessments have focused in the past, and should continue to focus in the future, on the Federal Reserve’s role as a provider of retail payment services. Large-value payments systems, such as Fedwire, are typically viewed as core, systemically important services, and they are commonly provided by other central banks around the globe. A rationale for the participation of a government-related entity, such as the Federal Reserve, in the retail payments system is harder to formulate. The most recent assessment of this operational role was conducted in the late 1990s, by the Committee on the Federal Reserve in the Payments Mechanism, better known as the Rivlin Committee, and it focused on the Federal Reserve’s role in the check and ACH systems. Ultimately, the committee concluded that the Federal Reserve should remain a provider of both check-collection and ACH services and should play a more active role in helping the banking industry become more efficient. The committee determined that the Federal Reserve played an important role in providing both check and ACH services to small and remote institutions and that, if the Federal Reserve stopped providing these services, it could disrupt the market in the short run, resulting in higher prices and more regulation, with little promise of substantial benefits over the long run. In recent years, we have actively pursued a strategy of engaging the industry in discussions on payments system issues and offering services designed to encourage the increased use of electronics. As we move into a more steady-state electronic check environment, the Federal Reserve may find it appropriate once again to review its longer-term operational role in the retail payments system. Clearly, at that time, the Federal Reserve’s national reach will no longer be a compelling reason for its operational role. As the Federal Reserve assesses its role in providing retail payment services, it will be important to consider how the circumstances that have provided the rationale for the Federal Reserve’s continuing involvement in retail payments services may have changed. The review would have to address, among other things, the following questions: If the Reserve Banks were to withdraw from check and ACH services, would these services continue to be provided competitively and cost-effectively? Would depository institutions continue to have equitable access to these services? In the event of an unanticipated shock, would the payments system be sufficiently resilient? ConclusionIn conclusion, the retail payments system will continue to become increasingly electronic even though the exact nature of that system is not yet clear. What is clear, however, is that the Federal Reserve will continue to foster a safe and efficient payments system. This shift away from paper and toward the electronic processing of payments has significant operational and legal implications that all of us need to ponder. I believe that an ongoing dialogue among payments system participants will help us address, in a balanced and thoughtful manner, these important issues that affect the long-term strategic direction of the U.S. financial system. This symposium is a welcome and constructive part of that dialogue. Footnotes 1.Helena L. Tenenholtz and Jeffrey S. H. Yeganeh, of the Board’s staff, contributed to this speech.Return to text 2.Check 21removed legal barriers that were preventing electronic technologies from being applied to long-established check-collection processes. Before Check 21, a bank had to present the original paper check to the paying bank unless the paying bank had agreed to accept presentment of the check electronically. While Check 21 did not mandate the electronic processing or presentment of checks, it did authorize a new negotiable instrument, called a substitute check, which is the legal equivalent of the original check. By permitting banks to use substitute checks in the check-collection process when the recipient could not or would not accept electronic presentment, Check 21 has facilitated the expanded use of electronic technologies in check processing, enabling the banking industry to improve the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of its check-processing operations over the long run.Return to text 3.The magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) line is the line of numbers printed near the bottom of the check, which generally includes the paying bank’s routing number, the customer’s account number, the check number, and the amount of the check.Return to text 4.The Expedited Funds Availability Act requires that the Board reduce the maximum hold periods to the period of time necessary for the depositary bank to reasonably expect to learn of the nonpayment of most checks in a given category. Because roughly half of all checks are for amounts of less than $100, the improvements in the check system due to Check 21 would likely not result in faster collection and return of most local or nonlocal checks in the near term.Return to text
The federal financial regulatory agencies today issued final guidance to address the risks posed by residential mortgage products that allow borrowers to defer repayment of principal and sometimes interest (Interagency Guidance on Nontraditional Mortgage Product Risks). These products, referred to variously as "nontraditional," "alternative," or "exotic" mortgage loans (referred to below as nontraditional mortgage loans), include "interest-only" mortgages and "payment option" adjustable-rate mortgages. These products allow borrowers to exchange lower payments during an initial period for higher payments later. While similar products have been available for many years, the number of institutions offering them has expanded rapidly. At the same time, these products are offered to a wider spectrum of borrowers who may not otherwise qualify for a similar-size mortgage under traditional terms and underwriting standards. The agencies are concerned that some borrowers may not fully understand the risks of these products. While many of these features exist in other adjustable-rate mortgage products, the agencies' concern is elevated with nontraditional products because of the lack of principal amortization and the potential for negative amortization. In addition, institutions are increasingly combining these loans with other features that may compound risk ("risk layering"). These features include making simultaneous second-lien mortgages and relying on reduced or no documentation in evaluating an applicant's creditworthiness. The final guidance discusses the importance of carefully managing the potential heightened risk levels created by these loans. Toward that end, management should: The agencies published for comment proposed interagency guidance on Nontraditional Mortgage Products on December 29, 2005. Comments were received from financial institutions, trade associations, consumer and community organizations, state and financial regulatory organizations, and other members of the public. The agencies made a number of changes to the proposal to respond to the commenters' concerns and to provide additional clarity. The guidance is attached. The agencies are issuing two additional related documents--Proposed Illustrations of Consumer Information for Nontraditional Mortgage Productsand anaddendumto the May 2005Interagency Credit Risk Management Guidance for Home Equity Lending. Several commenters on the proposed guidance encouraged the agencies to include model or sample disclosures or other descriptive materials as part of the interagency guidance. In response, the agencies are issuing for commentProposed Illustrations of Consumer Information for Nontraditional Mortgage Products. The agencies believe that illustrations of consumer information may be useful to institutions as they seek to implement the consumer information recommendations of the guidance. The agencies seek public comment on all aspects of the proposed illustrations, including whether these illustrations or a modified form should be adopted by the agencies. Comments on the proposed illustrations are due 60 days after publication in the Federal Register. The agencies are also issuing an addendum to the May 2005Interagency Credit Risk Management Guidance for Home Equity Lendingthat provides additional guidance for managing risks associated with open-end home equity lines of credit (HELOCs) that contain interest-only features. While HELOCs with these features may provide flexibility for consumers, the agencies are concerned that consumers may not fully understand the product terms and associated risks. This addendum provides guidance addressing the timing and content of communications with consumers obtaining interest- only HELOCs. These consumer protection recommendations are similar to the guidance contained in theInteragency Guidance on Nontraditional Mortgage Product Risksreferenced above. Addendum to Credit Risk Management Guidance for Home Equity Lending
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 percent. The moderation in economic growth appears to be continuing, partly reflecting a cooling of the housing market. Readings on core inflation have been elevated, and the high levels of resource utilization and of the prices of energy and other commodities have the potential to sustain inflation pressures. However, inflation pressures seem likely to moderate over time, reflecting reduced impetus from energy prices, contained inflation expectations, and the cumulative effects of monetary policy actions and other factors restraining aggregate demand. Nonetheless, the Committee judges that some inflation risks remain. The extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to address these risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Susan S. Bies; Jack Guynn; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Frederic S. Mishkin; Sandra Pianalto; Kevin M. Warsh; and Janet L. Yellen. Voting against was Jeffrey M. Lacker, who preferred an increase of 25 basis points in the federal funds rate target at this meeting.
Frederic S. Mishkin on Tuesday took the oath of office as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The oath was administered by Chairman Bernanke in the Board Room. President Bush announced his intention to nominate Dr. Mishkin on June 30 and the Senate confirmed him on July 26. Dr. Mishkin was nominated to a seat vacated by the resignation of Roger W. Ferguson, Jr., on April 28, 2006. The term expires January 31, 2014. Gov. Mishkin’s biography is attached. Attachment
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from July 17 through August 7, 2006.The minutes are attached.Attachment The minutes are attached.
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Subcommittee on Housing and Transportation and the Subcommittee on Economic Policy, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Chairman Allard, Chairman Bunning, Senators Reed and Schumer, and members of the Subcommittees, I appreciate the opportunity to appear today to discuss how loan cost disclosures provided to consumers under the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) apply to "nontraditional" or "alternative" mortgage products, such as "interest-only" loans and "option-ARMS." As the Subcommittees have requested, I will address only consumer issues related to these disclosures.Nontraditional mortgage products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. With traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal. In contrast, interest-only loans allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. Option-ARMs allow consumers to make "minimum payments" of less than the accrued interest, which causes the loan balance to increase ("negative amortization").Some consumers may benefit from these products and the more flexible payment options, for example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income. For consumers who expect their incomes to increase, the initially lower monthly payment with these loans may enable them to purchase homes that they otherwise might not be able to afford. But these loan products are not appropriate for everyone, depending on their individual circumstances. When monthly payments increase, sometimes substantially, consumers may face "payment shock." Thus, it is important for consumers to have the information necessary to understand the features and risks associated with these types of mortgages. The Federal Reserve is committed to doing what it can to improve the information consumers receive, including improving the Truth in Lending disclosures. Because these products are complex, the disclosures describing them are also complex and can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve will focus its efforts on making Truth in Lending disclosures more readable and easier for consumers to use. TILA is implemented by the Board's Regulation Z. As part of the Federal Reserve's overall review and revision of Regulation Z, which is currently underway, we will consider changes to both the content and format of mortgage disclosures to improve their effectiveness.The Federal Reserve plays several roles and engages in various activities to ensure that consumers understand credit terms and the options available to them when they are shopping for mortgage credit. First, in our role as a rulewriter, the Board issues regulations implementing TILA and its required disclosures. These regulations apply to all creditors. But we recognize that required disclosures alone cannot ensure that consumers understand these loan products. Thus, the Federal Reserve also promotes consumer understanding through other means, such as the development of educational materials for consumers. In addition, through the issuance of guidance and recommended practices, we encourage industry to improve its communications with consumers, for example, by developing promotional materials that are complete and balanced in their description of loan features and risks. The financial institutions that we supervise are examined to ensure that they comply with existing disclosure laws. The Federal Reserve also engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand consumer behavior and to inform our judgment with regard to the best approaches for assisting consumers. Toward this end, we sponsor consumer surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules. In order to address the complex issues associated with nontraditional mortgages, we plan to utilize a number of these approaches. In my testimony, I will first discuss the Truth in Lending disclosures, and the Board's plan to review and revise them. I will then discuss other efforts that we have already undertaken and planned efforts regarding nontraditional mortgages.The Truth in Lending ActTILA is the primary federal law governing disclosures for consumer credit, including home mortgage loans. It is implemented by the Board's Regulation Z. TILA has distinct rules for two categories of consumer credit: open-end (revolving) credit plans, such as credit card accounts; and closed-end (installment) transactions, such as home mortgage loans and auto loans.TILA's purpose is to assure the meaningful disclosure of credit terms so that consumers can compare more readily the available terms and avoid the uninformed use of credit. This goal is carried out by requiring the uniform disclosure of costs and other terms to consumers. For closed-end loans transactions such as mortgage loans, TILA requires creditors to provide transaction-specific disclosures before the loan closing. For home-purchase loans, these transaction-specific disclosures must be given within three days after consumers apply for the loan. For nearly twenty years, Regulation Z has also required additional extensive disclosures about lenders' adjustable rate mortgage programs.Background on the Disclosures for Alternative Mortgage ProductsThe rapid growth of nontraditional mortgages has been largely associated with loan products that have variable-rate features. The Truth in Lending Act did not specifically require the disclosure of variable-rate features. However, in 1977, the Board revised Regulation Z to require creditors to provide basic information for both mortgage and non-mortgage loans with variable-rate features, including: the circumstances under which the interest rate may increase (for example, when the index used to make rate adjustments rises); any limitations on the increase (such as a periodic or overall interest rate cap); and the effect of a rate increase (for example, whether it would result in an increase in the number or amount of payments).As adjustable-rate mortgages became more prevalent, and the variety of ARM products became more extensive, the Board grew concerned that the Regulation Z disclosures did not fully meet consumers' needs. Accordingly, in 1987, the Board amended Regulation Z to provide consumers with more information about ARMs. The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z required creditors to provide consumers with detailed, specific information about all major aspects of their variable rate programs. Creditors must provide these "program" disclosures with every ARM application, and are required to do so before consumers pay a nonrefundable fee. This allows consumers to review the information in an unpressured environment before they apply for the loan.The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z also required creditors to provide consumers with a copy of the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages" (the "CHARM booklet"), which was created by the Federal Reserve working in concert with the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS). The CHARM booklet was designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. Creditors are required to give consumers a copy of the CHARM booklet with each application for an ARM, including any nontraditional mortgage that has a variable rate.Revising the Disclosures for Alternative MortgagesAt this point, I would like to describe the information that is currently included in TILA disclosures and highlight some of the issues the Board will study as it reviews and revises these disclosures. TILA provides specific disclosure requirements for variable-rate loans and other disclosure requirements that apply to all mortgage loans. I will focus primarily on the disclosures for variable-rate mortgage loans, as many nontraditional mortgages have adjustable- rate features.ARM Program DisclosuresIn ARM program disclosures, creditors are required to state how the interest rate and payment will be determined. They must explain any rules relating to changes in the index, interest rate, and payment amount. The disclosure must also explain any rules relating to changes in the outstanding loan balance, including, for example, an explanation of payment caps, and the possibility of negative amortization if the payment is not sufficient to cover the accrued interest. Regulation Z requires either a 15-year historical example showing how payments for a $10,000 loan would have been affected by interest rate changes during that period, or a "worst case" payment example showing the maximum interest rate and maximum payment for a $10,000 loan.Although it is important for consumers to have complete and accurate information about the features of their ARMs, we recognize that "information overload" can impair the effectiveness of consumer disclosures. In addition, describing loan terms in legally precise language can make disclosures difficult to read and can hinder consumers' understanding. In revising Regulation Z, the Board will use consumer testing and work closely with design consultants to try to improve both the format and language of the ARM program disclosures. The goal is to make these disclosures easier to understand and more useful to consumers.Transaction-specific DisclosuresFor both variable-rate and fixed-rate mortgage loans, the transaction-specific disclosures provided before loan consummation express the cost of the loan as an annualized rate, the APR, over the full loan term. These disclosures include a payment schedule showing the amount and timing of payments, including any balloon payment. Regulation Z further requires that the transaction-specific disclosures indicate if the loan has a variable-rate feature. Creditors must also specify if a prepayment penalty may be charged.The APRFor variable-rate loans, the disclosed APR is based on the rates currently in effect. The APR calculation does not consider the effect of possible future changes to any index used to adjust the interest rate. However, when the loan's initial interest rate has been discounted and is not based on the index used to make later adjustments, the APR is a composite rate based on the discounted rate for as long as it is in effect, and the fully indexed rate in effect at the time the loan is consummated for the remainder of the loan term.The Payment ScheduleThe TILA payment schedule, like the APR, is based on the interest rates that are in effect at the time the loan is closed. No assumption is made about possible future changes in the index used to set the rate. Consequently, a consumer's actual payments may be higher than the amount shown in the schedule if interest rates increase due to changes in the index.Although the payment schedule disclosures do not assume changes in the interest rate, they must reflect increases in the monthly payment that will be required for interest-only loans or option-ARMs in order to amortize the principal. In general, for option-ARMs, the payment schedule is based on the assumption that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment each month. Accordingly, the payment schedule for an option-ARM should reflect the higher monthly payment that will be required to amortize the new loan balance after the option period ends.There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. Nontraditional mortgage products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. With traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal. In contrast, interest-only loans allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. Option-ARMs allow consumers to make "minimum payments" of less than the accrued interest, which causes the loan balance to increase ("negative amortization").Some consumers may benefit from these products and the more flexible payment options, for example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income. For consumers who expect their incomes to increase, the initially lower monthly payment with these loans may enable them to purchase homes that they otherwise might not be able to afford. But these loan products are not appropriate for everyone, depending on their individual circumstances. When monthly payments increase, sometimes substantially, consumers may face "payment shock." Thus, it is important for consumers to have the information necessary to understand the features and risks associated with these types of mortgages. The Federal Reserve is committed to doing what it can to improve the information consumers receive, including improving the Truth in Lending disclosures. Because these products are complex, the disclosures describing them are also complex and can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve will focus its efforts on making Truth in Lending disclosures more readable and easier for consumers to use. TILA is implemented by the Board's Regulation Z. As part of the Federal Reserve's overall review and revision of Regulation Z, which is currently underway, we will consider changes to both the content and format of mortgage disclosures to improve their effectiveness.The Federal Reserve plays several roles and engages in various activities to ensure that consumers understand credit terms and the options available to them when they are shopping for mortgage credit. First, in our role as a rulewriter, the Board issues regulations implementing TILA and its required disclosures. These regulations apply to all creditors. But we recognize that required disclosures alone cannot ensure that consumers understand these loan products. Thus, the Federal Reserve also promotes consumer understanding through other means, such as the development of educational materials for consumers. In addition, through the issuance of guidance and recommended practices, we encourage industry to improve its communications with consumers, for example, by developing promotional materials that are complete and balanced in their description of loan features and risks. The financial institutions that we supervise are examined to ensure that they comply with existing disclosure laws. The Federal Reserve also engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand consumer behavior and to inform our judgment with regard to the best approaches for assisting consumers. Toward this end, we sponsor consumer surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules. In order to address the complex issues associated with nontraditional mortgages, we plan to utilize a number of these approaches. In my testimony, I will first discuss the Truth in Lending disclosures, and the Board's plan to review and revise them. I will then discuss other efforts that we have already undertaken and planned efforts regarding nontraditional mortgages.The Truth in Lending ActTILA is the primary federal law governing disclosures for consumer credit, including home mortgage loans. It is implemented by the Board's Regulation Z. TILA has distinct rules for two categories of consumer credit: open-end (revolving) credit plans, such as credit card accounts; and closed-end (installment) transactions, such as home mortgage loans and auto loans.TILA's purpose is to assure the meaningful disclosure of credit terms so that consumers can compare more readily the available terms and avoid the uninformed use of credit. This goal is carried out by requiring the uniform disclosure of costs and other terms to consumers. For closed-end loans transactions such as mortgage loans, TILA requires creditors to provide transaction-specific disclosures before the loan closing. For home-purchase loans, these transaction-specific disclosures must be given within three days after consumers apply for the loan. For nearly twenty years, Regulation Z has also required additional extensive disclosures about lenders' adjustable rate mortgage programs.Background on the Disclosures for Alternative Mortgage ProductsThe rapid growth of nontraditional mortgages has been largely associated with loan products that have variable-rate features. The Truth in Lending Act did not specifically require the disclosure of variable-rate features. However, in 1977, the Board revised Regulation Z to require creditors to provide basic information for both mortgage and non-mortgage loans with variable-rate features, including: the circumstances under which the interest rate may increase (for example, when the index used to make rate adjustments rises); any limitations on the increase (such as a periodic or overall interest rate cap); and the effect of a rate increase (for example, whether it would result in an increase in the number or amount of payments).As adjustable-rate mortgages became more prevalent, and the variety of ARM products became more extensive, the Board grew concerned that the Regulation Z disclosures did not fully meet consumers' needs. Accordingly, in 1987, the Board amended Regulation Z to provide consumers with more information about ARMs. The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z required creditors to provide consumers with detailed, specific information about all major aspects of their variable rate programs. Creditors must provide these "program" disclosures with every ARM application, and are required to do so before consumers pay a nonrefundable fee. This allows consumers to review the information in an unpressured environment before they apply for the loan.The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z also required creditors to provide consumers with a copy of the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages" (the "CHARM booklet"), which was created by the Federal Reserve working in concert with the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS). The CHARM booklet was designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. Creditors are required to give consumers a copy of the CHARM booklet with each application for an ARM, including any nontraditional mortgage that has a variable rate.Revising the Disclosures for Alternative MortgagesAt this point, I would like to describe the information that is currently included in TILA disclosures and highlight some of the issues the Board will study as it reviews and revises these disclosures. TILA provides specific disclosure requirements for variable-rate loans and other disclosure requirements that apply to all mortgage loans. I will focus primarily on the disclosures for variable-rate mortgage loans, as many nontraditional mortgages have adjustable- rate features.ARM Program DisclosuresIn ARM program disclosures, creditors are required to state how the interest rate and payment will be determined. They must explain any rules relating to changes in the index, interest rate, and payment amount. The disclosure must also explain any rules relating to changes in the outstanding loan balance, including, for example, an explanation of payment caps, and the possibility of negative amortization if the payment is not sufficient to cover the accrued interest. Regulation Z requires either a 15-year historical example showing how payments for a $10,000 loan would have been affected by interest rate changes during that period, or a "worst case" payment example showing the maximum interest rate and maximum payment for a $10,000 loan.Although it is important for consumers to have complete and accurate information about the features of their ARMs, we recognize that "information overload" can impair the effectiveness of consumer disclosures. In addition, describing loan terms in legally precise language can make disclosures difficult to read and can hinder consumers' understanding. In revising Regulation Z, the Board will use consumer testing and work closely with design consultants to try to improve both the format and language of the ARM program disclosures. The goal is to make these disclosures easier to understand and more useful to consumers.Transaction-specific DisclosuresFor both variable-rate and fixed-rate mortgage loans, the transaction-specific disclosures provided before loan consummation express the cost of the loan as an annualized rate, the APR, over the full loan term. These disclosures include a payment schedule showing the amount and timing of payments, including any balloon payment. Regulation Z further requires that the transaction-specific disclosures indicate if the loan has a variable-rate feature. Creditors must also specify if a prepayment penalty may be charged.The APRFor variable-rate loans, the disclosed APR is based on the rates currently in effect. The APR calculation does not consider the effect of possible future changes to any index used to adjust the interest rate. However, when the loan's initial interest rate has been discounted and is not based on the index used to make later adjustments, the APR is a composite rate based on the discounted rate for as long as it is in effect, and the fully indexed rate in effect at the time the loan is consummated for the remainder of the loan term.The Payment ScheduleThe TILA payment schedule, like the APR, is based on the interest rates that are in effect at the time the loan is closed. No assumption is made about possible future changes in the index used to set the rate. Consequently, a consumer's actual payments may be higher than the amount shown in the schedule if interest rates increase due to changes in the index.Although the payment schedule disclosures do not assume changes in the interest rate, they must reflect increases in the monthly payment that will be required for interest-only loans or option-ARMs in order to amortize the principal. In general, for option-ARMs, the payment schedule is based on the assumption that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment each month. Accordingly, the payment schedule for an option-ARM should reflect the higher monthly payment that will be required to amortize the new loan balance after the option period ends.There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. Some consumers may benefit from these products and the more flexible payment options, for example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income. For consumers who expect their incomes to increase, the initially lower monthly payment with these loans may enable them to purchase homes that they otherwise might not be able to afford. But these loan products are not appropriate for everyone, depending on their individual circumstances. When monthly payments increase, sometimes substantially, consumers may face "payment shock." Thus, it is important for consumers to have the information necessary to understand the features and risks associated with these types of mortgages. The Federal Reserve is committed to doing what it can to improve the information consumers receive, including improving the Truth in Lending disclosures. Because these products are complex, the disclosures describing them are also complex and can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve will focus its efforts on making Truth in Lending disclosures more readable and easier for consumers to use. TILA is implemented by the Board's Regulation Z. As part of the Federal Reserve's overall review and revision of Regulation Z, which is currently underway, we will consider changes to both the content and format of mortgage disclosures to improve their effectiveness.The Federal Reserve plays several roles and engages in various activities to ensure that consumers understand credit terms and the options available to them when they are shopping for mortgage credit. First, in our role as a rulewriter, the Board issues regulations implementing TILA and its required disclosures. These regulations apply to all creditors. But we recognize that required disclosures alone cannot ensure that consumers understand these loan products. Thus, the Federal Reserve also promotes consumer understanding through other means, such as the development of educational materials for consumers. In addition, through the issuance of guidance and recommended practices, we encourage industry to improve its communications with consumers, for example, by developing promotional materials that are complete and balanced in their description of loan features and risks. The financial institutions that we supervise are examined to ensure that they comply with existing disclosure laws. The Federal Reserve also engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand consumer behavior and to inform our judgment with regard to the best approaches for assisting consumers. Toward this end, we sponsor consumer surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules. In order to address the complex issues associated with nontraditional mortgages, we plan to utilize a number of these approaches. In my testimony, I will first discuss the Truth in Lending disclosures, and the Board's plan to review and revise them. I will then discuss other efforts that we have already undertaken and planned efforts regarding nontraditional mortgages.The Truth in Lending ActTILA is the primary federal law governing disclosures for consumer credit, including home mortgage loans. It is implemented by the Board's Regulation Z. TILA has distinct rules for two categories of consumer credit: open-end (revolving) credit plans, such as credit card accounts; and closed-end (installment) transactions, such as home mortgage loans and auto loans.TILA's purpose is to assure the meaningful disclosure of credit terms so that consumers can compare more readily the available terms and avoid the uninformed use of credit. This goal is carried out by requiring the uniform disclosure of costs and other terms to consumers. For closed-end loans transactions such as mortgage loans, TILA requires creditors to provide transaction-specific disclosures before the loan closing. For home-purchase loans, these transaction-specific disclosures must be given within three days after consumers apply for the loan. For nearly twenty years, Regulation Z has also required additional extensive disclosures about lenders' adjustable rate mortgage programs.Background on the Disclosures for Alternative Mortgage ProductsThe rapid growth of nontraditional mortgages has been largely associated with loan products that have variable-rate features. The Truth in Lending Act did not specifically require the disclosure of variable-rate features. However, in 1977, the Board revised Regulation Z to require creditors to provide basic information for both mortgage and non-mortgage loans with variable-rate features, including: the circumstances under which the interest rate may increase (for example, when the index used to make rate adjustments rises); any limitations on the increase (such as a periodic or overall interest rate cap); and the effect of a rate increase (for example, whether it would result in an increase in the number or amount of payments).As adjustable-rate mortgages became more prevalent, and the variety of ARM products became more extensive, the Board grew concerned that the Regulation Z disclosures did not fully meet consumers' needs. Accordingly, in 1987, the Board amended Regulation Z to provide consumers with more information about ARMs. The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z required creditors to provide consumers with detailed, specific information about all major aspects of their variable rate programs. Creditors must provide these "program" disclosures with every ARM application, and are required to do so before consumers pay a nonrefundable fee. This allows consumers to review the information in an unpressured environment before they apply for the loan.The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z also required creditors to provide consumers with a copy of the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages" (the "CHARM booklet"), which was created by the Federal Reserve working in concert with the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS). The CHARM booklet was designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. Creditors are required to give consumers a copy of the CHARM booklet with each application for an ARM, including any nontraditional mortgage that has a variable rate.Revising the Disclosures for Alternative MortgagesAt this point, I would like to describe the information that is currently included in TILA disclosures and highlight some of the issues the Board will study as it reviews and revises these disclosures. TILA provides specific disclosure requirements for variable-rate loans and other disclosure requirements that apply to all mortgage loans. I will focus primarily on the disclosures for variable-rate mortgage loans, as many nontraditional mortgages have adjustable- rate features.ARM Program DisclosuresIn ARM program disclosures, creditors are required to state how the interest rate and payment will be determined. They must explain any rules relating to changes in the index, interest rate, and payment amount. The disclosure must also explain any rules relating to changes in the outstanding loan balance, including, for example, an explanation of payment caps, and the possibility of negative amortization if the payment is not sufficient to cover the accrued interest. Regulation Z requires either a 15-year historical example showing how payments for a $10,000 loan would have been affected by interest rate changes during that period, or a "worst case" payment example showing the maximum interest rate and maximum payment for a $10,000 loan.Although it is important for consumers to have complete and accurate information about the features of their ARMs, we recognize that "information overload" can impair the effectiveness of consumer disclosures. In addition, describing loan terms in legally precise language can make disclosures difficult to read and can hinder consumers' understanding. In revising Regulation Z, the Board will use consumer testing and work closely with design consultants to try to improve both the format and language of the ARM program disclosures. The goal is to make these disclosures easier to understand and more useful to consumers.Transaction-specific DisclosuresFor both variable-rate and fixed-rate mortgage loans, the transaction-specific disclosures provided before loan consummation express the cost of the loan as an annualized rate, the APR, over the full loan term. These disclosures include a payment schedule showing the amount and timing of payments, including any balloon payment. Regulation Z further requires that the transaction-specific disclosures indicate if the loan has a variable-rate feature. Creditors must also specify if a prepayment penalty may be charged.The APRFor variable-rate loans, the disclosed APR is based on the rates currently in effect. The APR calculation does not consider the effect of possible future changes to any index used to adjust the interest rate. However, when the loan's initial interest rate has been discounted and is not based on the index used to make later adjustments, the APR is a composite rate based on the discounted rate for as long as it is in effect, and the fully indexed rate in effect at the time the loan is consummated for the remainder of the loan term.The Payment ScheduleThe TILA payment schedule, like the APR, is based on the interest rates that are in effect at the time the loan is closed. No assumption is made about possible future changes in the index used to set the rate. Consequently, a consumer's actual payments may be higher than the amount shown in the schedule if interest rates increase due to changes in the index.Although the payment schedule disclosures do not assume changes in the interest rate, they must reflect increases in the monthly payment that will be required for interest-only loans or option-ARMs in order to amortize the principal. In general, for option-ARMs, the payment schedule is based on the assumption that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment each month. Accordingly, the payment schedule for an option-ARM should reflect the higher monthly payment that will be required to amortize the new loan balance after the option period ends.There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. The Federal Reserve plays several roles and engages in various activities to ensure that consumers understand credit terms and the options available to them when they are shopping for mortgage credit. First, in our role as a rulewriter, the Board issues regulations implementing TILA and its required disclosures. These regulations apply to all creditors. But we recognize that required disclosures alone cannot ensure that consumers understand these loan products. Thus, the Federal Reserve also promotes consumer understanding through other means, such as the development of educational materials for consumers. In addition, through the issuance of guidance and recommended practices, we encourage industry to improve its communications with consumers, for example, by developing promotional materials that are complete and balanced in their description of loan features and risks. The financial institutions that we supervise are examined to ensure that they comply with existing disclosure laws. The Federal Reserve also engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand consumer behavior and to inform our judgment with regard to the best approaches for assisting consumers. Toward this end, we sponsor consumer surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules. In order to address the complex issues associated with nontraditional mortgages, we plan to utilize a number of these approaches. In my testimony, I will first discuss the Truth in Lending disclosures, and the Board's plan to review and revise them. I will then discuss other efforts that we have already undertaken and planned efforts regarding nontraditional mortgages.The Truth in Lending ActTILA is the primary federal law governing disclosures for consumer credit, including home mortgage loans. It is implemented by the Board's Regulation Z. TILA has distinct rules for two categories of consumer credit: open-end (revolving) credit plans, such as credit card accounts; and closed-end (installment) transactions, such as home mortgage loans and auto loans.TILA's purpose is to assure the meaningful disclosure of credit terms so that consumers can compare more readily the available terms and avoid the uninformed use of credit. This goal is carried out by requiring the uniform disclosure of costs and other terms to consumers. For closed-end loans transactions such as mortgage loans, TILA requires creditors to provide transaction-specific disclosures before the loan closing. For home-purchase loans, these transaction-specific disclosures must be given within three days after consumers apply for the loan. For nearly twenty years, Regulation Z has also required additional extensive disclosures about lenders' adjustable rate mortgage programs.Background on the Disclosures for Alternative Mortgage ProductsThe rapid growth of nontraditional mortgages has been largely associated with loan products that have variable-rate features. The Truth in Lending Act did not specifically require the disclosure of variable-rate features. However, in 1977, the Board revised Regulation Z to require creditors to provide basic information for both mortgage and non-mortgage loans with variable-rate features, including: the circumstances under which the interest rate may increase (for example, when the index used to make rate adjustments rises); any limitations on the increase (such as a periodic or overall interest rate cap); and the effect of a rate increase (for example, whether it would result in an increase in the number or amount of payments).As adjustable-rate mortgages became more prevalent, and the variety of ARM products became more extensive, the Board grew concerned that the Regulation Z disclosures did not fully meet consumers' needs. Accordingly, in 1987, the Board amended Regulation Z to provide consumers with more information about ARMs. The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z required creditors to provide consumers with detailed, specific information about all major aspects of their variable rate programs. Creditors must provide these "program" disclosures with every ARM application, and are required to do so before consumers pay a nonrefundable fee. This allows consumers to review the information in an unpressured environment before they apply for the loan.The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z also required creditors to provide consumers with a copy of the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages" (the "CHARM booklet"), which was created by the Federal Reserve working in concert with the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS). The CHARM booklet was designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. Creditors are required to give consumers a copy of the CHARM booklet with each application for an ARM, including any nontraditional mortgage that has a variable rate.Revising the Disclosures for Alternative MortgagesAt this point, I would like to describe the information that is currently included in TILA disclosures and highlight some of the issues the Board will study as it reviews and revises these disclosures. TILA provides specific disclosure requirements for variable-rate loans and other disclosure requirements that apply to all mortgage loans. I will focus primarily on the disclosures for variable-rate mortgage loans, as many nontraditional mortgages have adjustable- rate features.ARM Program DisclosuresIn ARM program disclosures, creditors are required to state how the interest rate and payment will be determined. They must explain any rules relating to changes in the index, interest rate, and payment amount. The disclosure must also explain any rules relating to changes in the outstanding loan balance, including, for example, an explanation of payment caps, and the possibility of negative amortization if the payment is not sufficient to cover the accrued interest. Regulation Z requires either a 15-year historical example showing how payments for a $10,000 loan would have been affected by interest rate changes during that period, or a "worst case" payment example showing the maximum interest rate and maximum payment for a $10,000 loan.Although it is important for consumers to have complete and accurate information about the features of their ARMs, we recognize that "information overload" can impair the effectiveness of consumer disclosures. In addition, describing loan terms in legally precise language can make disclosures difficult to read and can hinder consumers' understanding. In revising Regulation Z, the Board will use consumer testing and work closely with design consultants to try to improve both the format and language of the ARM program disclosures. The goal is to make these disclosures easier to understand and more useful to consumers.Transaction-specific DisclosuresFor both variable-rate and fixed-rate mortgage loans, the transaction-specific disclosures provided before loan consummation express the cost of the loan as an annualized rate, the APR, over the full loan term. These disclosures include a payment schedule showing the amount and timing of payments, including any balloon payment. Regulation Z further requires that the transaction-specific disclosures indicate if the loan has a variable-rate feature. Creditors must also specify if a prepayment penalty may be charged.The APRFor variable-rate loans, the disclosed APR is based on the rates currently in effect. The APR calculation does not consider the effect of possible future changes to any index used to adjust the interest rate. However, when the loan's initial interest rate has been discounted and is not based on the index used to make later adjustments, the APR is a composite rate based on the discounted rate for as long as it is in effect, and the fully indexed rate in effect at the time the loan is consummated for the remainder of the loan term.The Payment ScheduleThe TILA payment schedule, like the APR, is based on the interest rates that are in effect at the time the loan is closed. No assumption is made about possible future changes in the index used to set the rate. Consequently, a consumer's actual payments may be higher than the amount shown in the schedule if interest rates increase due to changes in the index.Although the payment schedule disclosures do not assume changes in the interest rate, they must reflect increases in the monthly payment that will be required for interest-only loans or option-ARMs in order to amortize the principal. In general, for option-ARMs, the payment schedule is based on the assumption that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment each month. Accordingly, the payment schedule for an option-ARM should reflect the higher monthly payment that will be required to amortize the new loan balance after the option period ends.There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. The Truth in Lending ActTILA is the primary federal law governing disclosures for consumer credit, including home mortgage loans. It is implemented by the Board's Regulation Z. TILA has distinct rules for two categories of consumer credit: open-end (revolving) credit plans, such as credit card accounts; and closed-end (installment) transactions, such as home mortgage loans and auto loans.TILA's purpose is to assure the meaningful disclosure of credit terms so that consumers can compare more readily the available terms and avoid the uninformed use of credit. This goal is carried out by requiring the uniform disclosure of costs and other terms to consumers. For closed-end loans transactions such as mortgage loans, TILA requires creditors to provide transaction-specific disclosures before the loan closing. For home-purchase loans, these transaction-specific disclosures must be given within three days after consumers apply for the loan. For nearly twenty years, Regulation Z has also required additional extensive disclosures about lenders' adjustable rate mortgage programs.Background on the Disclosures for Alternative Mortgage ProductsThe rapid growth of nontraditional mortgages has been largely associated with loan products that have variable-rate features. The Truth in Lending Act did not specifically require the disclosure of variable-rate features. However, in 1977, the Board revised Regulation Z to require creditors to provide basic information for both mortgage and non-mortgage loans with variable-rate features, including: the circumstances under which the interest rate may increase (for example, when the index used to make rate adjustments rises); any limitations on the increase (such as a periodic or overall interest rate cap); and the effect of a rate increase (for example, whether it would result in an increase in the number or amount of payments).As adjustable-rate mortgages became more prevalent, and the variety of ARM products became more extensive, the Board grew concerned that the Regulation Z disclosures did not fully meet consumers' needs. Accordingly, in 1987, the Board amended Regulation Z to provide consumers with more information about ARMs. The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z required creditors to provide consumers with detailed, specific information about all major aspects of their variable rate programs. Creditors must provide these "program" disclosures with every ARM application, and are required to do so before consumers pay a nonrefundable fee. This allows consumers to review the information in an unpressured environment before they apply for the loan.The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z also required creditors to provide consumers with a copy of the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages" (the "CHARM booklet"), which was created by the Federal Reserve working in concert with the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS). The CHARM booklet was designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. Creditors are required to give consumers a copy of the CHARM booklet with each application for an ARM, including any nontraditional mortgage that has a variable rate.Revising the Disclosures for Alternative MortgagesAt this point, I would like to describe the information that is currently included in TILA disclosures and highlight some of the issues the Board will study as it reviews and revises these disclosures. TILA provides specific disclosure requirements for variable-rate loans and other disclosure requirements that apply to all mortgage loans. I will focus primarily on the disclosures for variable-rate mortgage loans, as many nontraditional mortgages have adjustable- rate features.ARM Program DisclosuresIn ARM program disclosures, creditors are required to state how the interest rate and payment will be determined. They must explain any rules relating to changes in the index, interest rate, and payment amount. The disclosure must also explain any rules relating to changes in the outstanding loan balance, including, for example, an explanation of payment caps, and the possibility of negative amortization if the payment is not sufficient to cover the accrued interest. Regulation Z requires either a 15-year historical example showing how payments for a $10,000 loan would have been affected by interest rate changes during that period, or a "worst case" payment example showing the maximum interest rate and maximum payment for a $10,000 loan.Although it is important for consumers to have complete and accurate information about the features of their ARMs, we recognize that "information overload" can impair the effectiveness of consumer disclosures. In addition, describing loan terms in legally precise language can make disclosures difficult to read and can hinder consumers' understanding. In revising Regulation Z, the Board will use consumer testing and work closely with design consultants to try to improve both the format and language of the ARM program disclosures. The goal is to make these disclosures easier to understand and more useful to consumers.Transaction-specific DisclosuresFor both variable-rate and fixed-rate mortgage loans, the transaction-specific disclosures provided before loan consummation express the cost of the loan as an annualized rate, the APR, over the full loan term. These disclosures include a payment schedule showing the amount and timing of payments, including any balloon payment. Regulation Z further requires that the transaction-specific disclosures indicate if the loan has a variable-rate feature. Creditors must also specify if a prepayment penalty may be charged.The APRFor variable-rate loans, the disclosed APR is based on the rates currently in effect. The APR calculation does not consider the effect of possible future changes to any index used to adjust the interest rate. However, when the loan's initial interest rate has been discounted and is not based on the index used to make later adjustments, the APR is a composite rate based on the discounted rate for as long as it is in effect, and the fully indexed rate in effect at the time the loan is consummated for the remainder of the loan term.The Payment ScheduleThe TILA payment schedule, like the APR, is based on the interest rates that are in effect at the time the loan is closed. No assumption is made about possible future changes in the index used to set the rate. Consequently, a consumer's actual payments may be higher than the amount shown in the schedule if interest rates increase due to changes in the index.Although the payment schedule disclosures do not assume changes in the interest rate, they must reflect increases in the monthly payment that will be required for interest-only loans or option-ARMs in order to amortize the principal. In general, for option-ARMs, the payment schedule is based on the assumption that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment each month. Accordingly, the payment schedule for an option-ARM should reflect the higher monthly payment that will be required to amortize the new loan balance after the option period ends.There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. TILA's purpose is to assure the meaningful disclosure of credit terms so that consumers can compare more readily the available terms and avoid the uninformed use of credit. This goal is carried out by requiring the uniform disclosure of costs and other terms to consumers. For closed-end loans transactions such as mortgage loans, TILA requires creditors to provide transaction-specific disclosures before the loan closing. For home-purchase loans, these transaction-specific disclosures must be given within three days after consumers apply for the loan. For nearly twenty years, Regulation Z has also required additional extensive disclosures about lenders' adjustable rate mortgage programs.Background on the Disclosures for Alternative Mortgage ProductsThe rapid growth of nontraditional mortgages has been largely associated with loan products that have variable-rate features. The Truth in Lending Act did not specifically require the disclosure of variable-rate features. However, in 1977, the Board revised Regulation Z to require creditors to provide basic information for both mortgage and non-mortgage loans with variable-rate features, including: the circumstances under which the interest rate may increase (for example, when the index used to make rate adjustments rises); any limitations on the increase (such as a periodic or overall interest rate cap); and the effect of a rate increase (for example, whether it would result in an increase in the number or amount of payments).As adjustable-rate mortgages became more prevalent, and the variety of ARM products became more extensive, the Board grew concerned that the Regulation Z disclosures did not fully meet consumers' needs. Accordingly, in 1987, the Board amended Regulation Z to provide consumers with more information about ARMs. The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z required creditors to provide consumers with detailed, specific information about all major aspects of their variable rate programs. Creditors must provide these "program" disclosures with every ARM application, and are required to do so before consumers pay a nonrefundable fee. This allows consumers to review the information in an unpressured environment before they apply for the loan.The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z also required creditors to provide consumers with a copy of the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages" (the "CHARM booklet"), which was created by the Federal Reserve working in concert with the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS). The CHARM booklet was designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. Creditors are required to give consumers a copy of the CHARM booklet with each application for an ARM, including any nontraditional mortgage that has a variable rate.Revising the Disclosures for Alternative MortgagesAt this point, I would like to describe the information that is currently included in TILA disclosures and highlight some of the issues the Board will study as it reviews and revises these disclosures. TILA provides specific disclosure requirements for variable-rate loans and other disclosure requirements that apply to all mortgage loans. I will focus primarily on the disclosures for variable-rate mortgage loans, as many nontraditional mortgages have adjustable- rate features.ARM Program DisclosuresIn ARM program disclosures, creditors are required to state how the interest rate and payment will be determined. They must explain any rules relating to changes in the index, interest rate, and payment amount. The disclosure must also explain any rules relating to changes in the outstanding loan balance, including, for example, an explanation of payment caps, and the possibility of negative amortization if the payment is not sufficient to cover the accrued interest. Regulation Z requires either a 15-year historical example showing how payments for a $10,000 loan would have been affected by interest rate changes during that period, or a "worst case" payment example showing the maximum interest rate and maximum payment for a $10,000 loan.Although it is important for consumers to have complete and accurate information about the features of their ARMs, we recognize that "information overload" can impair the effectiveness of consumer disclosures. In addition, describing loan terms in legally precise language can make disclosures difficult to read and can hinder consumers' understanding. In revising Regulation Z, the Board will use consumer testing and work closely with design consultants to try to improve both the format and language of the ARM program disclosures. The goal is to make these disclosures easier to understand and more useful to consumers.Transaction-specific DisclosuresFor both variable-rate and fixed-rate mortgage loans, the transaction-specific disclosures provided before loan consummation express the cost of the loan as an annualized rate, the APR, over the full loan term. These disclosures include a payment schedule showing the amount and timing of payments, including any balloon payment. Regulation Z further requires that the transaction-specific disclosures indicate if the loan has a variable-rate feature. Creditors must also specify if a prepayment penalty may be charged.The APRFor variable-rate loans, the disclosed APR is based on the rates currently in effect. The APR calculation does not consider the effect of possible future changes to any index used to adjust the interest rate. However, when the loan's initial interest rate has been discounted and is not based on the index used to make later adjustments, the APR is a composite rate based on the discounted rate for as long as it is in effect, and the fully indexed rate in effect at the time the loan is consummated for the remainder of the loan term.The Payment ScheduleThe TILA payment schedule, like the APR, is based on the interest rates that are in effect at the time the loan is closed. No assumption is made about possible future changes in the index used to set the rate. Consequently, a consumer's actual payments may be higher than the amount shown in the schedule if interest rates increase due to changes in the index.Although the payment schedule disclosures do not assume changes in the interest rate, they must reflect increases in the monthly payment that will be required for interest-only loans or option-ARMs in order to amortize the principal. In general, for option-ARMs, the payment schedule is based on the assumption that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment each month. Accordingly, the payment schedule for an option-ARM should reflect the higher monthly payment that will be required to amortize the new loan balance after the option period ends.There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. Background on the Disclosures for Alternative Mortgage ProductsThe rapid growth of nontraditional mortgages has been largely associated with loan products that have variable-rate features. The Truth in Lending Act did not specifically require the disclosure of variable-rate features. However, in 1977, the Board revised Regulation Z to require creditors to provide basic information for both mortgage and non-mortgage loans with variable-rate features, including: the circumstances under which the interest rate may increase (for example, when the index used to make rate adjustments rises); any limitations on the increase (such as a periodic or overall interest rate cap); and the effect of a rate increase (for example, whether it would result in an increase in the number or amount of payments).As adjustable-rate mortgages became more prevalent, and the variety of ARM products became more extensive, the Board grew concerned that the Regulation Z disclosures did not fully meet consumers' needs. Accordingly, in 1987, the Board amended Regulation Z to provide consumers with more information about ARMs. The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z required creditors to provide consumers with detailed, specific information about all major aspects of their variable rate programs. Creditors must provide these "program" disclosures with every ARM application, and are required to do so before consumers pay a nonrefundable fee. This allows consumers to review the information in an unpressured environment before they apply for the loan.The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z also required creditors to provide consumers with a copy of the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages" (the "CHARM booklet"), which was created by the Federal Reserve working in concert with the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS). The CHARM booklet was designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. Creditors are required to give consumers a copy of the CHARM booklet with each application for an ARM, including any nontraditional mortgage that has a variable rate.Revising the Disclosures for Alternative MortgagesAt this point, I would like to describe the information that is currently included in TILA disclosures and highlight some of the issues the Board will study as it reviews and revises these disclosures. TILA provides specific disclosure requirements for variable-rate loans and other disclosure requirements that apply to all mortgage loans. I will focus primarily on the disclosures for variable-rate mortgage loans, as many nontraditional mortgages have adjustable- rate features.ARM Program DisclosuresIn ARM program disclosures, creditors are required to state how the interest rate and payment will be determined. They must explain any rules relating to changes in the index, interest rate, and payment amount. The disclosure must also explain any rules relating to changes in the outstanding loan balance, including, for example, an explanation of payment caps, and the possibility of negative amortization if the payment is not sufficient to cover the accrued interest. Regulation Z requires either a 15-year historical example showing how payments for a $10,000 loan would have been affected by interest rate changes during that period, or a "worst case" payment example showing the maximum interest rate and maximum payment for a $10,000 loan.Although it is important for consumers to have complete and accurate information about the features of their ARMs, we recognize that "information overload" can impair the effectiveness of consumer disclosures. In addition, describing loan terms in legally precise language can make disclosures difficult to read and can hinder consumers' understanding. In revising Regulation Z, the Board will use consumer testing and work closely with design consultants to try to improve both the format and language of the ARM program disclosures. The goal is to make these disclosures easier to understand and more useful to consumers.Transaction-specific DisclosuresFor both variable-rate and fixed-rate mortgage loans, the transaction-specific disclosures provided before loan consummation express the cost of the loan as an annualized rate, the APR, over the full loan term. These disclosures include a payment schedule showing the amount and timing of payments, including any balloon payment. Regulation Z further requires that the transaction-specific disclosures indicate if the loan has a variable-rate feature. Creditors must also specify if a prepayment penalty may be charged.The APRFor variable-rate loans, the disclosed APR is based on the rates currently in effect. The APR calculation does not consider the effect of possible future changes to any index used to adjust the interest rate. However, when the loan's initial interest rate has been discounted and is not based on the index used to make later adjustments, the APR is a composite rate based on the discounted rate for as long as it is in effect, and the fully indexed rate in effect at the time the loan is consummated for the remainder of the loan term.The Payment ScheduleThe TILA payment schedule, like the APR, is based on the interest rates that are in effect at the time the loan is closed. No assumption is made about possible future changes in the index used to set the rate. Consequently, a consumer's actual payments may be higher than the amount shown in the schedule if interest rates increase due to changes in the index.Although the payment schedule disclosures do not assume changes in the interest rate, they must reflect increases in the monthly payment that will be required for interest-only loans or option-ARMs in order to amortize the principal. In general, for option-ARMs, the payment schedule is based on the assumption that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment each month. Accordingly, the payment schedule for an option-ARM should reflect the higher monthly payment that will be required to amortize the new loan balance after the option period ends.There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. As adjustable-rate mortgages became more prevalent, and the variety of ARM products became more extensive, the Board grew concerned that the Regulation Z disclosures did not fully meet consumers' needs. Accordingly, in 1987, the Board amended Regulation Z to provide consumers with more information about ARMs. The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z required creditors to provide consumers with detailed, specific information about all major aspects of their variable rate programs. Creditors must provide these "program" disclosures with every ARM application, and are required to do so before consumers pay a nonrefundable fee. This allows consumers to review the information in an unpressured environment before they apply for the loan.The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z also required creditors to provide consumers with a copy of the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages" (the "CHARM booklet"), which was created by the Federal Reserve working in concert with the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS). The CHARM booklet was designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. Creditors are required to give consumers a copy of the CHARM booklet with each application for an ARM, including any nontraditional mortgage that has a variable rate.Revising the Disclosures for Alternative MortgagesAt this point, I would like to describe the information that is currently included in TILA disclosures and highlight some of the issues the Board will study as it reviews and revises these disclosures. TILA provides specific disclosure requirements for variable-rate loans and other disclosure requirements that apply to all mortgage loans. I will focus primarily on the disclosures for variable-rate mortgage loans, as many nontraditional mortgages have adjustable- rate features.ARM Program DisclosuresIn ARM program disclosures, creditors are required to state how the interest rate and payment will be determined. They must explain any rules relating to changes in the index, interest rate, and payment amount. The disclosure must also explain any rules relating to changes in the outstanding loan balance, including, for example, an explanation of payment caps, and the possibility of negative amortization if the payment is not sufficient to cover the accrued interest. Regulation Z requires either a 15-year historical example showing how payments for a $10,000 loan would have been affected by interest rate changes during that period, or a "worst case" payment example showing the maximum interest rate and maximum payment for a $10,000 loan.Although it is important for consumers to have complete and accurate information about the features of their ARMs, we recognize that "information overload" can impair the effectiveness of consumer disclosures. In addition, describing loan terms in legally precise language can make disclosures difficult to read and can hinder consumers' understanding. In revising Regulation Z, the Board will use consumer testing and work closely with design consultants to try to improve both the format and language of the ARM program disclosures. The goal is to make these disclosures easier to understand and more useful to consumers.Transaction-specific DisclosuresFor both variable-rate and fixed-rate mortgage loans, the transaction-specific disclosures provided before loan consummation express the cost of the loan as an annualized rate, the APR, over the full loan term. These disclosures include a payment schedule showing the amount and timing of payments, including any balloon payment. Regulation Z further requires that the transaction-specific disclosures indicate if the loan has a variable-rate feature. Creditors must also specify if a prepayment penalty may be charged.The APRFor variable-rate loans, the disclosed APR is based on the rates currently in effect. The APR calculation does not consider the effect of possible future changes to any index used to adjust the interest rate. However, when the loan's initial interest rate has been discounted and is not based on the index used to make later adjustments, the APR is a composite rate based on the discounted rate for as long as it is in effect, and the fully indexed rate in effect at the time the loan is consummated for the remainder of the loan term.The Payment ScheduleThe TILA payment schedule, like the APR, is based on the interest rates that are in effect at the time the loan is closed. No assumption is made about possible future changes in the index used to set the rate. Consequently, a consumer's actual payments may be higher than the amount shown in the schedule if interest rates increase due to changes in the index.Although the payment schedule disclosures do not assume changes in the interest rate, they must reflect increases in the monthly payment that will be required for interest-only loans or option-ARMs in order to amortize the principal. In general, for option-ARMs, the payment schedule is based on the assumption that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment each month. Accordingly, the payment schedule for an option-ARM should reflect the higher monthly payment that will be required to amortize the new loan balance after the option period ends.There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. The 1987 amendments to Regulation Z also required creditors to provide consumers with a copy of the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages" (the "CHARM booklet"), which was created by the Federal Reserve working in concert with the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS). The CHARM booklet was designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. Creditors are required to give consumers a copy of the CHARM booklet with each application for an ARM, including any nontraditional mortgage that has a variable rate.Revising the Disclosures for Alternative MortgagesAt this point, I would like to describe the information that is currently included in TILA disclosures and highlight some of the issues the Board will study as it reviews and revises these disclosures. TILA provides specific disclosure requirements for variable-rate loans and other disclosure requirements that apply to all mortgage loans. I will focus primarily on the disclosures for variable-rate mortgage loans, as many nontraditional mortgages have adjustable- rate features.ARM Program DisclosuresIn ARM program disclosures, creditors are required to state how the interest rate and payment will be determined. They must explain any rules relating to changes in the index, interest rate, and payment amount. The disclosure must also explain any rules relating to changes in the outstanding loan balance, including, for example, an explanation of payment caps, and the possibility of negative amortization if the payment is not sufficient to cover the accrued interest. Regulation Z requires either a 15-year historical example showing how payments for a $10,000 loan would have been affected by interest rate changes during that period, or a "worst case" payment example showing the maximum interest rate and maximum payment for a $10,000 loan.Although it is important for consumers to have complete and accurate information about the features of their ARMs, we recognize that "information overload" can impair the effectiveness of consumer disclosures. In addition, describing loan terms in legally precise language can make disclosures difficult to read and can hinder consumers' understanding. In revising Regulation Z, the Board will use consumer testing and work closely with design consultants to try to improve both the format and language of the ARM program disclosures. The goal is to make these disclosures easier to understand and more useful to consumers.Transaction-specific DisclosuresFor both variable-rate and fixed-rate mortgage loans, the transaction-specific disclosures provided before loan consummation express the cost of the loan as an annualized rate, the APR, over the full loan term. These disclosures include a payment schedule showing the amount and timing of payments, including any balloon payment. Regulation Z further requires that the transaction-specific disclosures indicate if the loan has a variable-rate feature. Creditors must also specify if a prepayment penalty may be charged.The APRFor variable-rate loans, the disclosed APR is based on the rates currently in effect. The APR calculation does not consider the effect of possible future changes to any index used to adjust the interest rate. However, when the loan's initial interest rate has been discounted and is not based on the index used to make later adjustments, the APR is a composite rate based on the discounted rate for as long as it is in effect, and the fully indexed rate in effect at the time the loan is consummated for the remainder of the loan term.The Payment ScheduleThe TILA payment schedule, like the APR, is based on the interest rates that are in effect at the time the loan is closed. No assumption is made about possible future changes in the index used to set the rate. Consequently, a consumer's actual payments may be higher than the amount shown in the schedule if interest rates increase due to changes in the index.Although the payment schedule disclosures do not assume changes in the interest rate, they must reflect increases in the monthly payment that will be required for interest-only loans or option-ARMs in order to amortize the principal. In general, for option-ARMs, the payment schedule is based on the assumption that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment each month. Accordingly, the payment schedule for an option-ARM should reflect the higher monthly payment that will be required to amortize the new loan balance after the option period ends.There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. Revising the Disclosures for Alternative MortgagesAt this point, I would like to describe the information that is currently included in TILA disclosures and highlight some of the issues the Board will study as it reviews and revises these disclosures. TILA provides specific disclosure requirements for variable-rate loans and other disclosure requirements that apply to all mortgage loans. I will focus primarily on the disclosures for variable-rate mortgage loans, as many nontraditional mortgages have adjustable- rate features.ARM Program DisclosuresIn ARM program disclosures, creditors are required to state how the interest rate and payment will be determined. They must explain any rules relating to changes in the index, interest rate, and payment amount. The disclosure must also explain any rules relating to changes in the outstanding loan balance, including, for example, an explanation of payment caps, and the possibility of negative amortization if the payment is not sufficient to cover the accrued interest. Regulation Z requires either a 15-year historical example showing how payments for a $10,000 loan would have been affected by interest rate changes during that period, or a "worst case" payment example showing the maximum interest rate and maximum payment for a $10,000 loan.Although it is important for consumers to have complete and accurate information about the features of their ARMs, we recognize that "information overload" can impair the effectiveness of consumer disclosures. In addition, describing loan terms in legally precise language can make disclosures difficult to read and can hinder consumers' understanding. In revising Regulation Z, the Board will use consumer testing and work closely with design consultants to try to improve both the format and language of the ARM program disclosures. The goal is to make these disclosures easier to understand and more useful to consumers.Transaction-specific DisclosuresFor both variable-rate and fixed-rate mortgage loans, the transaction-specific disclosures provided before loan consummation express the cost of the loan as an annualized rate, the APR, over the full loan term. These disclosures include a payment schedule showing the amount and timing of payments, including any balloon payment. Regulation Z further requires that the transaction-specific disclosures indicate if the loan has a variable-rate feature. Creditors must also specify if a prepayment penalty may be charged.The APRFor variable-rate loans, the disclosed APR is based on the rates currently in effect. The APR calculation does not consider the effect of possible future changes to any index used to adjust the interest rate. However, when the loan's initial interest rate has been discounted and is not based on the index used to make later adjustments, the APR is a composite rate based on the discounted rate for as long as it is in effect, and the fully indexed rate in effect at the time the loan is consummated for the remainder of the loan term.The Payment ScheduleThe TILA payment schedule, like the APR, is based on the interest rates that are in effect at the time the loan is closed. No assumption is made about possible future changes in the index used to set the rate. Consequently, a consumer's actual payments may be higher than the amount shown in the schedule if interest rates increase due to changes in the index.Although the payment schedule disclosures do not assume changes in the interest rate, they must reflect increases in the monthly payment that will be required for interest-only loans or option-ARMs in order to amortize the principal. In general, for option-ARMs, the payment schedule is based on the assumption that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment each month. Accordingly, the payment schedule for an option-ARM should reflect the higher monthly payment that will be required to amortize the new loan balance after the option period ends.There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. ARM Program DisclosuresIn ARM program disclosures, creditors are required to state how the interest rate and payment will be determined. They must explain any rules relating to changes in the index, interest rate, and payment amount. The disclosure must also explain any rules relating to changes in the outstanding loan balance, including, for example, an explanation of payment caps, and the possibility of negative amortization if the payment is not sufficient to cover the accrued interest. Regulation Z requires either a 15-year historical example showing how payments for a $10,000 loan would have been affected by interest rate changes during that period, or a "worst case" payment example showing the maximum interest rate and maximum payment for a $10,000 loan.Although it is important for consumers to have complete and accurate information about the features of their ARMs, we recognize that "information overload" can impair the effectiveness of consumer disclosures. In addition, describing loan terms in legally precise language can make disclosures difficult to read and can hinder consumers' understanding. In revising Regulation Z, the Board will use consumer testing and work closely with design consultants to try to improve both the format and language of the ARM program disclosures. The goal is to make these disclosures easier to understand and more useful to consumers.Transaction-specific DisclosuresFor both variable-rate and fixed-rate mortgage loans, the transaction-specific disclosures provided before loan consummation express the cost of the loan as an annualized rate, the APR, over the full loan term. These disclosures include a payment schedule showing the amount and timing of payments, including any balloon payment. Regulation Z further requires that the transaction-specific disclosures indicate if the loan has a variable-rate feature. Creditors must also specify if a prepayment penalty may be charged.The APRFor variable-rate loans, the disclosed APR is based on the rates currently in effect. The APR calculation does not consider the effect of possible future changes to any index used to adjust the interest rate. However, when the loan's initial interest rate has been discounted and is not based on the index used to make later adjustments, the APR is a composite rate based on the discounted rate for as long as it is in effect, and the fully indexed rate in effect at the time the loan is consummated for the remainder of the loan term.The Payment ScheduleThe TILA payment schedule, like the APR, is based on the interest rates that are in effect at the time the loan is closed. No assumption is made about possible future changes in the index used to set the rate. Consequently, a consumer's actual payments may be higher than the amount shown in the schedule if interest rates increase due to changes in the index.Although the payment schedule disclosures do not assume changes in the interest rate, they must reflect increases in the monthly payment that will be required for interest-only loans or option-ARMs in order to amortize the principal. In general, for option-ARMs, the payment schedule is based on the assumption that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment each month. Accordingly, the payment schedule for an option-ARM should reflect the higher monthly payment that will be required to amortize the new loan balance after the option period ends.There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. Although it is important for consumers to have complete and accurate information about the features of their ARMs, we recognize that "information overload" can impair the effectiveness of consumer disclosures. In addition, describing loan terms in legally precise language can make disclosures difficult to read and can hinder consumers' understanding. In revising Regulation Z, the Board will use consumer testing and work closely with design consultants to try to improve both the format and language of the ARM program disclosures. The goal is to make these disclosures easier to understand and more useful to consumers.Transaction-specific DisclosuresFor both variable-rate and fixed-rate mortgage loans, the transaction-specific disclosures provided before loan consummation express the cost of the loan as an annualized rate, the APR, over the full loan term. These disclosures include a payment schedule showing the amount and timing of payments, including any balloon payment. Regulation Z further requires that the transaction-specific disclosures indicate if the loan has a variable-rate feature. Creditors must also specify if a prepayment penalty may be charged.The APRFor variable-rate loans, the disclosed APR is based on the rates currently in effect. The APR calculation does not consider the effect of possible future changes to any index used to adjust the interest rate. However, when the loan's initial interest rate has been discounted and is not based on the index used to make later adjustments, the APR is a composite rate based on the discounted rate for as long as it is in effect, and the fully indexed rate in effect at the time the loan is consummated for the remainder of the loan term.The Payment ScheduleThe TILA payment schedule, like the APR, is based on the interest rates that are in effect at the time the loan is closed. No assumption is made about possible future changes in the index used to set the rate. Consequently, a consumer's actual payments may be higher than the amount shown in the schedule if interest rates increase due to changes in the index.Although the payment schedule disclosures do not assume changes in the interest rate, they must reflect increases in the monthly payment that will be required for interest-only loans or option-ARMs in order to amortize the principal. In general, for option-ARMs, the payment schedule is based on the assumption that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment each month. Accordingly, the payment schedule for an option-ARM should reflect the higher monthly payment that will be required to amortize the new loan balance after the option period ends.There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. Transaction-specific DisclosuresFor both variable-rate and fixed-rate mortgage loans, the transaction-specific disclosures provided before loan consummation express the cost of the loan as an annualized rate, the APR, over the full loan term. These disclosures include a payment schedule showing the amount and timing of payments, including any balloon payment. Regulation Z further requires that the transaction-specific disclosures indicate if the loan has a variable-rate feature. Creditors must also specify if a prepayment penalty may be charged.The APRFor variable-rate loans, the disclosed APR is based on the rates currently in effect. The APR calculation does not consider the effect of possible future changes to any index used to adjust the interest rate. However, when the loan's initial interest rate has been discounted and is not based on the index used to make later adjustments, the APR is a composite rate based on the discounted rate for as long as it is in effect, and the fully indexed rate in effect at the time the loan is consummated for the remainder of the loan term.The Payment ScheduleThe TILA payment schedule, like the APR, is based on the interest rates that are in effect at the time the loan is closed. No assumption is made about possible future changes in the index used to set the rate. Consequently, a consumer's actual payments may be higher than the amount shown in the schedule if interest rates increase due to changes in the index.Although the payment schedule disclosures do not assume changes in the interest rate, they must reflect increases in the monthly payment that will be required for interest-only loans or option-ARMs in order to amortize the principal. In general, for option-ARMs, the payment schedule is based on the assumption that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment each month. Accordingly, the payment schedule for an option-ARM should reflect the higher monthly payment that will be required to amortize the new loan balance after the option period ends.There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. The APRFor variable-rate loans, the disclosed APR is based on the rates currently in effect. The APR calculation does not consider the effect of possible future changes to any index used to adjust the interest rate. However, when the loan's initial interest rate has been discounted and is not based on the index used to make later adjustments, the APR is a composite rate based on the discounted rate for as long as it is in effect, and the fully indexed rate in effect at the time the loan is consummated for the remainder of the loan term.The Payment ScheduleThe TILA payment schedule, like the APR, is based on the interest rates that are in effect at the time the loan is closed. No assumption is made about possible future changes in the index used to set the rate. Consequently, a consumer's actual payments may be higher than the amount shown in the schedule if interest rates increase due to changes in the index.Although the payment schedule disclosures do not assume changes in the interest rate, they must reflect increases in the monthly payment that will be required for interest-only loans or option-ARMs in order to amortize the principal. In general, for option-ARMs, the payment schedule is based on the assumption that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment each month. Accordingly, the payment schedule for an option-ARM should reflect the higher monthly payment that will be required to amortize the new loan balance after the option period ends.There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. The Payment ScheduleThe TILA payment schedule, like the APR, is based on the interest rates that are in effect at the time the loan is closed. No assumption is made about possible future changes in the index used to set the rate. Consequently, a consumer's actual payments may be higher than the amount shown in the schedule if interest rates increase due to changes in the index.Although the payment schedule disclosures do not assume changes in the interest rate, they must reflect increases in the monthly payment that will be required for interest-only loans or option-ARMs in order to amortize the principal. In general, for option-ARMs, the payment schedule is based on the assumption that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment each month. Accordingly, the payment schedule for an option-ARM should reflect the higher monthly payment that will be required to amortize the new loan balance after the option period ends.There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. Although the payment schedule disclosures do not assume changes in the interest rate, they must reflect increases in the monthly payment that will be required for interest-only loans or option-ARMs in order to amortize the principal. In general, for option-ARMs, the payment schedule is based on the assumption that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment each month. Accordingly, the payment schedule for an option-ARM should reflect the higher monthly payment that will be required to amortize the new loan balance after the option period ends.There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. There has been much discussion about the value of also requiring a worst-case payment disclosure based on the loan's interest rate caps. Some believe that such a disclosure would provide consumers with useful information to assess the affordability of a particular loan. Others assert that disclosing a worst-case payment has "shock value" that would alert the consumer to the loan's inherent risk. Some industry representatives question the usefulness of the disclosure, particularly if the worst-case payment would occur so far in the future that the consumer's payment is unlikely to reach that level before the home is sold or refinanced. Others argue that if the disclosure is provided, individual consumers will be able to evaluate for themselves the relevance of this information in light of their own financial circumstances.In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. In 1998, the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) submitted a joint report to the Congress making recommendations for legislative reform of the mortgage disclosure requirements. The 1998 joint report contained model disclosures which included a proposed disclosure of the maximum interest rate that could be charged on the loan and the resulting payment for that "worst-case" scenario. In reviewing Regulation Z, the Board plans to study this aspect of the disclosures carefully by using consumer testing to determine its usefulness.Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. Negative AmortizationThe ARM program disclosures must note the possibility that negative amortization will occur if the consumer's payments are not sufficient to cover the interest due. The transaction-specific disclosures are not required to show how much the consumer's loan balance will increase if the loan has a negatively amortizing payment schedule. Whether or not consumers would find such disclosures useful is something that the Federal Reserve will evaluate through consumer testing during the Regulation Z review.Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. Fixed-Rate LoansThere have been recent reports of an increase in the popularity of fixed-rate loans that allow consumers to make interest-only payments or choose to make minimum payments that are less than the accrued interest. With some loans, consumers may start out by making small payments of principal based on a forty-year amortization schedule (or longer), but the required monthly payments subsequently increase so that the loan will be paid off in thirty years. As with ARMs, these fixed-rate alternative mortgages can also result in increasing loan balances and payment shock when consumers' payments increase to fully amortize the loan. Because the interest rate is fixed, however, the increase in payments may be smaller and more predictable. For fixed-rate loans, the payment schedule currently required under TILA will show the consumer's future payment amounts, including any expected increases, assuming that the consumer makes only the required minimum payment.Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. Timing of DisclosuresFor home-purchase loans, TILA's transaction-specific disclosures must be provided within three days after a consumer applies for a loan, and additional disclosures must be given before the loan closing if the terms subsequently change. In non-purchase transactions, these disclosures may be provided at or just before the loan closing. The timing of these disclosures for nonpurchase loans presents an issue that the Board will consider during its review of Regulation Z. The Board has previously studied whether TILA disclosures should be provided to consumers earlier in the mortgage shopping process. This issue was discussed in the 1998 joint report to the Congress by the Board and HUD. In considering this issue, a trade-off must be weighed: the value of providing estimated disclosures before the underwriting process is complete, versus the value of later disclosures that are firmer and less likely to change. Consistent with the framework of TILA, the Board will consider whether the transaction-specific TILA disclosures for non-purchase loans should be provided earlier in the loan process, as they currently are for home-purchase loans.The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. The Process for Reviewing and Revising Regulation ZThe Board and its staff have reviewed and updated Regulation Z and its interpretations frequently to address new products and issues. Moreover, in December 2004, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z starting with the publication of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). Although the first phase of the Board's review has concentrated on the rules for credit card accounts, the ultimate goal of the Regulation Z review is to improve the effectiveness and usefulness of all TILA disclosures, including mortgage disclosures. To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board.Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. Although the initial focus has been on credit cards, the Board's staff has already taken steps relative to its review of mortgage disclosures, beginning with the home-equity lending hearings that we held this past summer. Those hearings were particularly focused on the information consumers receive regarding ARMs and other alternative mortgage products. However, because rulemakings and consumer testing take time, the Board is taking more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about alternative mortgages. These steps include: revising the CHARM booklet; publishing a consumer education brochure; and issuing interagency guidance to help financial institutions improve their communications with consumers.As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, and industry trade groups from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that were just held.In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. In considering how to improve disclosures for alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. The Board will also use consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress.Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. Furthermore, in reviewing the disclosure requirements for closed-end credit transactions, the Board will also be mindful that loan products will change over time, and that future products might differ substantially. Thus, any new disclosure requirements relating to features and risks of today's loan products must be sufficiently flexible to allow creditors to provide meaningful disclosures even as these products change over time and new products are developed.Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. Interagency GuidanceIn December 2005, the Federal Reserve and other federal bank and thrift regulators issueddraft interagency guidanceon alternative mortgage products. The proposed guidance addresses both safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns. In particular, guidance is provided to institutions on ensuring that loan terms and underwriting standards are consistent with prudent lending practices, including consideration of a borrower's repayment capacity. With regard to consumer issues, the proposed guidance focuses on the need to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial times, when they are making decisions about the relative benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the draft interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just when they submit an application or close a loan.Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. Specifically, the proposed guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers' payment obligations ("payment shock") and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity ("negative amortization"). The proposed guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage. Lenders' communications regarding the features and risks of these products can be enhanced, for example, through the use of illustrations for sample loan amounts and interest rates, based on the products actually being offered by the lender at that time.The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. The agencies have considered the public comments received and are currently finalizing the draft guidance. As the public comments recognized, the interagency guidance is directed only at depository institutions and their affiliates. This highlights the importance of the TILA disclosures and CHARM booklet, which must be provided by all lenders.The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. The Federal Reserve's Hearings on Home-equity LendingDuring the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve heldpublic hearingson the topic of home-equity lending in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board's review of Regulation Z disclosures for nontraditional mortgage products, such as option-ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing these products and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with nontraditional mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures.At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. At the hearings, lenders testified that they underwrite these loans carefully, and they cited the historically strong performance of these products. Industry representatives believe that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default.On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of these products put borrowers at additional risk for obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders "push-marketing" nontraditional mortgages to low-income consumers and borrowers living on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concerned about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates who testified favored the adoption of legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgages loans.Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. Federal Reserve staff is considering carefully the transcripts of the hearings as well as the related public comment letters. Staff will consider this information in developing its plans and recommendations for revising the mortgage disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. The Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate MortgagesAs previously noted, nearly twenty years ago, the Federal Reserve, working with the OTS, created the "Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages." The CHARM booklet is designed to educate consumers about the features and risks associated with alternative mortgages. To enhance the information consumers receive about nontraditional mortgage products, the Board's staff is currently working with staff of the OTS to revise the CHARM booklet to include additional information about these products.The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. The CHARM booklet can be an effective means to educate consumers because the Board's Regulation Z requires creditors to give a copy to consumers with each application for an ARM, including nontraditional mortgages such as option-payment ARMs. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it is useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples of how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase. The agencies plan to publish a revised CHARM booklet later this year that will contain additional information tailored to interest-only and option-ARMs.Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. Consumer EducationThe Federal Reserve engages in a number of consumer education activities. For example, we plan to publish a consumer education brochure titled: "Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?" The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. We expect to publish the brochure within the next several weeks. It will be available in printed form and on the Board's web site. We are also developing an interactive mortgage calculator for the Internet, which consumers can use to compare the repayment terms for different products.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs. ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in efforts to ensure that consumers understand the terms and features of nontraditional mortgage products. Improving federally required disclosures under TILA is one aspect of this endeavor. We are also pursuing other opportunities, such as consumer education publications and interagency regulatory guidance that will include recommended best practices for depository institutions. We expect the Board will continue these efforts over time as mortgage products evolve in response to consumers' changing needs.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the presentation of the Order of the Palmetto, Dillon, South Carolina I am very pleased to have the opportunity to come back to Dillon and very grateful for the honor you have done me today. Thank you all very much for your thoughtfulness and your efforts to prepare for this event. It is good to see so many people that I remember, as well as their children and maybe even a few grandchildren. My family’s connection with Dillon goes back about sixty years. My grandfather Jonas Bernanke and his wife, Lina, moved here in the 1940s when Jonas purchased a local drugstore. Jonas named the store with his own initials--hence Jay Bee Drugs. Jonas’s sons--my dad and my uncle--bought the store from their father and ran it as partners for many years. The original store was on Main Street, but when the chain stores entered the local market, my dad and uncle built a new, larger, and more modern store a block off Main. They competed by offering personal, first-name service, by delivering prescriptions without charge, and by coming down to the store at any time, nights or Sundays, to fill an emergency prescription. Dillon had very few doctors at the time, and lots of people came to my dad and uncle for advice on basic health matters. My mother, who gave up a job teaching elementary school when I was born, often helped out in the store. As a child, I was supposed to help out as well, but I usually ended up in the store’s comic book section. Our family moved to Dillon when I was very small, and all my childhood memories are here. I went to East Elementary, J.V. Martin Junior High, and Dillon High School. Quite a few friends were classmates for all twelve grades. I made many other friends playing saxophone in the high-school marching band. My family and I attended Dillon’s small synagogue, Ohav Shalom, which is unfortunately no longer in existence. As a teenager, like many other teenagers, I itched to get away from the small town in which I was raised to see the bright lights of the big city. I got my wish, leaving when I was seventeen to attend college and graduate school in Boston. I met my wife in Boston, and we have lived in Palo Alto, California; Princeton, New Jersey; and now Washington. We have two children, a son and a daughter, now in graduate school and college, respectively. My wife is a teacher and is meeting her classes today in a public charter high school in Washington. Although the idea of leaving Dillon to attend college was exciting for me, I realize now that I learned a lot from living here for seventeen years. I learned, among many other lessons, a few things about work. I saw the long hours and persistent effort my parents put in to make their independent small business successful. After I graduated from high school I spent the summer as a construction worker helping to build Dillon’s Saint Eugene hospital, and during the summers of my college years, I waited tables six days a week at the South of the Border. I took two lessons from those experiences: First, in small towns like Dillon and in communities all across the United States, people work very hard every day to support themselves and their families. I remember that, on the first day I came home from the construction site that summer, I was too tired to eat and I fell asleep in my chair. The second thing I learned in Dillon is that Americans are economically ambitious; they seek opportunity and advancement. I remember the fellow construction worker who wanted to become foreman someday and a waitress who was saving to go to college. I was impressed by these experiences, and I think they were an important reason I went into economics, which a great economist once called the study of people in the ordinary business of life. Now I am an economic policy maker, and I sit in a nice office in Washington looking at reports and tables of data and following the fluctuations of the financial markets. However, I try not to forget what underlies all those data: millions of Americans working hard, trying to better themselves economically, struggling to manage their family finances, and worrying about the price of gas and college tuition. I take my work extremely seriously because I know that, if my colleagues at the Federal Reserve and I do our jobs right, we will help our economy prosper and give more people the economic opportunities they seek. Let me thank you all again for inviting me back to Dillon and for sharing this morning with me.
The Federal Reserve Board today announced the appointment of Roger T. Cole as director of the Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, effective immediately. The division develops regulatory policy and oversees the supervision of state member banks, bank and financial holding companies and their non-bank subsidiaries, and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banking organizations. Cole joined the Board's staff in 1979 as a senior financial analyst. He was appointed to the Board's official staff in 1988 and promoted to associate director in 1997 and senior associate director in 2001. Before joining the Board, Cole was a financial analyst at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and worked at the Wyatt Company. The director of the division is the senior Board official with responsibility for banking supervision and regulation. The director represents the Board on domestic interagency policy and coordination committees, including the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council's Supervision Task Force, and on the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. Cole succeeds Rich Spillenkothen, who retired in June after thirty years of service at the Board, including nearly fifteen years as director of the division. Cole holds a B.A. in economics from Bucknell University and an M.A. in economics from Johns Hopkins University.
Note: Tables 1 and 2 and the last sentence of the Overview section revised September 26, 2006. The volume of syndicated credits rose rapidly, in part reflecting a rise in merger and acquisition activity over the past year, according to the Shared National Credit (SNC)2review released today by federal bank and thrift regulators. The review noted a small increase in problem credits as a share of commitments in 2006. The bulk of this increase was associated with credits held by nonbank3entities while problem loans at regulated institutions, particularly those with insured deposits, grew slightly. Deterioration in exposures to the manufacturing sector, primarily the automotive industry, accounted for most of the softening in asset quality. The review affirmed that most other industries exhibit improved credit quality from peak problem levels experienced only a few years ago. Examiners also found, however, a continued easing of underwriting standards in the syndicated lending market in general, particularly in non-investment grade or leveraged credit facilities.The results--reported by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision--are based on analyses prepared in the second quarter of 2006 and reflect business and economic conditions at that time. Total adversely rated credits4rose slightly to 5.1 percent of total commitments from 4.8 percent a year ago (see Chart 1). Similarly, the ratio of classified commitments to total commitments rose slightly to 3.3 percent from 3.2 percent last year. Total classified commitments rose by $9.4 billion, or 18 percent, since 2005, compared with a net decrease of $21.5 billion, or 29 percent, the previous year. Commitments rated special mention increased by $7.5 billion, or 29 percent, in contrast to 2005 when they fell by $7.0 billion, or 21 percent. Classified commitments held by United States (US) domiciled banking organizations increased to $13.1 billion from $11.9 billion in 2005, but the classified ratio remained at only 1.6 percent due to growth in these companies’ syndicated credit portfolios. These discussions of adversely rated credits and their ratios do not include the effects of hedging or other techniques that organizations often employ to mitigate risk. Overview In aggregate, the 2006 SNC Program covered 7,009 credits totaling $1.9 trillion in credit commitments to 4,833 borrowers. Total SNC commitments increased by nearly $250 billion, a 15.2 percent increase from 2005, the largest annual expansion in nearly eight years. The current level of commitments is slightly below the 2001 peak of $2.0 trillion, while adversely rated commitments are only 40 percent of their peak level in 2002. The increase in 2006 total commitments reflects, in part, substantial merger and acquisition financing provided over the past year. Total outstandings, or drawn amounts, of $626 billion were up 20 percent from the prior year. For the 2006 review, total commitments classified as substandard rose $14.0 billion, or 32 percent from the prior year, while doubtful credits decreased $3.1 billion, or 55 percent (see Table 1). Commitments classified as loss fell $1.5 billion, down 56 percent from the prior year. Outstanding nonaccrual5classified credits fell 29 percent to $17.7 billion. Industry Trends The volume of classified SNCs improved slightly in most industries (see Appendix B)6, with the notable exception of the Manufacturing sector. While commitments to this sector increased 8.4 percent, weakness in the automotive industry during the year led to a $15.6 billion, or 147 percent, increase in classified credits. This softness in the manufacturing sector overshadowed notable improvements in loan classifications in the Oil, Gas, Pipelines & Utilities sector, Lodging & Transportation sector, the Construction & Real Estate sector, and the Professional, Scientific & Other Services sector, each with classified volumes falling by approximately one-third. Classified commitments also declined for the Telecommunication and Cable industry (by $2.4 billion or 14 percent), but remain elevated at 10 percent of total commitments. The volume of special mention SNC credits increased 29 percent or $7.5 billion, with increases observed in most industries except Manufacturing and Professional Services. Trends by Entity Type During 2006, the portion of SNC commitments held by U.S. domiciled banking organizations edged down 0.5 percentage points to 44 percent, a level mostly unchanged in the past five years. Compared to last year, the portion held by foreign banking organizations (FBOs) also slipped 0.5 percentage points to 41 percent in 2006 (see Table 2). Over the past ten years, lenders not affiliated with banks, such as brokerage firms, mutual funds, insurance companies, and hedge funds, have taken on larger positions in the syndicated market. These nonbank entities have increased their share to 14 percent of total commitments compared to 8 percent five years ago and 2 percent in 1996. The quality of holdings also varied among entity types with classified commitments amounting to 1.6 percent of total commitments at U.S. banks compared with 2.2 percent at FBOs and 11.8 percent at nonbanks. Nonbank holdings of classified commitments increased even more dramatically over the past five years than their overall syndicated credit holdings, increasing from 21 percent of all classified credit commitments in 2001 to 51 percent in 2006. U.S. banks only held 21 percent of classified commitments in 2006. Total nonaccrual loans improved for U.S. banks and FBOs, but worsened for nonbanks. Nonbank entities held 58 percent of nonaccrual loans in 2006 with U.S. banks only holding 16 percent. Total Classifications ($ billion) Classifieds as % of Commitments Total Nonaccrual Commitments ($ billion) (*) Uninsured refers to organizations that do not take consumer deposits such as holding companies, brokerage firms, finance companies, etc. Note: Figures may not add to totals due to rounding. Risk Management by Banks Strong market competition and a highly liquid secondary loan market have contributed to easing of credit underwriting standards in large corporate and leveraged loans. Demand for bank loans from non-bank institutional investors has influenced underwriting terms and pushed credit spreads lower. Of note is the increasing volume of term loans with nominal amortization required prior to maturity and loosened financial loan covenants such as leverage and fixed charge coverage ratios. Although credit risk in SNC portfolios of U.S domiciled banking organizations is low and generally stable, rapid portfolio growth, easing of underwriting standards, and the increase in adversely rated commitments over the past year are indicative of increasing credit risk. Banking organizations should ensure that competitive pressures and easing of underwriting standards do not unduly compromise their tolerance for credit risk. In addition, advanced credit risk management systems should exist to appropriately measure, monitor and control risks in large corporate portfolios. Industry Telecommunication & Cable Commitment 197.5 174.1 149.7 120.2 123.7 149.8 Classified 6.9 38.1 35.7 13.1 17.0 14.6 Special Mention 10.0 9.0 7.0 10.8 2.5 6.2 % Classified 3.5% 21.9% 23.8% 10.9% 13.7% 9.7% % Special Mention 5.0% 5.1% 4.7% 9.0% 2.0% 4.1% Manufacturing Commitment 540.5 494.8 424.4 400.1 409.7 444.3 Classified 58.1 60.9 42.6 19.6 10.7 26.4 Special Mention 27.0 26.2 22.8 6.9 16.6 12.2 % Classified 10.8% 12.3% 10.0% 4.9% 2.6% 5.9% % Special Mention 5.0% 5.3% 5.4% 1.7% 4.0% 2.7% Professional, Scientific, & Other Services Commitment 157.9 124.9 122.4 107.3 102.2 125.4 Classified 11.9 8.8 6.8 3.3 1.5 1.0 Special Mention 4.5 2.3 1.8 1.1 1.3 0.3 % Classified 7.5% 7.0% 5.5% 3.1% 1.5% 0.8% % Special Mention 2.8% 1.9% 1.5% 1.0% 1.3% 0.3% Oil, Gas, Pipeline & Utilities Commitment 222.8 229.5 200.5 175.7 186.4 208.9 Classified 4.3 17.1 38.1 24.2 14.1 9.7 Special Mention 7.0 15.5 12.3 10.1 1.9 2.0 % Classified 1.9% 7.4% 19.0% 13.8% 7.5% 4.6% % Special Mention 3.1% 6.8% 6.1% 5.8% 1.0% 1.0% Construction & Real Estate Commitment 100.1 96.7 87.5 90.2 107.9 124.0 Classified 4.7 4.1 3.6 2.5 0.7 0.4 Special Mention 1.9 3.2 2.3 0.9 0.3 0.6 % Classified 4.7% 4.2% 4.1% 2.8% 0.6% 0.3% % Special Mention 1.9% 3.3% 2.6% 1.0% 0.2% 0.5% Lodging & Transportation Commitment 99.1 82.9 74.8 74.1 76.5 80.8 Classified 3.1 6.6 7.7 5.2 3.7 2.5 Special Mention 6.7 5.3 1.8 0.7 0.8 4.5 % Classified 3.1% 7.9% 10.3% 7.1% 4.9% 3.1% % Special Mention 6.8% 6.4% 2.4% 1.0% 1.1% 5.6% Financial Services & Insurance Commitment 420.0 376.5 343.3 337.1 336.0 424.0 Classified 11.9 8.9 6.7 2.1 0.1 0.8 Special Mention 4.4 2.9 2.5 0.5 0.2 2.8 % Classified 2.8% 2.4% 1.9% 0.6% 0.0% 0.2% % Special Mention 1.1% 0.8% 0.7% 0.2% 0.1% 0.7% All Other Commitment 310.8 291.6 241.0 240.4 284.2 316.7 Classified 16.5 12.7 11.0 3.8 4.7 6.4 Special Mention 13.9 14.6 4.7 1.8 2.4 4.8 % Classified 5.3% 4.4% 4.6% 1.6% 1.6% 2.0% % Special Mention 4.5% 5.0% 2.0% 0.7% 0.8% 1.5% All Industries (Total) Commitment 2,048.9 1,871.0 1,643.5 1,545.2 1,626.7 1,873.9 Classified 117.5 157.1 152.2 72.4 52.5 61.8 Special Mention 75.4 79.0 55.2 32.8 25.9 33.4 % Classified 5.7%* 8.4%* 9.3%* 4.8% 3.2% 3.3% % Special Mention 3.7%* 4.2%* 3.4%* 2.1% 1.6% 1.8% Endnotes 1.Credits include syndicated loans and loan commitments, letters of credit, commercial leases, as well as other forms of credit. Credit commitments include both drawn and undrawn portions of credit facilities. This release reports only the par amounts of commitments; these may differ from the amounts at which loans are carried by investors.Return to text 2.The Shared National Credit (SNC) Program was established in 1977 by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. In 2001 the Office of Thrift Supervision became an assisting agency. With a few exceptions, the annual program, which seeks to provide an efficient and consistent review and classification of large syndicated loans, generally covers loans or loan commitments of at least $20 million that are shared by three or more regulated financial institutions.Return to text 3.Nonbanks include a wide range of institutional investors including brokerage firms, mutual funds, insurance companies, and hedge funds.Return to text 4.Adversely rated credits (also known as criticized credits) are the total of credits classified substandard, doubtful, and loss – and credits rated special mention. Classified credits are only those rated substandard, doubtful, and loss. Under the agencies’ Uniform Loan Classification Standards, classified credits have well-defined weaknesses, including default in some cases. Special mention credits exhibit potential weaknesses, which may result in further deterioration if left uncorrected. Excerpt from Federal Reserve’s SR Letter 79-556 defining regulatory classifications:Classification ratings are defined as “Substandard,” “Doubtful,” and “Loss.” A Substandard asset is inadequately protected by the current sound worth and paying capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if any. Assets so classified must have a well-defined weakness or weaknesses that jeopardize the liquidation of the debt. They are characterized by the distinct possibility that the bank will sustain some loss if the deficiencies are not corrected. An asset classified as Doubtful has all the weakness inherent in one classified Substandard with the added characteristic that the weaknesses make the collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of currently existing facts, conditions, and values, highly questionable and improbable. Assets classified as Loss are considered uncollectible and of such little value that their continuance as bankable assets is not warranted. This classification does not mean that the asset has absolutely no recovery or salvage value, but rather it is not practical or desirable to defer writing off this basically worthless asset even though partial recovery may be effected in the future. Excerpt from June 10, 1993, Interagency Statement on the Supervisory Definition of Special Mention Assets:A Special Mention asset has potential weaknesses that deserve management’s close attention. If left uncorrected, these potential weaknesses may result in deterioration of the repayment prospects for the asset or in the institution’s credit position at some future date. Special Mention assets are not adversely classified and do not expose an institution to sufficient risk to warrant adverse classification.Return to text 5. Nonaccrual loans are defined for regulatory reporting purposes as “loans and lease financing receivables that are required to be reported on a nonaccrual basis because (a) they are maintained on a cash basis due to a deterioration in the financial position of the borrower, (b) payment in full of interest or principal is not expected, or (c) principal or interest has been in default for 90 days or longer, unless the obligation is both well secured and in the process of collection.”Return to text 6. Note that the current industry totals categorize borrowers using 2002 NAICS codes, in contrast to prior release of SNC data which categorized borrowers using 1997 NAICS codes.Return to text 7. NAICS groupings of industries identified in Appendix B are as follows: Telecommunication & Cable - 5132 through 51339; Manufacturing - 31 through 33 and 5121 through 5131; Professional, Scientific, & Other Services - 54, 55, 56, 61, and 62; Oil, Gas, Pipelines, & Utilities - 21 (oil- & gas-related only), 22, and 486; Construction & Real Estate - 23 and 53; Lodging & Transportation - 48 (excluding 486), 49, and 72; Financial Services & Insurance - 52; and All Other - remaining NAICS codes. Prior year data has been restated to reflect industry categorizations using 2002 NAICS groupings rather than 1997 NAICS groupings used in prior data releases.Return to text 2006 Banking and consumer regulatory policy|2006 Shared National Credit Program
Statement by Susan S. Bies, member, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System: "We at the Board were shocked and saddened to learn of the death of Andrei Kozlov. His courage and vigor in pursuing the betterment of his country’s banking system earned respect and admiration throughout the world. We extend our deepest condolences to his family."
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur. Credit Lyonnais, S.A., Paris, FranceCease and Desist Order dated December 18, 2003Terminated September 21, 2006 Credit Agricole, S.A., Paris, FranceWritten Agreement dated December 16, 2003Terminated September 21, 2006 Credit Agricole, S.A., Paris, FranceCredit Agricole Indosuez, Paris, FranceCredit Agricole Indosuez NY Branch, New York, N.Y.Credit Lyonnais, S.A., Paris, FranceCredit Lyonnais, S.A.NY Branch, New York, N.Y.Cease and Desist Order dated March 9, 2004Terminated September 21, 2006
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur. The Community State Bank, Poteau, Okla.Written Agreement dated October 14, 2004Terminated August 15, 2006 Bank of Gassaway, Gassaway, W.Va.Written Agreement dated October 21, 2003Terminated September 5, 2006
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At The Forecasters Club of New York, New York, New York I am delighted to be able to speak before the Forecasters Club of New York. One of the things I’ve enjoyed most during the past five years in both public service and in academia has been the opportunity to engage actively in economic forecasting. I chaired the so-called Troika-2 process when I was a member of the Council of Economic Advisers in 2001 to 2003 through which the economic forecast that is the basis for Administration’s budget is formulated. When I returned to the University of Chicago, I presented the annual economic forecast for the Graduate School of Business in both Chicago and New York, and I believe I see some people here who had attended those events. Since becoming a Governor in March, I have had the privilege of working on the forecasting with the superb staff at the Federal Reserve. In a sense, forecasting is where the "rubber" of economic theory meets the "road" of the real world. As such, it is intellectually exciting and challenging. One of the foremost challenges has been forecasting productivity developments and their macroeconomic implications. As you know, productivity growth is the key source of higher living standards in the long run. But, of course, it also is an important influence shaping shorter-run economic developments as well as monetary policy decisions. Today I will talk about some of the forces that drive productivity growth, the macroeconomic implications of changes in the longer-run trend of productivity, and the prospects for productivity growth. My views on these topics are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. The revolution in information technology (IT) is commonly taken as the initiating force behind the acceleration in productivity seen since 1995. Although I believe that IT is a necessary ingredient, I don’t believe it is sufficient. In particular, the interaction of IT advances with the flexible markets in the United States continues to be a crucial ingredient. The IT revolution has not simply allowed a worker to turn the crank faster on an improved machine (the traditional way we think of technological innovation) but opened the possibility of fundamentally altering the way production (or provision of a service) takes place; hence, the crucial role for flexible labor, product, and financial markets. As I will describe in more detail, this interaction effect of IT with a flexible economy can help to explain why the IT revolution has produced higher productivity growth in the United States but not in many other industrialized economies. While it is important for policymakers to understand the sources of the productivity resurgence, it is also important for us to understand the macroeconomic implications. An often overlooked implication is that, all else equal, an increase in the growth rate of productivity will tend to put upward pressure on real interest rates. But in fact we have not seen the predicted rise in real rates. Of course, we do not live in the world of simple economic models so all other things are not equal. In particular, I believe one reason is that sound economic policies have created a more stable economic environment, and with that has come low and stable inflation and an ongoing desire by foreigners to invest in the United States to reap higher returns associated with higher productivity growth than may be available in their economies. At bottom, I expect that the flexibility of U.S. markets will continue to provide a nourishing environment for technological and process advances, and that very flexibility, along with sound monetary policy, will also allow the U.S. economy to enjoy the benefits of the evolving macroeconomic dynamics that accelerating productivity sets in motion. A Framework for Analyzing the Growth of Labor ProductivityA great success story for the American economy has been the resurgence of productivity growth that began around 1995.1From 1973 to 1995, labor productivity in the nonfarm business sector increased at an annual rate of 1-1/2 percent. (Labor productivity is defined in terms of output per hour of work in the economy.) In contrast, from 1995 to 2000, productivity accelerated to a 2-1/2 percent rate. Perhaps even more remarkably, despite a recession, the fall of the dot-com market, a broad stock market correction, terrorism, and corporate governance scandals, productivity has accelerated even further since 2000. Despite some slowing in the past few quarters, productivity in the nonfarm business sector has risen at an average annual rate of about 3 percent over the past 5-1/2 years. Many economists, including myself, use growth accounting as a framework for analyzing productivity developments. In its simplest terms, growth accounting decomposes the growth rate of labor productivity into two major components. One is the contribution to productivity growth that comes from giving workers more capital to work with, such as equipment or software; the standard term for this component is "capital deepening." The other major contribution comes from the growth of multifactor productivity--that is, the efficiency with which labor and capital are combined to create output.2Multifactor productivity growth reflects such things as business process innovations--for example, enhanced supply-chain management techniques or more-effective retail store layouts; advancements in technology, such as the development of new-generation computer chips; or most any other type of improvement in the efficiency of a firm’s operations. This aggregate growth-accounting framework forms the economic underpinning of key comprehensive productivity statistics produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Work done over the past decade takes a somewhat more disaggregated approach to growth accounting in order to get inside the aggregate numbers and try to get a better handle on the sources of our remarkable productivity performance since 1995.3But all of this is just accounting--albeit, in some research, very elaborate and painstakingly constructed accounting. The deeper analytical questions are, What are the forces driving capital deepening and the growth of multifactor productivity, especially since 1995, and Why does the United States seem to have experienced increased productivity growth, since the mid-1990s, that has not been shared by many other industrial economies? The Forces Driving the Growth of Labor ProductivityIn broad terms, the story for the post-1995 productivity resurgence that comes out of the various studies that take a disaggregated approach, as well as case studies such as those conducted by McKinsey (2002), is well known. Technological advances in the IT-producing sector--that is, multifactor productivity--and associated investments in more and better production equipment (capital deepening) started things off. These developments were bolstered by investments in IT equipment and software by firms outside of the IT-producing sector, improvements in the knowledge and skills needed to use effectively the equipment and software, and innovations in business processes. An unexplained puzzle, however, remains in that story. If productivity growth were simply a matter of installing ever-more-powerful computers or reading ever-more-advanced technical manuals, then all countries with access to the breakthroughs in information technology from the past two decades should have enjoyed the same productivity revival as the United States. But that hasn’t been the case. Since 1995, productivity in the United States has grown substantially faster than in other advanced industrial countries. For example, a recent study by van Ark and Inklaar (2005) indicates that while productivity in the United States accelerated after 1995, average productivity in Europe actually decelerated--indeed, they estimate that the trend in the fifteen countries that made up the European Union before 2004 has been decelerating since the mid-1980s. According to van Ark and Inklaar, some of the differential reflects faster capital deepening in the United States, but much of it reflects a surge in multifactor productivity growth in the United States outside of the IT sector since 2000.4 Innovations in information technology, however, cannot be the whole story--flexibility at the firm level and in labor markets, and competitive pressure throughout the economy, also play their roles.5Businesses must be flexible enough to adopt new technologies and then to transform themselves in ways that allow technology-intensive investment to have the highest possible effect on productivity growth. Similarly, labor markets must be flexible enough to allow for the prompt re-allocation of resources in response to changes in demand. The economy also must be competitive enough to allow useful innovations at some firms to be transmitted throughout the industry by market pressure. At the firm level, an important characteristic of the American economy is that we have a business culture that rewards nimbleness, innovation, and entrepreneurship. As an example, consider the case of U.S. retail trade. To be sure, firms in this industry invested heavily in information technology in the 1990s. Yet they did not become more productive simply by buying faster computers and returning to business as usual. As discussed in a recent in-depth study by McKinsey & Co., IT investments were combined with a host of changes in business practices to raise productivity. Perhaps the best example is the use of IT to improve the links in the supply chain from vendor to retailer, to create a so-called glass pipeline through which retailers’ orders can be monitored as they progress (McKinsey 2002). Flexibility also has been evident in other industries. Consider, for example, a study done of a medical products company that made a large investment in computer-integrated manufacturing (Brynjolfsson and Hitt 2000). The flexibility gained by this investment necessitated a host of other changes in business practice, such as the elimination of piece rates, the encouragement of workers to stop the production line if it is not running at full speed, and a reduction in management layers. Eventually, productivity rose so much that the firm painted the windows of this site black so that competitors could not see how the new system worked! There is an important historical parallel in the United States to the interaction of technological innovation and flexibility in producing higher productivity growth. In the early twentieth century, the electrification of production operations and the electric motor did not substantially raise manufacturing productivity until firms realized that electricity allowed them to rethink the layout of their factories. Rather than build a many-storied factory around a centralized power source, a firm could disperse electric motors around a single-story plant and thereby create the modern assembly line. Workers then could use specialized tools to undertake new activities. This redesign allowed the firm to optimize material handling, change production lines more easily, and perform maintenance on individual sections of the plant without idling production throughout the facility (David, 1990). More broadly, the increasing competitiveness of the American economy over the past quarter century or so has brought with it a market imperative for creativity, innovation, and efficiency. In 1977, Fred Kahn, the Cornell University economist, came to Washington as the chairman of the now-defunct Civil Aeronautics Board and as an adviser to President Carter on deregulation. With Professor Kahn as the prime mover, the Airline Deregulation Act was passed in 1978. This act started the ball rolling, and in fairly short order the Congress passed legislation that deregulated the rail, trucking, and interstate bus industries. Deregulation removed barriers to entry and made it possible for a multitude of new firms to enter the transportation industry. Freely allowing the entry of new firms generates competitive pressures that have a ripple effect throughout the economy. For example, it’s difficult to imagine that online retailers could have become so successful without access to inexpensive, interstate (and international) package delivery services. But the proliferation of these delivery services would not have been possible without the deregulation of the transportation industry in the late 1970s and early 1980s. The converse also may be true. Regulatory barriers to entry in the retail sector in Japan and Europe--for example, restrictions on land use and shopping hours--appear to have impeded the development of more-innovative, and presumably more-productive, types of retailing (Gordon, 2004). More generally, research conducted at the Federal Reserve suggests that regulatory environments in a number of industrial countries have impeded the adoption of information technologies and slowed productivity growth (Gust and Marquez, 2004). Increased trade liberalization, which lowers barriers to the international flow of goods, financial capital, and direct investment, also spurs innovation and creativity. An interesting illustration of the connection is the productivity of multinational corporations. Research conducted by Federal Reserve System economists and others has found that, in the United States, multinational firms are more productive than domestically oriented firms, and the difference holds regardless of whether the parent firm is headquartered in the United States or abroad.6Perhaps even more remarkable is a finding that, in the United Kingdom, multinational firms owned by U.S. parents are more productive than multinational firms owned by British parents (Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen, 2006). I draw two conclusions from this work. First, trade liberalization appears to have made it possible for multinational firms to institute highly efficient cross-border supply chains within their firms that seem to have allowed them to boost significantly the efficiency of their worldwide operations. Second, U.S. firms, on average, have more flexible and innovative business practices, sometimes called organizational capital, that a liberalized trade regime apparently allows them to transfer to their foreign operations. Taking Account of Productivity in a Macro ForecastLet me switch gears now from the sources of our remarkable productivity performance to some of its macroeconomic implications. A good deal of research, including the Board’s large-scale econometric model of the U.S. economy (FRB/US), suggests that what is called Say’s law still holds.7 That is, in the model, an increase in the level of productivity (reflecting, for example, some technological advance) causes businesses and financial markets to revise upward their views about the level of expected profits, and it causes households to revise upward their views about the level of permanent income. The higher level of expected profits and returns to capital, in turn, lead to a rise in business investment. Similarly, personal consumption expenditures are boosted in response to the rise in permanent income. The initial increases in spending are then followed by multiplier effects. A dynamic feedback also occurs on the supply side as the higher level of investment spending increases the capital stock (relative to the supply of worker hours), which gives a small fillip to productivity and potential output. Ultimately, the increases in aggregate supply are matched by an equivalent increase in aggregate demand.8This is, of course, Say’s law. What I’ve just described is a sketch of what happens after a one-time rise in thelevelof productivity. In the case of an ongoing rise in thegrowth rateof productivity, the dynamics and macro consequences are more complicated. In particular, all else equal, a positive shock to the growth rate of productivity will tend to put upward pressure on real interest rates.9The upward pressure on real interest occurs, in part, because investment must rise to keep the growth of the capital stock in line with the faster growth of gross domestic product. In addition, a shock to the growth rate of productivity boosts household’s assessments of the growth rate of their permanent income, while increases in the expected growth rate of profits and dividends raise asset values, including the value of equities, relative to current income. The combination of faster expected growth of permanent income and higher stock market wealth tends to raise consumption relative to income and, concomitantly, lower personal saving. Thus, all else equal, the increase in demand for financing relative to domestic saving will tend to boost real interest rates.10 The dynamics of this process, and how long they take to play out, depend on several factors. One factor is how quickly the productivity change is incorporated into household and business expectations. The change in expectations can be drawn out if households and firms are slow to recognize an inflection point in the productivity growth trend or are highly uncertain about how long any observed change in the data might last. This seems to have been the case in the mid-1990s, when it took some time for that recognition to begin to sink in to the mind-set of most households and businesses. To his credit, Chairman Greenspan was one of the first to call the sea change in our productivity performance to public attention.11 Another factor influencing the dynamics of the process the degree to which businesses, financial markets and consumers are forward-looking in their economic behavior. If they are myopic in their behavior or tend to discount the future very heavily, then the dynamic response of the economy to a change in the growth rate of productivity will be drawn out. At this point, you might be saying to yourself, "Hold on; if an increase in the productivity growth trend is supposed to boost real interest rates, why have real rates been falling since around mid-2004 and are low by historical standards?" The answer involves that favorite safety net of economists, the "all else equal" caveat. In fact, all else has not been equal. Importantly, the term premium embedded in interest rates has been falling. The term premium reflects the extent of uncertainty about future prospects for inflation and for real economic activity. The reduction in the term premia appears to be associated, in part, with the greater economic stability we have been enjoying. Real activity has become less volatile; moreover, inflation is lower and, as long as we at the Federal Reserve do our job, more predictable.12 The huge inflow of foreign saving into the United States, undoubtedly, also has been important. As then-Governor Bernanke observed in 2005, differential demographic trends and rates of return on investment between the United States and many of the world’s other rich countries is part of the explanation for that inflow (Bernanke, 2005). Rich countries, with populations that are aging faster than ours, have a strong motive to save to provide for an impending sharp increase in the number of retirees relative to the number of workers. Moreover, many advanced economies outside the United States also have a paucity of domestic investment opportunities relative to the United States. As a consequence of high desired saving and low prospective returns to domestic investment, the mature industrial economies outside of the United States, as a group, seek to lend abroad. The higher prospective returns in the United States may be due in part to the higher productivity growth that the United States has been experiencing relative to many other industrialized countries resulting from the interaction effect of IT innovations and the flexibility of the United States economy relative to other countries. What about the effects of a productivity shock on inflation? Ultimately inflation is determined by the policy actions of the central bank. In the short run, however, a change in the trend growth rate of productivity can influence inflation dynamics. A one-time change in the level of productivity, or transitory volatility in productivity growth rates, are unlikely to have lasting effects on business pricing behavior. Economic theory and econometric evidence suggest that only a persistent shock to the rate of change of productivity has persistent consequences for rate of change of prices--that is, inflation. If we lived in a world with no impediments to competition in labor and product markets, with prices and wages that freely and quickly moved up and down in response to shifts in economic conditions, then a change in productivity growth would be promptly matched by a corresponding change in nominal compensation per hour. As a consequence, unit labor costs would be unchanged, and all else equal, so would inflation. But, we don’t live in such a perfectly competitive, frictionless world. Nominal compensation per hour initially seems to respond sluggishly to changes in the economy, including productivity shocks. As a result, an increase in productivity growth, for example, initially slows the growth of unit labor costs, which firms--under competitive pressure--then pass on to their customers, thereby slowing price inflation. As price inflation slows and as, with a lag, nominal compensation per hour accelerates, the growth rate ofrealcompensation per hour increases so that over time workers share in the benefits of faster productivity growth. Indeed, in the past, any rise in the level of productivity has eventually been fully translated into a rise in the level of real compensation per hour. How quickly the re-equilibration takes place depends in part on the extent of competition in product markets and the nature of the wage-bargaining process. Up until now, the process in our economy has taken at least a few years, but it has always occurred. Productivity and Real Compensation Per HourWhat I have dubbed the re-equilibration of productivity and real compensation per hour is just another manifestation of one of the great stylized facts of macroeconomics: In the past, deviations in the labor share of income from its mean value of roughly two-thirds have eventually been reversed. But the two-thirds share is an empirical observation about the U.S. economy; it is not an immutable number derived from the first principles of economic theory. As it turns out--I’ll leave the proof to you as a homework assignment--mean reversion in the labor share is equivalent to the observation that over time labor productivity and real compensation per hour have moved together; in the jargon of econometrics, they are co-integrated. (See chart.) As I just mentioned, when the labor share deviates from its long-run average or, equivalently, a gap opens between productivity and real compensation per hour, the reversion to the mean (that is, the closing of the gap) can take quite a while. In recent years, the labor share has moved down as increases in real compensation per hour have, for the most part, lagged behind productivity growth, but the timing and extent of the change in the labor share depends in part on the particular statistical measure chosen.13 A challenge for forecasters is deciphering whether this latest drop in the labor share is transitory, as such drops have been in the past, or whether some structural aspect of the economy, such as the wage-bargaining process, has changed to make the drop in the labor share permanent. More likely, the adjustment process is taking a long time to play out, as it did in the 1990s, and some recent evidence may suggest that the gap is beginning to close. Assuming that the drop is transitory, another challenge for forecasters is predicting whether the adjustment to real compensation per hour will be driven by a pickup in the growth of nominal compensation per hour or by a reduction in inflation. Prospects for ProductivityLet me close with some comments on the outlook for productivity. Recent estimates by a number of economists suggest that the underlying trend in productivity in the nonfarm business sector is about 2-1/2 percent per year, close to the rate of productivity growth achieved during the period from 1995 to 2000.14I think a good case can be made for the view that the strong productivity growth of the post-1995 era will persist for some time. The rate of technology growth appears to be proceeding apace, and further diffusion of already existing technologies and applications to more firms and industries should continue to boost productivity. ConclusionAn important lesson of the U.S. productivity resurgence is that an open economy with flexible labor, capital, and product markets is critical for a nation to enjoy the full benefits of recent IT innovation and, thus, to enhance a nation’s productivity performance going forward. In my opinion, the productivity developments that we are likely to see in coming years will be fostered by a U.S. economy that remains very flexible, highly competitive, and open--if anything, it is becoming even more flexible, competitive, and open. If this assessment is reasonably close to the mark, the prospects for future improvements in our nation’s longer-run living standards should be quite favorable, and this underscores the importance of maintaining an open, flexible, and stable economy. Even small increases in productivity growth have tremendous cumulative effects over time on production and income. Let me close by quoting the Nobel laureate Robert Lucas who once said that when one contemplates the effect that sustained economic growth has on human welfare, it is hard to think about anything else. References Bernanke, Ben S. (2005)."The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,"speech delivered at the Homer Jones Lecture, April 14.Bloom, Nick, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen (2006). "It Ain’t What You Do, It’s the Way You Do I.T.: Investigating the Productivity Miracle Using the Overseas Activities of U.S. Multinationals," working paper. London: Centre for Economic Performance, London School of Economics, May.Brayton, Flint, and Peter Tinsley (eds.) (1996)."A Guide to FRB/US: A Macroeconomic Model of the United States,"Finance and Economic Discussion Series 1996-42. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Lorin M. Hitt (2000). "Beyond Computation: Information Technology, Organizational Transformation and Business Performance,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 14 (Fall), pp. 23–48.Corrado, Carol, and Lawrence Slifman (1999). "Decomposition of Productivity and Unit Costs,"American Economic Review, vol. 89 (May), pp. 328–32.Corrado, Carol, Paul Lengermann, and Larry Slifman (2005). "The Contribution of MNCs to U.S. Productivity Growth, 1977–2000," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics, July.Corrado, Carol, Paul Lengermann, Eric Bartelsman, and J. Joseph Beaulieu (2006)."Modeling Aggregate Productivity at a Disaggregate Level: New Results for U.S. Sectors and Industries," (510 KB PDF)paper presented at the 2006 Summer Institute sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Research and the Conference on Research in Income and Wealth, held in Cambridge, Mass., July 17.David, Paul A. (1990). "The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern Productivity Paradox,"American Economic Review, vol. 80 (May), pp. 355–61.Doms, Mark E., and J. Bradford Jensen (1998). "Comparing Wages, Skills, and Productivity between Domestically and Foreign-Owned Manufacturing Establishments in the United States," in R.E. Baldwin, R.E. Lipsey, and J. David Richardson, eds.,Geography and Ownership as Bases for Economic Accounting, National Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 59. Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, pp. 235–58.Gordon, Robert J. (2003)."Exploding Productivity Growth: Context, Causes, and Implications," (349 KB PDF)Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003:2, pp. 207–98.Gordon, Robert J. (2004)."Why Was Europe Left at the Station When America’s Productivity Locomotive Departed?"NBER Working Paper Series 10661. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August.Gust, Christopher, and Jaime Marquez (2004)."International Comparisons of Productivity Growth: The Role of Information Technology and Regulatory Practices,"Labour Economics, vol. 11 (February), pp. 33-58.Jorgenson, Dale W., Kevin J. Stiroh, Robert G. Gordon, and Daniel E. Sichel (2000)."Raising the Speed Limit: U.S. Economic Growth in the Information Age" (458 KB PDF)Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2000:1, pp. 125–235.Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun S. Ho, and Kevin J. Stiroh (2004)."Will the U.S. Productivity Resurgence Continue?"Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 10 (December), pp. 1–7.Kohn, Donald L. (2003)."Productivity and Monetary Policy,"speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Monetary Seminar, Philadelphia, Pa., September 24.Kroszner, Randall S. (2003). "Promoting Global Economic Growth: The Productivity Challenge," working paper. Chicago: University of Chicago, July.Kroszner, Randall S. (2006a)."Innovative Statistics for a Dynamic Economy,"speech delivered at the National Association for Business Economics Professional Development Seminar for Journalists, Washington, D.C., May 24.Kroszner, Randall S. (2006b)."Why Are Yield Curves So Flat and Long Rates So Low Globally?"speech delivered at the Institute of International Bankers, New York, New York, June 15.Kurz, Christopher (2006)."Outstanding Outsourcers: A Firm- and Plant-Level Analysis of Production Sharing,"Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2006-04. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March.McKinsey & Co. (2002).Perspective: How IT Enables Productivity Growth: The U.S. Experience across Three Sectors in the 1990s.Washington: McKinsey Global Institute, November.OECD (2002). "Productivity and Innovation: The Impact of Product and Labor Market Policies,"OECD Economic Outlook, vol. 2002/1 (no. 71, June), pp. 171–84.Oliner, Stephen D., and Daniel Sichel (2000). "The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s: Is Information Technology the Story?"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 14 (Autumn), pp. 3–22.Reifschneider, David, Robert Tetlow, and John Williams (1999)."Aggregate Disturbances, Monetary Policy, and the Macroeconomy: The FRB/US Perspective,"Federal Reserve Bulletin,vol. 85 (January), pp. 1–19.van Ark, Bart, and Robert Inklaar (2005)."Catching up or Getting Stuck? Europe’s Trouble to Exploit ICT’s Productivity Potential,"Research Memorandum GD-79. Groningen, The Netherlands: Groningen Growth and Development Centre, September.Endnotes1.One of the earlier papers that was used by many observers to suggest the possibility of a mid-1990s inflection point in productivity growth was Corrado and Slifman (1999).Return to text2.A third contribution comes from the change in labor composition, which some analysts include as part of multifactor productivity. According to estimates produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), this component has played little role in the productivity resurgence. The estimates come from the BLS program on multifactor productivity. The data are available at www.bls.gov.Return to text3.Some of the important papers include Oliner and Sichel (2000), Jorgenson and Stiroh (2000), and Corrado, Lengermann, Bartelsman, and Beaulieu (2006).Return to text4.A study by the OECD (2002), which reports cross-country estimates of multifactor productivity (MFP) growth from 1990 to 1999, also shows that U.S. MFP growth picked up after 1995, while MFP growth fell in most other OECD countries.Return to text5.This point is developed more extensively in Kroszner (2003).Return to text6.For example, Doms and Jensen (1998); Corrado, Lengermann, and Slifman (2005); and Kurz (2006).Return to text7.Descriptions of FRB/US are in Brayton and Tinsley (1996) and Reifschneider, Tetlow, and Williams (1999).Return to text8.Simulations of FRB/US suggest that a 1 percent positive shock to the growth rate of productivity ultimately leads to both aggregate supply and aggregate demand increasing about 1.1 percent faster than they would have in the absence of the shock.Return to text9.This point is emphasized in Kohn (2003).Return to text10.Two possible partial offsets to this process should be noted. First, if all of the spending increases are confined to the private sector, then the government budget deficit will shrink, as it did in the late 1990s, which would help narrow the potential saving shortfall. Second, if foreign economies do not share in the productivity boom, their demand for our exports will not expand in line with the increase in domestic demand.Return to text11.Kroszner (2006a) discusses the need for better data to help identify emerging economic developments more accurately and promptly.Return to text12.This point is explored in Kroszner (2006b).Return to text13.Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector is reported to have increased at an annual rate of 13.7 percent in the first quarter of 2006. As a result, real gross domestic income, or GDI (that is, the real value of the goods and services produced in the United States as measured from the income side of the national accounts) increased at a 10.2 percent rate, compared with a 5.6 percent pace for real GDP. In the past, such large differences between the growth rates of GDI and GDP were narrowed by the periodic revisions to the national accounts. However, history offers no sound guidance on which series is likely to be revised most.Return to text14.For example, Baily (2003); Gordon (2003); and Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2004).Return to text Bernanke, Ben S. (2005)."The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,"speech delivered at the Homer Jones Lecture, April 14. Bloom, Nick, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen (2006). "It Ain’t What You Do, It’s the Way You Do I.T.: Investigating the Productivity Miracle Using the Overseas Activities of U.S. Multinationals," working paper. London: Centre for Economic Performance, London School of Economics, May. Brayton, Flint, and Peter Tinsley (eds.) (1996)."A Guide to FRB/US: A Macroeconomic Model of the United States,"Finance and Economic Discussion Series 1996-42. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October. Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Lorin M. Hitt (2000). "Beyond Computation: Information Technology, Organizational Transformation and Business Performance,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 14 (Fall), pp. 23–48. Corrado, Carol, and Lawrence Slifman (1999). "Decomposition of Productivity and Unit Costs,"American Economic Review, vol. 89 (May), pp. 328–32. Corrado, Carol, Paul Lengermann, and Larry Slifman (2005). "The Contribution of MNCs to U.S. Productivity Growth, 1977–2000," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics, July. Corrado, Carol, Paul Lengermann, Eric Bartelsman, and J. Joseph Beaulieu (2006)."Modeling Aggregate Productivity at a Disaggregate Level: New Results for U.S. Sectors and Industries," (510 KB PDF)paper presented at the 2006 Summer Institute sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Research and the Conference on Research in Income and Wealth, held in Cambridge, Mass., July 17. David, Paul A. (1990). "The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern Productivity Paradox,"American Economic Review, vol. 80 (May), pp. 355–61. Doms, Mark E., and J. Bradford Jensen (1998). "Comparing Wages, Skills, and Productivity between Domestically and Foreign-Owned Manufacturing Establishments in the United States," in R.E. Baldwin, R.E. Lipsey, and J. David Richardson, eds.,Geography and Ownership as Bases for Economic Accounting, National Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 59. Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, pp. 235–58. Gordon, Robert J. (2003)."Exploding Productivity Growth: Context, Causes, and Implications," (349 KB PDF)Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003:2, pp. 207–98. Gordon, Robert J. (2004)."Why Was Europe Left at the Station When America’s Productivity Locomotive Departed?"NBER Working Paper Series 10661. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. Gust, Christopher, and Jaime Marquez (2004)."International Comparisons of Productivity Growth: The Role of Information Technology and Regulatory Practices,"Labour Economics, vol. 11 (February), pp. 33-58. Jorgenson, Dale W., Kevin J. Stiroh, Robert G. Gordon, and Daniel E. Sichel (2000)."Raising the Speed Limit: U.S. Economic Growth in the Information Age" (458 KB PDF)Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2000:1, pp. 125–235. Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun S. Ho, and Kevin J. Stiroh (2004)."Will the U.S. Productivity Resurgence Continue?"Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 10 (December), pp. 1–7. Kohn, Donald L. (2003)."Productivity and Monetary Policy,"speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Monetary Seminar, Philadelphia, Pa., September 24. Kroszner, Randall S. (2003). "Promoting Global Economic Growth: The Productivity Challenge," working paper. Chicago: University of Chicago, July. Kroszner, Randall S. (2006a)."Innovative Statistics for a Dynamic Economy,"speech delivered at the National Association for Business Economics Professional Development Seminar for Journalists, Washington, D.C., May 24. Kroszner, Randall S. (2006b)."Why Are Yield Curves So Flat and Long Rates So Low Globally?"speech delivered at the Institute of International Bankers, New York, New York, June 15. Kurz, Christopher (2006)."Outstanding Outsourcers: A Firm- and Plant-Level Analysis of Production Sharing,"Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2006-04. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March. McKinsey & Co. (2002).Perspective: How IT Enables Productivity Growth: The U.S. Experience across Three Sectors in the 1990s.Washington: McKinsey Global Institute, November. OECD (2002). "Productivity and Innovation: The Impact of Product and Labor Market Policies,"OECD Economic Outlook, vol. 2002/1 (no. 71, June), pp. 171–84. Oliner, Stephen D., and Daniel Sichel (2000). "The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s: Is Information Technology the Story?"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 14 (Autumn), pp. 3–22. Reifschneider, David, Robert Tetlow, and John Williams (1999)."Aggregate Disturbances, Monetary Policy, and the Macroeconomy: The FRB/US Perspective,"Federal Reserve Bulletin,vol. 85 (January), pp. 1–19. van Ark, Bart, and Robert Inklaar (2005)."Catching up or Getting Stuck? Europe’s Trouble to Exploit ICT’s Productivity Potential,"Research Memorandum GD-79. Groningen, The Netherlands: Groningen Growth and Development Centre, September. Endnotes 1.One of the earlier papers that was used by many observers to suggest the possibility of a mid-1990s inflection point in productivity growth was Corrado and Slifman (1999).Return to text 2.A third contribution comes from the change in labor composition, which some analysts include as part of multifactor productivity. According to estimates produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), this component has played little role in the productivity resurgence. The estimates come from the BLS program on multifactor productivity. The data are available at www.bls.gov.Return to text 3.Some of the important papers include Oliner and Sichel (2000), Jorgenson and Stiroh (2000), and Corrado, Lengermann, Bartelsman, and Beaulieu (2006).Return to text 4.A study by the OECD (2002), which reports cross-country estimates of multifactor productivity (MFP) growth from 1990 to 1999, also shows that U.S. MFP growth picked up after 1995, while MFP growth fell in most other OECD countries.Return to text 5.This point is developed more extensively in Kroszner (2003).Return to text 6.For example, Doms and Jensen (1998); Corrado, Lengermann, and Slifman (2005); and Kurz (2006).Return to text 7.Descriptions of FRB/US are in Brayton and Tinsley (1996) and Reifschneider, Tetlow, and Williams (1999).Return to text 8.Simulations of FRB/US suggest that a 1 percent positive shock to the growth rate of productivity ultimately leads to both aggregate supply and aggregate demand increasing about 1.1 percent faster than they would have in the absence of the shock.Return to text 9.This point is emphasized in Kohn (2003).Return to text 10.Two possible partial offsets to this process should be noted. First, if all of the spending increases are confined to the private sector, then the government budget deficit will shrink, as it did in the late 1990s, which would help narrow the potential saving shortfall. Second, if foreign economies do not share in the productivity boom, their demand for our exports will not expand in line with the increase in domestic demand.Return to text 11.Kroszner (2006a) discusses the need for better data to help identify emerging economic developments more accurately and promptly.Return to text 12.This point is explored in Kroszner (2006b).Return to text 13.Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector is reported to have increased at an annual rate of 13.7 percent in the first quarter of 2006. As a result, real gross domestic income, or GDI (that is, the real value of the goods and services produced in the United States as measured from the income side of the national accounts) increased at a 10.2 percent rate, compared with a 5.6 percent pace for real GDP. In the past, such large differences between the growth rates of GDI and GDP were narrowed by the periodic revisions to the national accounts. However, history offers no sound guidance on which series is likely to be revised most.Return to text 14.For example, Baily (2003); Gordon (2003); and Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2004).Return to text
A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.