Five federal agencies today requested public comment on a revised proposed statement on the complex structured finance activities of financial institutions. The revised statement describes the types of internal controls and risk management procedures that should help financial institutions identify, manage and address the heightened legal and reputational risks that may arise from certain complex structured finance transactions. The agencies have modified the revised statement in several important respects in light of the comments received on the original proposed statement, which was issued for comment on May 19, 2004. For example, the agencies have reorganized, streamlined and modified the statement to make the document more principles-based and focused on those complex structured finance transactions that may pose heightened levels of legal or reputational risk to a financial institution. The proposed statement was issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision and the Securities and Exchange Commission. The revised statement would represent supervisory guidance for institutions supervised by the four banking agencies and a policy statement for institutions supervised by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Comments on the revised statement are requested within thirty days of publication in the Federal Register, expected shortly. The revised proposed statement is attached. Attachment (220 KB PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the proposal filed by Banco Santander Central Hispano, S.A., Madrid, Spain, to acquire up to 24.99 percent of the voting shares of Sovereign Bancorp, Inc. and indirectly acquire control of Sovereign’s subsidiary savings association, Sovereign Bank, both of Wyomissing, Pennsylvania, and Independence Community Bank Corp. and its subsidiary savings bank, Independence Community Bank, both of Brooklyn, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the proposal by M&P Community Bancshares, Inc. 401(k) Employee Stock Ownership Plan, Newport, to become a bank holding company by acquiring an additional 1.63 percent, for a total of 26.58 percent, of the voting shares of M&P Community Bancshares, Inc., Newport, and its subsidiaries, Merchants & Planters Bank, Newport, and Greers Ferry Lake State Bank, Heber Springs, all of Arkansas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday approved action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, increasing the discount rate at the Bank from 5-3/4 percent to 6 percent, effective immediately.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago’s 42nd Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Chicago, Illinois I am pleased to speak to you this morning at what has become, over more than four decades, perhaps the most prestigious conference for bankers, academics, and bank supervisors in the United States. In every year but one of his tenure, Chairman Greenspan spoke at this meeting, and he sometimes used the occasion to advocate major changes to the bank regulatory system. Notable examples include the revisions to deposit insurance and bank capital standards that were embedded in the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA), the relaxation of restrictions on interstate banking in the Riegle-Neal Act of 1994, and the repeal of Glass-Steagall's limits on combinations of commercial and investment banking implemented by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999. Today, I will discuss the importance of implementing another major change in the way we regulate and supervise banking organizations, especially our largest, most complex, and most internationally active firms.1That change is the modernization of our approach to assessing the adequacy of bank capital, within the context of the framework that has come to be known as Basel II. The current system of bank capital standards, the so-called Basel I framework agreed upon internationally in 1988, was a major step forward in that it embodied the important principle that regulatory capital requirements should be tied to the risks taken by each banking institution.2However, the relatively crude method of assigning risk weights to assets, as well as an emphasis on balance-sheet risks as opposed to other risks facing financial firms, limits the overall responsiveness of capital requirements to risk under Basel I, which renders that system increasingly inadequate for supervising the largest and most complex banking organizations. For these organizations, we need to move beyond Basel I to a more risk-sensitive and more comprehensive framework for assessing capital adequacy. Basel II represents the concerted efforts of the supervisory community, in consultation with banks and other stakeholders, to develop such a framework. The broad principles of Basel II have become increasingly clear over many years of discussion and consultation, and I will review them briefly. I will argue that a framework built on these principles is the right one for supervising the largest and most complex institutions. Moreover, the Basel II framework is inherently dynamic; it will be able to adapt to ongoing innovation and change. But I also want to convey today that Basel II remains very much a work in progress. As we proceed toward the implementation of this framework, success will require that bank regulators, the banking industry, the Congress, and other relevant parties engage in an ongoing and frank dialogue, and that policymakers be open-minded, flexible, and ready to make needed adjustments. For our part, the Federal Reserve is committed to getting Basel II right. Financial Innovations in Mortgage and Other MarketsAs in years past, the Chicago Fed has chosen wisely in selecting the theme of the conference. Innovations in the financing of homes and other real estate have come at a remarkable pace over the past decade or more, leading to more sophisticated and flexible instruments, more liquid markets, and better risk-sharing. Taking full advantage of these innovations has required banks and other institutions to make important improvements in risk measurement and risk management. Financial innovations and improved risk management have not been limited to real estate finance, of course. Securitization, improved hedging instruments and strategies, more-liquid markets, greater risk-based pricing, and the data-collection and management systems needed to implement such innovations have also occurred in other retail and wholesale markets. In my judgment, these developments, on net, have provided significant benefits. Borrowers have more choices and greater access to credit; lenders and investors are better able to measure and manage risk; and, because of the dispersion of financial risks to those more willing and able to bear them, the economy and the financial system are more resilient. To be sure, rapid financial innovation carries some risks, if new instruments are used improperly or if the market infrastructure that facilitates the trading of those instruments is inadequate. Regulators must be aware of and ready to mitigate those risks. Overall, however, the public interest is served both by the prudent use of new financial instruments and by the improvements in risk-measurement and risk-management practices that prudent use requires. Implications for Financial RegulationAs market participants innovate and markets become more efficient and sophisticated, bank regulators and supervisors must ensure that they do not fall behind. Indeed, a regulatory and supervisory system that is increasingly divorced from actual business practice may well become counterproductive. A regulatory and supervisory system that is not in tune with practice may increase the costs of regulation, stifle efficiency and innovation, and ultimately be less effective in mitigating the moral hazard problems associated with the financial safety net. Most regulatory changes are incremental, which is entirely appropriate given the inherent uncertainties about how best to respond to market developments and the desire to avoid unintended consequences. Examples of incremental regulatory change are common. For example, the U.S. banking agencies have made more than twenty-five amendments to the Basel I framework in response to ongoing changes in banking and financial markets. But sometimes a more fundamental rethinking of the regulatory framework is needed. Sometimes a crisis is the catalyst for such rethinking, as in the case of the deposit insurance and capital policy reforms in FDICIA that I mentioned earlier. At other times, major change is motivated by the gradual accumulation of factors, such as the blending of commercial and investment banking that evolved before passage of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. I would put the need for Basel II squarely in this latter category. No immediate crisis requires us to move toward Basel II, but the gradual evolution of market practice and the emergence of very large and increasingly complex banking organizations operating on a global scale require that we make significant changes in the way we assess capital adequacy at these organizations. Indeed, waiting for a crisis to force change would be foolish; by moving forward now, we have the luxury of being deliberate in the development and introduction of a system that promises significant benefits. Why Basel II?Many aspects and possible effects of Basel II have been debated, including its potential effects on banks' costs and on the competitive landscape. I will discuss some of those aspects shortly. It is important to keep in mind, however, that the core goal of Basel II is to promote the stability of the U.S. financial system by ensuring the safety and soundness of U.S. banks. Its ability to promote that objective is the first criterion on which the proposed Basel II framework should be judged. I stated that the core goal of Basel II is to promote the stability of the U.S. financial system; but, as everyone here understands, the U.S. banking and financial system is increasingly interwoven with that of the rest of the world. Indeed, increasing globalization was a major factor that led the U.S. banking agencies to negotiate the Basel I agreement in 1988. Of course, the extent of globalization of both financial and real product markets is even more extensive today, and systemic financial problems will not respect national borders. Thus, it remains very much in the interest of the United States to continue to encourage international cooperation and consistency in regulating and supervising those banks that pose the greatest potential systemic risk. For this reason, we have chosen to work with our international and domestic colleagues on the Basel Committee to develop a new capital framework for the largest, most complex, and most globally active banking organizations. To maintain U.S. and global financial stability, we want to ensure that banks, particularly our largest and most complex institutions, will remain able to serve their customers and meet their obligations as lenders and counterparties during periods of economic or financial stress. That requires, of course, that banks have both adequate capital and strong risk management. Because confidence promotes stability, it is also important that supervisors and market participants are able to assess for themselves the financial soundness and risk-management capabilities of these institutions. Basel II is a comprehensive framework for improving bank safety and soundness by more closely linking regulatory capital requirements with bank risk, by improving the ability of supervisors and financial markets to assess capital adequacy, and by giving banking organizations stronger incentives to improve risk measurement and management. The framework encompasses three elements: risk-focused regulatory capital requirements, supervisory review, and market discipline. These are the so-called three pillars of Basel II. Under Pillar 1, the risk sensitivity of minimum risk-based capital requirements would be much greater than under the current accord. This greater sensitivity would be achieved by linking each banking organization's capital requirement to empirically based measures of credit and operational risk, as determined in part by risk parameters estimated by that organization, such as a loan's probability of default and its expected loss given default. The methods used to construct such estimates would be subject to supervisory standards, guidance, and reviews, including a requirement that the risk parameters used for Pillar 1 be consistent with risk assessments actually used by the bank for its internal risk management. The Pillar 1 treatment of credit risk also reflects more accurately the risk-reducing effects of guarantees, credit derivatives, and securitization, thus improving regulatory capital incentives for banks to hedge portfolio credit risks. The incorporation of operational risk in Pillar 1 is also a significant step, which recognizes that operational failures are indeed a potentially important risk for many banks, one that they should actively seek to minimize. In addition, Pillar 1 incorporates a more comprehensive treatment of trading account risk. We should not underestimate the importance of strong minimum capital requirements. Strong capital helps banks absorb unexpected shocks and reduces the moral hazard associated with the federal safety net. A key lesson of the banking and thrift crises of the late 1980s and early 1990s is that prudent and explicit minimum regulatory capital requirements are needed to ensure that banks maintain adequate capital and to anchor an effective supervisory system. For example, explicit minimum regulatory capital requirements that accurately reflect a bank's risk provide more-effective triggers for prompt corrective action. Besides making regulatory capital ratios more risk-sensitive, Basel II provides a consistent framework for improving supervisory assessments of capital adequacy and risk management. Under Pillar 2, a bank would be required to maintain a capital cushion above the regulatory minimums to capture the full set of risks to which the bank is exposed. These include liquidity risk, interest rate risk, and concentration risk, none of which is reflected in Pillar 1. Currently, the U.S. banking agencies assess a bank's overall capital adequacy as a normal part of the examination process. But the overall quality of both the supervisors' and each bank's assessments of capital adequacy should improve greatly under Basel II because of the expanded information that will be available from Pillar 1, from supervisory reviews of a bank's systems for implementing Pillar 1 and Pillar 2, and from the bank's own analyses. Under Pillar 3, banks will be required to disclose to the public the new risk-based capital ratios and more-extensive information about the credit quality of their portfolios and their practices in measuring and managing risk. Such disclosures should make banks more transparent to financial markets, thereby improving market discipline. Taken together, these three pillars provide a broad and coherent framework for linking regulatory capital to risk, for improving internal risk measurement and management, and for enhancing supervisory and market discipline at large, complex, and internationally active banks. The three pillars build on the economic capital and other risk-management approaches of well-managed banks and better align regulatory and supervisory practices with the way the best-run banks are actually managed. As a result, Basel II will be better able than the current system to adapt over time to innovations in banking and markets. In addition, Basel II sets standards for risk measurement and management and for related disclosures that will give banks ongoing incentives to improve their practices in these areas. Indeed, we have already seen significant progress in risk measurement and management at many banks in the United States and elsewhere as a result of the Basel II development process. More progress can be expected as we move forward. The Need for Ongoing Dialogue and FlexibilityBasel II has the potential to provide significant benefits, but any policy change as fundamental as Basel II inevitably creates uncertainties and raises difficult and complex tradeoffs. Successfully dealing with these challenges requires that the banking agencies, the industry, and other stakeholders maintain a frank and ongoing exchange of views and remain flexible and open-minded as we tackle difficult issues. In this spirit, I urge the industry and other interested parties to comment thoroughly on the Basel II Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPR), proposed supervisory guidance that will come out in the near future, and the upcoming proposed changes to Basel I that would apply to the vast majority of banks not subject to Basel II. In an effort to aid this process, I would like to touch on a number of concerns that have been raised regarding Basel II. The first issue is the complexity and potential cost of the framework. The Basel II NPR is long and detailed. Thedraftagreed upon among the banking agencies and approved unanimously by the Federal Reserve's Board of Governors in late March is just short of 450 pages. The length and complexity of that document, not to mention the additional supervisory guidance that will be needed, have led some to fear that the costs of implementing Basel II in the United States will outweigh any benefits it brings in terms of greater safety and soundness of banks, improved risk measurement and management, and better market discipline. I understand these concerns. We must recognize, however, that the Basel II proposal is complex for the good reason that modern risk measurement and risk management are inherently complex activities. Indeed, some commenters have argued that Basel II is overly simplistic in certain areas. The draft proposals also represent many judgments about how best to deal with sometimes competing objectives. On the one hand, the system must be enforceable and it must allow for reasonable comparability of regulatory capital ratios across large, complex, and diverse institutions. Thus, some standardization is required. Regulators and supervisors also owe it to the industry and other market participants to be as clear as possible about what we mean by such core concepts as the probability of default and loss given default and about our expectations for how banks go about estimating such parameters. On the other hand, the diversity of practices across banking organizations, the absence of any single, definitive "best practice," and the need to provide strong incentives for improving risk measurement and management require that the system be flexible enough to allow the exercise of judgment by supervisors and bankers. This need for flexibility and the use of judgment is the major reason that we have long emphasized that the supervisory reviews in Pillar 2 are a necessary complement to the explicit minimum regulatory capital requirements set forth in Pillar 1. Naturally, we would like to see the framework implemented as cost-effectively as possible. The desire to avoid unnecessary regulatory costs is another reason why we have tried to build Basel II on what banks are already doing. However, Basel II does ask banks to make some infrastructure investments whose primary purpose is to help supervisors validate and compare banks' systems--investments that many banks would not otherwise make. Feedback from the industry regarding our proposals in this area would be very helpful. A key mechanism in Basel II for balancing the inevitable tensions that arise when attempting to achieve sometimes competing objectives is the so-called use test. Under the use test, the systems and processes that a bank uses for regulatory capital purposes must be consistent with those used internally. Note that I use the word "consistent," not "identical." For example, minimum regulatory capital need not equal the economic capital requirements computed internally by a bank, but our intent is that the two will be highly correlated. In addition, Basel II seeks to accommodate a range of risk- measurement and risk-management practices, a range that can change over time. No regulator wants to impose a single definition of "best practice" or to set current practice in stone. In light of questions about the use test, I would highlight our desire for specific feedback on how best to implement this important principle. More generally, I hope the industry will work with the agencies to identify aspects of the framework that are neither cost-effective nor supportive of sound risk management. Relative to the Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking issued in 2003, the current NPR incorporates many specific suggestions from the industry along these lines. Important examples include the definition of default and the treatments of expected losses, loan-loss reserves, credit derivatives, and securitization. If more adjustments are needed, we are ready to listen and adjust. Another concern that has been expressed regarding Basel II is that it will unfairly tilt the competitive playing field. This concern has two aspects. First, some have argued that the bifurcated application of Basel II within the United States could allow domestic banks that adopt the framework both lower capital charges on certain activities and lower overall regulatory capital requirements compared with other domestic banks. Lower regulatory capital charges would, it has been argued, translate into a cost advantage for adopters that would place non-adopters at a competitive disadvantage. In addition, some fear that adopters would use any newly created excess regulatory capital to acquire smaller banks. It is an important principle that differences in capital rules among institutions should not distort financial markets or create artificial competitive advantages for any particular class of banks. With this principle in mind, the Federal Reserve has conducted research on the potential competitive impacts of Basel II, and all of the U.S. banking agencies have received comments from many sources. Based on this information, the banking agencies have announced their intention to propose revisions to the existing Basel I capital standards that would aim to mitigate competitive inequities. Proposals should be released in the not-too-distant future, and I urge interested parties to give us specific advice regarding what else we may need to do to reduce any unintended competitive consequences of Basel II. The second competitive equity concern relates to the international consistency with which Basel II will be implemented. Inconsistency in international standards of implementation and enforcement, it is sometimes said, will put internationally active U.S. banks at a competitive disadvantage and may also hurt purely domestic U.S. banks vis-à-vis the U.S. subsidiaries of foreign banks. All bank regulators recognize that achieving international consistency will be a challenge. However, this problem is not really new. Companies operating across national borders, and their supervisors, are familiar with the challenges of complying with sometimes conflicting legal and regulatory requirements. Still, we recognize that some international implementation issues will be more complex than those we currently face. U.S. regulators are working hard through the Basel Committee and with individual firms and national supervisors to address international implementation issues. A great deal more effort and cooperation will be needed, but I believe that, as in the past, we can craft an acceptable set of agreements and work out means of resolving future issues. The final concern I will discuss is the worry that Basel II could lead to a substantial decline in minimum regulatory capital requirements at adopting banks. I emphasized earlier that, for supervisors, an overarching lesson from the banking and thrift crises of the late-1980s and early-1990s is the importance of prudent minimum regulatory capital standards. All the banking agencies are committed to this principle. At present, we cannot quantify precisely how much Basel II, once fully implemented, will affect banks' risk-based capital requirements relative to Basel I levels. Although our quantitative impact studies have been useful, they have been conducted using bank systems and measurements that generally would not be expected to meet the Basel II standards. We will learn more as the process moves forward, the standards and guidance come into sharper focus, and banks upgrade their risk-management systems. Because of the irreducible uncertainty in this process, the implementation plan set forth in the NPR incorporates extensive safeguards to limit the potential for unintended consequences, including any possibility of a large decline in required capital levels. These safeguards include a minimum one-year parallel run for each bank, during which the bank will calculate what its risk-based capital requirement would be under Basel II, even though its actual requirement will be determined using the Basel I rules. Following the parallel run, each bank will be subject to a transition period of at least three years during which capital floors based on the Basel I rules will ensure that there is no sharp decline in regulatory capital. In addition, the agencies have committed themselves, throughout the transition process and beyond, to continually evaluate the effects of the new framework and to make any needed adjustments to ensure prudent levels of capital. Finally, I would note that, even when Basel II is fully implemented, all banking organizations will continue to be subject to the current minimum leverage-ratio requirement and prompt-corrective-action rules. This step-by-step implementation plan, which all the U.S. banking agencies support, should ensure that banking organizations maintain strong capital positions throughout the transition years and after. Moreover, safety and soundness depends not only on the absolute level of capital in the banking system but on how well that capital is deployed. The Basel II framework should make any given level of bank capital work harder, so to speak, by aligning capital more closely with risks taken, by providing incentives for banks to improve their risk management, and by enhancing market discipline through greater transparency. To reiterate, however, to make that framework achieve what is intended requires getting the details right. Therefore, I once more urge the banking industry and other members of the public to review the NPR and the draft supervisory guidance closely and to provide the agencies with constructive comments on all aspects of the proposed framework. ConclusionIn summary, I believe the time has come to move to the next stages of implementing Basel II. This framework will modernize bank supervision and bring supervisory practice into line with best industry practice. Substantial benefits will ensue--most importantly, a safer and sounder banking system--but uncertainties remain. Satisfactory resolutions of these uncertainties will require hard work and close cooperation among bank regulators, the industry, Congress, and other key players. There is a long way to go, but the Federal Reserve is committed to this task. It is very much in the best interest of all Americans for the next generation of bank capital standards to be as effective as possible in promoting the stability of the U.S. banking and financial system. Footnotes 1.In my talk, I will use the terms "bank" and "banking organization" interchangeably.Return to text 2.A second major contribution of Basel I was that it created international standards for measuring bank capital.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday invited consumers, consumer advocacy organizations, lenders, and other interested parties to participate in four public hearings on the home equity lending market. The Board is holding the hearings under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA), which was enacted in 1994 in response to reports of predatory home equity lending practices in underserved markets. HOEPA amended the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) to impose additional disclosure requirements and limits on certain high-cost, home-secured loans. HOEPA also directs the Board to periodically hold public hearings to examine the home equity lending market and the adequacy of existing regulatory and legislative provisions for protecting the interests of consumers, particularly low-income consumers. The Board last held such hearings in 2000. Those hearings focused on ways the Board might use its rulemaking authority under HOEPA to address concerns about predatory lending. Following those hearings and the receipt of public comment, the Board amended the provisions of Regulation Z that implement HOEPA. The revisions took effect in October 2002. The Board's 2006 hearings will focus on three topics: (1) predatory lending and the impact of the HOEPA rules, and state and local anti-predatory lending laws on the subprime market; (2) nontraditional mortgage products such as interest only mortgage loans and payment option adjustable rate mortgages, and reverse mortgages; and (3) how consumers select lenders and mortgage products in the subprime mortgage market. Time will be reserved after panel discussions by invited speakers for brief statements from other interested parties. The hearing discussions will serve four objectives. First, the Board wishes to gather information on the effectiveness of the 2002 revisions to the HOEPA rules in protecting consumers and on the rules' impact on the availability of credit in the higher-cost portion of the subprime market. Second, the Board would like to gather information that will assist its pending review of Regulation Z, which implements TILA and HOEPA. Third, the hearings will focus on matters for which the Board or other entities can develop educational materials to help consumers make informed choices about mortgage loans. Fourth, the hearings will identify mortgage lending market issues that require additional research. The first hearing is scheduled for Wednesday, June 7, 2006, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 230 South LaSalle Street, Chicago, Illinois. The second is scheduled for Friday, June 9, 2006, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Ten Independence Mall, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The third is scheduled for Friday, June 16, 2006, at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 101 Market Street, San Francisco, California, and the fourth is scheduled for Tuesday, July 11, 2006, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 1000 Peachtree Street, N.E., Atlanta, Georgia. All hearings are scheduled from 8:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., and will begin with panel discussions by invited speakers. Other interested parties may deliver oral statements of five minutes or less at a one-hour "open-mike" period starting at about 3:00 p.m. Written statements of any length may be submitted for the record. Anyone interested in presenting an oral statement is asked to contact the Board in advance of the hearings by calling (202) 452-3667. As more information about the agenda for each hearing becomes available, it will be posted on the Board's web site. Written comments may be mailed to Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 20th Street and Constitution Avenue, N.W., Washington, DC 20551 or mailed electronically to[email protected]. Public comments are due by August 15, 2006. A notice of the hearings and request for public comment is attached. Attachment (66 KB PDF)
Governor Mark W. Olson At the Social Compact Visionary Awards, Washington, D.C. I appreciate the opportunity to join you this evening to recognize the successes of an impressive list of community revitalization projects. Having observed the revitalization of Washington, D.C., over a number of years, I am particularly pleased to be here at the Tivoli Theatre and see first-hand the work that has been done to restore this historic theater and bring new activity and investment to the Columbia Heights neighborhood. As I look around, it is hard to believe that such an architectural gem sat vacant for some twenty-eight years. The restoration of the Tivoli honors the past while helping serve the residential, commercial, retail, and cultural needs of Columbia Heights residents. It is a fine example of the transformative power of investments in older, urban neighborhoods. Projects such as this would not be possible without the strategic vision and commitment of community, business, and government leaders. It is that vision we are here to celebrate this evening. I would like to begin by offering a review of the overall economic climate today and the prospects for business investment generally. Then, to borrow a phrase from Social Compact, I will "drill down" to highlight a number of the elements that I believe are important in making sound investment decisions, particularly in underserved areas of our inner cities. Finally, I will offer a few other observations about the state of the community development industry as I see it. Macroeconomic Conditions The recent news on the U.S. economy has been, on the whole, quite positive. Adjusted for inflation, gross domestic product increased at a brisk rate in the first quarter of the year. Gains in consumer spending and business investment were particularly strong. To be sure, most forecasters are expecting the overall pace of economic activity to moderate to a more sustainable pace in coming quarters as housing markets gradually cool and the delayed effects of higher interest rates and energy prices temper domestic demand. However, with economic activity abroad expanding at a solid pace, export sales should provide some support for domestic production. On balance, the outlook for business investment should remain quite favorable even as the pace of overall activity moderates. Against a backdrop of sustained growth in sales, businesses should be well positioned to undertake potentially profitable projects. They have enjoyed robust earnings for the past several years, and their balance sheets are strong. The reports on first-quarter earnings have been quite positive, and available measures of credit quality, such as credit ratings and loan defaults, show few signs of stress. Financing costs have moved up since last fall, but the Federal Reserve’s most recent survey of bank lending practices, which was conducted in April, indicates that domestic banks are noticing increases in requests for business loans. They also indicated an increased willingness to supply business loans in an environment of brisk competition from other lenders, a liquid secondary market for business loans, and an increased tolerance for risk. In that regard, research conducted by Federal Reserve economists notes that more banks are offering loans to businesses in markets where the banks do not have branch offices; the research suggests that new technology has spurred competition for some types of small business lending in recent years. More broadly, businesses currently have access to plentiful debt and equity financing from a variety of sources in addition to banks. The challenge that community development practitioners face in working with businesses looking for new investment opportunities is to demonstrate through careful analysis that promising inner-city neighborhoods can be good investments. That the current overall conditions for business investment are positive is thus good news for the work of Social Compact and its partners. The Importance of Data to Investment Decisions Community development has come a long way since I first began following it as a young congressional staffer thirty-five years ago. Whereas government programs once funded the bulk of inner-city development, public-private partnerships now dominate. In many places, community-based organizations have been able to "jump start" markets by facilitating private investment. The focus of neighborhood revitalization has shifted increasingly toward market-based approaches. In that regard, organizations that seek to promote neighborhood revitalization must focus on what makes their projects competitive. Social Compact is perhaps best known for its focus on one important input into the investment process--information. Timely and accurate information is what project planners need to bring entrepreneurs, investors, and lenders together to objectively assess the proposed undertaking. Having been a banker, I know very well how much more efficient the process can be when decisionmakers are presented with a clear assessment of the projected returns and a balanced analysis of risk. Another related feature of market-based investment decisions is the importance of built-in measures of accountability. Hard data on results are important in establishing the credibility of projects. With data, and results, such investments can also serve as catalysts for additional private investment in underserved areas. A number of methods have been derived for evaluating the effectiveness of community development projects. The one with which I am most familiar, through my work on the board of NeighborWorks America, is the Success Measures Data System. This system uses more than forty indicators and a variety of data-collection tools--including surveys, interviews, and focus groups--to quantify the effects of housing, economic development, and community building programs at the personal, organizational, and community levels. This array of tools allows NeighborWorks to measure success not just quantitatively but qualitatively, looking beyond the numbers to detect sustainable positive change. The underlying philosophy is that a community development initiative cannot be judged successful just because it puts a family in a home; rather, it must be able to say that, by doing so, it has improved the community, the family’s quality of life, and the family’s economic potential. These data are also useful to corporate partners insofar as they demonstrate business performance against internal goals and commitment to the community. Businesses recognize that demonstrable success enhances their reputation, increases brand recognition, and improves their ability to compete successfully for future partnership opportunities. Thus, being able to determine the return on a business’ investment in a community development initiative in both quantitative and qualitative terms is the next logical step in attracting further private investment. But the social and economic needs of our inner-city neighborhoods extend beyond business investment. Effective partnerships with local officials and community leaders are another key element of the revitalization process. At the state and local levels, public officials contribute to the attractiveness of investment conditions by maintaining sound fiscal policies. These policies allow local officials to take the lead from Social Compact and begin to market local neighborhoods using the analysis that demonstrates the buying-power residing within these more challenging neighborhoods. Their willingness to address other neighborhood needs, such as housing, infrastructure, education, health care, and other social supports will also be important to investors. In general, when community development is a cooperative effort, it can lead to more sustainable outcomes along both economic and social dimensions. While the return on investment can be a sufficient gauge of their economic success, success in broader terms can be viewed by assessing the commitment of all segments of the community to the goal of revitalization. Moreover, the benefits of such cooperative actions are not always readily measurable in dollars and cents. Greater opportunities in local neighborhoods evidence themselves through better schools and stronger ties forged within the local community. The Importance of Vision So far, my remarks have focused on the tangible aspects of planning and investment. But I do not want to leave out a critical element that is perhaps impossible to measure but underlies each of your undertakings. That element is vision. TheWashington Posthas reported that when Joe Horning walked through this theater eight years ago, he was surrounded by broken windows, rotted floor boards, and leaks in the roof. That’s what he saw. But what he envisioned was quite different. He envisioned a beautifully restored theater that would not only serve the community but, more important, also serve as a symbol that Columbia Heights could be revitalized. Indeed, in the past eight years, that vision has been realized, with Columbia Heights today a vibrant and viable neighborhood. As in similar neighborhoods in the District of Columbia and throughout the United States, there is much to celebrate in the results of community investments. The increase in street traffic and economic activity makes the neighborhood a livelier and safer place. Property values are rising, and that allows homeowners here to experience the wealth-building power of homeownership that their peers in more-affluent areas have experienced for years. It also enables them to invest in the rehabilitation of their homes. This additional investment improves the look and feel of the entire neighborhood. Of course, the higher home prices and rents that result from the increased desirability of this neighborhood also limit the availability of affordable housing. These pressures on the market are being felt here in the Washington metropolitan area as well as in other expanding real estate markets. The question of gentrification in Columbia Heights was interestingly portrayed in theWashington Postearlier this month through the eyes of a pair of twelve-year old girls who have grown up in this neighborhood. The girls entered a citywide essay contest on gentrification, a word that they had not previously known, and observed very keenly the effects of the development going on around them. They noted their increased feeling of safety as they walked to and from school thanks to the rehabilitation of previously vacant rowhouses and the exciting new diversity of individuals living in their neighborhoods. But they also missed the friends whose families were forced to move out of the neighborhood when it became too expensive to stay. They were saddened by the loss of some of the smaller shops that will be replaced by larger retailers. In the end, the girls concluded that gentrification is a complicated issue, and its results are "not always bad and not always good." I would have to agree that gentrification is complicated and requires thorough thought and planning as neighborhood revitalization strategies are developed. Many strategies are being developed at the local level to address the increasing need for affordable housing; these strategies include housing trust funds, private activity bonds, and community land trusts, to name just a few. The Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond is currently studying patterns of home price changes and gentrification in neighborhoods here in Washington, D.C. The work is intended to assist city governments, community development corporations, and funders in anticipating and mitigating the effects of gentrification on lower-income residents. As difficult as the challenges seem, I am confident that if policymakers, researchers, and public and private community development practitioners continue to work together, they will be able to balance new investments with strategies to encourage affordable housing options for sustainable and equitable community development. In the meantime, my colleagues at the Board of Governors and I are committed to sustaining a noninflationary economic expansion and a healthy financial system, which should create a solid foundation for the development of new business opportunities. Of course, although a strong economy and vibrant capital markets are necessary to establish a solid market-based foundation for economic development, they are not sufficient. Successful community development projects require vision, commitment, tough choices, and hard work. Indeed, these are the qualities that each of the projects honored here tonight share. I am pleased to be able to give my personal congratulations to tonight’s honorees and to Social Compact for leading the way in the effort to uncover the market potential of inner-city neighborhoods through innovation, risk taking, and the sharing of results.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At Operation HOPE’s Anacostia Economic Summit, Washington, D.C. I would like to thank Operation HOPE and the host committee for inviting me to participate in today's summit. I would also like to congratulate John Bryant and the staff of the Anacostia HOPE Center on this anniversary and on your many contributions to this community over the past year. I recently visited the HOPE Center and saw some of the services it offers in financial education, small business development, job training, and computer literacy. These activities contribute to the revitalization of this community by helping residents gain access to resources they can use to improve their economic situations and prospects. Institutions such as the HOPE Center and THEARC (Town Hall Education, Arts, and Recreation Campus) bring people together and give them a sense of being part of a larger community. Today, I will share some thoughts on economic revitalization, highlighting two general themes. The first theme is the importance in community economic development of strategic collaboration among public, private, and nonprofit organizations. Working together, these three groups of actors can achieve much more than they could on their own. The second theme is the need for a comprehensive approach to revitalizing communities, one that focuses on the economic and cultural viability of the community as a whole, not only on the construction or rehabilitation of individual homes and businesses. In my remarks I will focus on the experience of the Anacostia neighborhood in the District of Columbia, which offers useful illustrations of both themes. Anacostia: Looking BackTo think about Anacostia's future it helps first to recall its past. I recently toured some of the neighborhoods southeast of the Anacostia River and gained an appreciation for both the rich history of the area and its great promise. Many of the buildings in this area are architectural treasures. The older houses date from the late 1800s, when Anacostia was home to a large working-class community. The residents included, of course, Frederick Douglass, known as the Sage of Anacostia, a man whose dedication to lifelong learning and to the battle for racial equality still has the capacity to inspire. In the early to middle twentieth century, Anacostia offered affordable homes and wide open spaces--at that time, it had only 5 percent of the District's total population but 40 percent of the District's vacant land. In the 1920s, Anacostia had a higher percentage of homeowners than other sections of the District, with apartments accounting for less than 1 percent of its dwellings. Indeed, during a six-year period of rapid expansion following World War I, when Anacostia's population surged 56 percent, more than 1,800 detached and row houses were constructed in the area, but only four apartment buildings.1 However, the pattern of residential construction and homeownership in Anacostia changed dramatically over the following decades. During the 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s, policies designed to eradicate tenements in central D.C. resulted in Anacostia, with its relatively large tracts of undeveloped land, becoming home to large numbers of lower-income families displaced from other parts of the city. In the 1950s and 1960s, the growth of the city's population, the expansion of the central business district to accommodate the burgeoning federal government, and urban renewal projects led to substantial increases in the demand for new housing in the city, particularly for lower-income residents. By 1967, the need for affordable housing in the District led the planning commission to call for the construction of 65,000 units of new housing, with 30,000 of those units to be located in Anacostia. The result of these developments was an apartment-construction boom that ultimately changed the character of the area. As the community's stock of public and rental housing increased, Anacostia shifted from being a community of homeowners to one of renters, with a high concentration of lower-income households. As we have seen in other cities, large-scale public housing projects have often become liabilities to the community. Anacostia struggled as public housing complexes fell into disrepair, many homes were abandoned, crime rates increased, and poverty rates climbed. The economic vitality of this historic community was undermined, and previously healthy neighborhoods were destabilized. Anacostia TodayToday, however, Anacostia looks to be on the way back. Leaders in the public, private, and nonprofit sectors have a new vision for the area--one of mixed-income neighborhoods, vibrant commercial and retail centers, expanded neighborhood amenities, and strong community institutions. These partners are playing different but complementary roles, bringing both capital and expertise and ushering in a new wave of economic development in the area. In the public sector, both the federal and city governments are supporting development in Anacostia through their investments, often leveraged with private money. On the federal side, for example, the Department of Homeland Security's new communications center and other planned development on the St. Elizabeth's property will bring jobs and economic activity to the neighborhood. The city of Washington is making a number of important investments here as well. For example, the Anacostia Gateway project will include two buildings, one that will house offices of the D.C. government, the other (which will be a joint venture of the Anacostia Economic Development Corporation and the National Capital Revitalization Corporation) providing commercial office space. The city has also made a major commitment for the construction of a baseball stadium, as you know. In the sphere of housing, an entirely new community is rising up at Henson Ridge, bringing residents with a range of incomes. The city took a leadership role in this project, demolishing the public housing previously on the site and then arranging the financing of the new construction through a combination of public bond issuance, private equity, and a successful competitive proposal to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. The promise of these investments for Anacostia's future is supported by recent research, which has highlighted how carefully targeted public investment can help to jump-start urban revitalization.2An illustration not too far from here can be found in Richmond, where the city played a lead role in finding the funds to develop mixed-income housing in seven distressed neighborhoods. After five years, the housing values in those communities increased nearly 10 percent per year faster than in the city of Richmond as a whole.3 But public investments alone are generally not sufficient to re-establish the economic viability of a community. For development to be truly sustainable, private capital is also needed. Successful private investment in economically challenged areas can be rewarding, but it requires substantial expertise, local knowledge, and a vision of what the community can become. In this community, several innovative private developers have shown what is possible by collaborating with the city, financial institutions, and nonprofit organizations to rehabilitate and construct thousands of new mixed-income housing units for both renters and owners. A key element in the success of much of this private-led development is the insight that, to achieve economically viable communities, building housing units is not enough. For people to find an area an attractive place to live, they need a range of services, community institutions, and places to shop and work. Accordingly, developers building in Anacostia have included in their plans community amenities such as day care centers, shuttle services, and recreation programs for resident children. Developments like Asheford Court, a new mixed-use, mixed-income community, will include a supermarket, restaurants, and shops. Even as they make communities more attractive, these amenities create new jobs and provide opportunities for small business development. Together with actors in the public and private sectors, leaders in the nonprofit community have an important role in the redevelopment of Anacostia as well, particularly in creating the social infrastructure that improves the quality of life. I have already alluded to Operation HOPE and the important work that it does in helping residents become more financially literate, which paves the way for more people to own homes and to start small businesses. Nonprofit community development organizations, such as East of the River Community Development Corporation, the Anacostia Economic Development Corporation, and the Marshall Heights Community Development Organization have supported retail development. With the support of the Local Initiatives Support Corporation, over the past twenty years these organizations have worked to bring projects such as the Good Hope Marketplace and the future Shops at Park Village to the area. Guided by leaders who have a personal commitment to the success of their communities, these nonprofit organizations have led the way in meeting the needs of residents for affordable housing and in helping to attract private investment and development. Nonprofit educational and cultural organizations are also at the heart of this community's revitalization. The network of nonprofits that worked together to create THEARC--the Washington Ballet, the Corcoran Gallery of Art, the Levine School of Music, and the Boys and Girls Club--is a model for strategic partnerships. THEARC also provides vital services, such as the Children's Hospital family wellness center, a significant resource in a community that previously had no health-care facilities. Again, the development philosophy that we see at work in Anacostia is one that focuses not only on the construction of individual homes and businesses but on the broader social and economic environment in the community. As every successful developer knows, real estate markets are driven not only by the characteristics of the physical structures, though those are important, but also by the accessibility of goods and services that current and future residents want, such as schools, shops, and transportation. Data on business patterns offer some insight into the positive changes in Anacostia, as well as the remaining challenges. In the communities which I had the opportunity to visit, the number of business establishments increased by about 7 percent between 1998 and 2003.4In light of the public and private investments in this community, it is not surprising that some of the most rapid growth was in the number of firms in construction (64%) and in the finance and insurance industries (47%). Industry data for these communities reveal significant increases in the number of establishments in educational services, such as academic and arts schools and training centers (a 118% gain); professional, scientific, and technical services such as offices of lawyers and engineers (a 35% increase); and health care and social assistance including medical care and daycare centers (a 15% gain).5Although the rate of homeownership in Ward 8 is still only about half the average for the city as a whole, progress has been made on that count as well. From 1990 to 2000, the homeownership rate in Ward 8 increased by 22 percent, and I have little doubt that further improvement has occurred since 2000, given the completion of 765 owner-occupied housing units since 2001 and an additional 210 under construction due to be completed by 2006.6 Beyond AnacostiaWhat does Anacostia's experience offer for other communities confronting economic decline, given the reality of limited resources and the financial risks associated with redeveloping distressed areas? One lesson is that public, private, and nonprofit development partners must be increasingly innovative in their work. First, they must identify the strategic investments that have the potential to transform neighborhoods and stimulate ongoing private investment and economic activity. As I have noted today, success in community development requires a comprehensive approach--one based on the recognition that vibrant communities offer their residents not only a place to live, but also access to services, to community institutions, and to places to shop, work, and enjoy recreation as well. Many of the development initiatives that have taken place in Anacostia have made good use of this insight, combining housing development with other amenities such as recreational areas, retail outlets, or cultural institutions like THEARC. Second, the community leaders, government officials, lenders, and developers now involved in helping to rebuild communities must keep working to find new partners and new sources of capital. In this respect, it is encouraging to see how much more professional the whole field of community development finance has become. For example, over the past twenty-five years, innovative lenders at banks and at community development financial institutions have demonstrated that investments in community economic development can be rewarding in the financial sense as well as in the social sense. With that demonstration, new financing structures may continue to emerge that can help mitigate decreases in government funding. The expansion of secondary markets for affordable housing and community development loans will, I hope, provide increasing liquidity that allows the redeployment of capital for new development efforts. What we see today in Southeast D.C. demonstrates that smart public and private investment can create a virtuous circle of economic growth and opportunity. I am optimistic that the positive changes that we see in Anacostia can be replicated in economically challenged communities throughout the country. My optimism also stems from the commitment demonstrated by the participation today of leaders from all levels of government, banking, the corporate sector, and nonprofit institutions. Today's summit underscores your commitment to increasing opportunity for lower-income individuals and communities. I join you in celebrating the ongoing revitalization of Anacostia and the potential for similar communities throughout our nation. I commend you for your leadership and look forward to your continued success. Footnotes 1.American Studies at the University of Virginia,"The Changing Face of Anacostia: Public Housing and Urban Renewal."Return to text 2.Bruce Katz, Brookings Institution,"Transformative Investments: Unleashing the Potential of American Cities (3.1 MB PDF),"April 5, 2006.Return to text 3.John Accordino, George Galster, Peter Tatian,"The Impacts of Targeted Public and Nonprofit Investment on Neighborhood Development: Research based on Richmond, Virginia's Neighborhoods in Bloom Program (3.1 MB PDF),"July 2005.Return to text 4.U.S. Census Bureau, North American Industry Classification System,zip codes 20020 and 20032.Return to text 5.Ibid.Return to text 6.D.C. Office of Planning and NeighborhoodInfo DC,Neighborhood Profiles.Return to text
Governor Mark W. Olson To the Financial Services Roundtable and the Morin Center for Banking and Financial Services, Washington, D.C. Thank you for the opportunity to share my perspective on effective compliance risk management for diversified financial institutions. This area of risk management has been receiving a good deal of attention lately. Risk, to state the obvious, is inherent in all activities in the financial services industry. Because the industry is heavily regulated, compliance risk is an important element of the activities in which you are engaged. Today, the financial services industry is experiencing tremendous growth, diversification, and innovation. This growth should be embraced as we consider the future of our financial sector. However, our "embrace" should be in the form of a sound risk-management framework. My remarks today will focus on what Federal Reserve supervisors see as the key components of a sound and effective compliance-risk management framework. Before I begin, let me clarify what I mean by "compliance risk." Compliance risk can be defined as the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, financial loss, or damage to reputation and franchise value that arises when a banking organization fails to comply with laws, regulations, or the standards or codes of conduct of self-regulatory organizations applicable to the banking organization's business activities and functions. A consolidated--or "enterprise-wide"--approach to compliance risk management has become "mission critical" for large, complex banking organizations, for several reasons. First, because compliance failures have touched many businesses, including banking, securities, and insurance firms, it has become clear that companies operating in more than one type of business must have a compliance strategy that is both globally consistent and locally effective. Increasingly, large, complex organizations are taking an enterprise-wide compliance-risk management approach to augment and better coordinate what had been fragmented and duplicative compliance activities. Such an approach puts local compliance activities within individual business lines into an integrated, global program, makes possible an understanding of compliance requirements and performance across an organization, and promotes consistency in responsibility, expectations, documentation, assessment, and reporting. I have been told that this more-integrated approach to compliance risk management by industry is already having a positive effect on risk identification and mitigation. Second, the need for an enterprise-wide approach to compliance risk management at larger, more complex firms is suggested by the diversity of laws and regulations that span business lines, legal entities, and geographic boundaries--for example, in the areas of Bank Secrecy Act compliance and anti-money laundering controls, fair lending, information security, privacy, transactions with affiliates (Regulation W), and conflicts of interest. A more-integrated approach may be warranted for other matters, as well, because similar laws and regulations exist across the various jurisdictions in which the organization operates, both in the United States and overseas. Because of the nature and levels of risks inherent to their business activities, complex banking organizations should have in place a compliance-risk management framework that makes it possible to identify, monitor, and effectively control the compliance risks facing their entire organization. Of course, such a framework needs to be commensurate with the nature and level of the organization's compliance risk. It should evolve with the ever-changing product lines and business activities of any growth-oriented organization. And, of course, it needs to stay on top of regulatory developments. Setting the Tone at the Top--The Role of the Board of DirectorsA successful compliance-risk management program starts at the top of the organization. It is essential that the board of directors take the lead by requiring a top-to-bottom compliance culture that is well-communicated and incorporated into the organization's day-to-day operations by senior management, in order to ensure that all staff members understand their compliance responsibilities and their roles in implementing the enterprise-wide program. A strong compliance culture is evidenced by the extent to which employees work together both to raise concerns about compliance risks and to design and establish effective controls. A sound and effective enterprise-wide compliance-risk management program has strong board and senior management oversight. However, it is important to note that the board of directors and senior management have distinct, though complementary, roles in ensuring the program's success. As I mentioned, the board of directors is responsible for requiring a strong compliance culture. This environment should assure that compliance is an integral part of day-to-day operations. To this end, the board should approve the key elements of the program and then entrust responsibility for embedding the culture and implementing the program to managers and staff at all levels of the organization. Periodically, the board should be apprised of the extent to which predetermined benchmarks are being met. Many of the largest and most complex banking organizations have established a corporate-level function to oversee their enterprise-wide compliance-risk management program, and the Federal Reserve views this trend very favorably. In these cases, the central function has been staffed with experienced compliance officers who are able to provide substantive guidance to business line managers and to keep senior management and boards of directors informed on how well the program is functioning, including by alerting them promptly about any material compliance breaches. Overall, such a central function can contribute a great deal toward ensuring that the key elements of a sound and effective compliance-risk management program are present and functioning as intended. Corporate Standards--Tailored within the Business LinesHow does a board-mandated "compliance culture" permeate a banking organization? Among other ways, the culture and expectations are communicated through enterprise-wide compliance-risk management standards or objectives--established by senior management within a corporate-level compliance function--that reflect the expectations of the board. Regardless of the compliance-risk management framework employed, the business line managers continue to "own" the compliance risk. That is, they are responsible for achieving compliance in their business lines and suffer the consequences in the event of compliance failures or missteps. Business line managers convert the corporate compliance risk standards or objectives into policies and procedures tailored to the specific type and level of compliance risk inherent in their activities and to the specific laws of the jurisdictions in which they operate. To create appropriate compliance risk controls, organizations seek first to understand compliance risk across the entire entity. Managers assess and evaluate the risks and controls within their scope of authority at least annually. However, an enterprise-wide compliance-risk management program is dynamic and proactive, meaning that risks are assessed whenever new business lines or activities are added or existing activities and processes are altered. Once a particular business line has identified and assessed its compliance risks, it can design policies, detailed day-to-day procedures and processes, and associated risk-mitigating internal controls. The corporate compliance function plays an important role in advising business line managers as they assess risk. Such counsel adds to consistency in approach and helps control for mis-estimated risk. The corporate compliance function's involvement also increases the organization's ability to aggregate and better understand risks across the organization. Understanding of risk helps both the business lines and the compliance function develop internal controls that are reasonably designed to mitigate the risk. While the industry trend toward more-consolidated compliance risk management is a favorable development, it is critical that business line management remain engaged. As I noted, senior managers in the business lines remain the "owners" of the risk, and compliance risk mitigation must be integrated into their overall business processes. The sense of ownership can be reinforced by factoring compliance ratings into performance measures and rewards. I am aware that, increasingly, organizations are tying compensation to management's ability to maintain strong internal controls and compliance processes. This practice helps keep the organization focused on managing compliance risk. To ensure that issues are escalated as they arise, the compliance staff embedded within the business lines should be independent and should have a clear reporting relationship to the corporate compliance-risk management function. In addition, to be most effective, the business line compliance staff should be "right-sized" to the level of risk within that business line. Clear lines of reporting, authority, and communication are key to the success of any compliance-risk management framework. Policies and procedures should spell out for business line staff how to escalate compliance concerns, should delineate responsibilities (avoiding overlapping roles and conflicts of interest), and should ultimately ensure that the board and senior management are fully apprised of material compliance events. Monitoring and ReportingAs I mentioned at the start, the fundamental purpose of the enterprise-wide compliance-risk management framework is to identify, monitor, and manage compliance risk more effectively. Among other things, monitoring is the means of identifying and communicating compliance breaches to the appropriate points within the organization. Banking organizations are establishing processes for monitoring the implementation of compliance policies, procedures, and controls, at both the consolidated and business line levels. Sound compliance-risk monitoring activities at large, complex banking organizations are supported by information systems that provide management with timely reports related to compliance with laws and regulations at the transaction level. These reports generally address monitoring and testing activities, actual or potential material compliance deficiencies or breaches, and new or changing compliance requirements. Reports such as these ensure that information on compliance is communicated to the appropriate levels within the organization. Monitoring and reporting enable senior management and the board to effectively carry out their respective responsibilities. At the frontier of compliance risk monitoring, larger, more complex banking organizations are moving toward the collection and analysis of quantitative information relating to compliance risk activities at the transaction level. Bearing in mind that this is an evolving area, banking organizations are investing in the development and application of such information as key risk indicators and key performance indicators in order to facilitate more accurate and more timely monitoring. Increased development and use of key compliance risk and performance indicators will ultimately enable better measurement, monitoring, and control of compliance risk. TestingAs with other control functions within an organization, independent testing should be conducted to verify that compliance-risk mitigation activities, including training and internal controls, are in place and functioning as intended throughout the organization. Whereas monitoring is an ongoing process, testing is a "point-in-time" event, a critical check of performance. The frequency of testing should be based on risk--on such factors as whether significant deficiencies were identified through a recent examination or during the last testing; whether the business line's products or activities have grown or changed significantly; or whether a high risk that may directly affect the organization's activities has been identified. Exceptions to the corporate-wide risk standards or objectives are reported to senior management, and I understand that this is most effectively done through reporting channels not under the direct control of business line management; however, resolution of the exceptions is the responsibility of business line management. An exception is tracked until its resolution has been validated. Importantly, a sound testing program contains provisions for escalating unresolved exceptions to higher levels in the organization, including the board of directors. Of course, the program should clearly define and communicate the roles of the internal audit, compliance, and other independent functions or third parties, although these roles will vary by organization. Testing provides important feedback on how well the internal control framework is operating in practice, pointing the way toward any remedial actions that need to be taken. This essential part of an internal control framework can be performed by compliance personnel, audit personnel, or third-party firms that have specialized expertise. While banking organizations sometimes outsource compliance testing or other compliance function tasks, the organization itself remains accountable and must exercise appropriate oversight. The "War for Talent"We've heard industry leaders refer to their compliance recruitment process as a "war for talent." Running an effective enterprise-wide compliance-risk management program requires more than policies, procedures, and management information systems. Decisions are made by senior management on the basis of advice from their staff. Consequently, talent is required at all levels. In assessing the risk management of individual organizations, we have noted the importance of staff who have experience and expertise consistent with the scope and complexity of an organization's business activities. Staff must also have the integrity, ethical values, and competence consistent with a prudent management philosophy and operating style. We understand that hiring and retaining qualified and experienced compliance staff is a key challenge across the industry. Successful organizations are focusing not only on recruiting talent, but also on developing staff from within. Training and other staff-development tools are essential in this time of "war for compliance talent." The Role of the RegulatorsThe business lines and activities of financial services firms can cross the jurisdictional boundaries of many legal entities, making it more difficult for a supervisory agency acting alone to determine what went wrong and what processes may need to be improved. In these cases, the Federal Reserve, as the consolidated supervisor of the banking organization in question, works closely with the primary bank regulator and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to investigate control breakdowns. The agencies exchange information and compare their findings. For example, findings from SEC examinations of broker-dealers, investment advisers, and mutual fund distributors are analyzed together with findings from targeted joint reviews of bank holding companies and banks conducted by the Federal Reserve and the primary bank regulators. This is the way the functional regulators should and will work in the environment of diversified financial institutions. ConclusionControlling compliance risk may be easier said than done. Certainly, establishment of an effective enterprise-wide compliance-risk management function and program is not done overnight. Nor is it done without costs--both monetary costs and the intangible costs inherent in real cultural change. However, it is clear that all organizations must find ways to effectively manage compliance risk--and there is growing consensus within the industry that for some of the largest and most complex organizations, an enterprise-wide approach to controlling compliance risk is no longer just a "nice thing to have." Rather, it has become an essential element of effective risk management.
Financial Services Policy Committee David FettigFSPC Spokesman(612) 204-5274[email protected] Minneapolis, Minn.-- After completing a two-year review of their cash infrastructure, the Federal Reserve Banks today announced that the cash processing operation at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's Omaha, Neb., branch will be changed to a cash depot. This change is part of a broader effort to update the Federal Reserve's infrastructure for processing currency. "We want to emphasize that the Federal Reserve will continue to make cash services available to depository institutions throughout the country, although in some cases we are employing a different business model. We want to ensure that we're making the best use of resources while satisfying the need for cash services," said Gary Stern, chairman of the Reserve Banks' Financial Services Policy Committee and president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Since 2004, the Federal Reserve discontinued cash services through branches in Little Rock, Ark., Louisville, Ky., Buffalo, N.Y., Portland, Ore., and Oklahoma City, Okla., and established cash depots in those cities. A cash depot is an alternative market presence for Federal Reserve cash services. With a cash depot, the Federal Reserve contracts with a third party--usually an armored carrier--that acts as a secure collection point for Federal Reserve currency deposits from the region's depository institutions. The depot also distributes currency orders that depository institutions have placed with the Reserve Bank. The work of counting deposits and preparing orders is done by a Federal Reserve office in another city. The Federal Reserve pays for the transportation between the Reserve Bank office and the depot. The depot operator follows strict procedures developed by the Federal Reserve. The Omaha cash depot will be serviced by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's head office. Approximately 16 cash employees work at the Omaha branch, but the number that will be affected by this change is undetermined at this time. The Reserve Bank will offer a variety of programs to staff that are affected by these decisions, including separation packages, extended medical coverage and career transition assistance. Cash remains a vital component of the nation's payment system. While studies show that the use of electronic payments is growing, the amount of deposits and orders processed through Reserve Banks has increased nearly 66 percent, to 76 billion banknotes, between 1995 and 2005.
Financial Services Policy Committee David FettigFSPC Spokesman(612) 204-5274[email protected] Minneapolis, Minn.--The Federal Reserve Banks today announced changes to their check operations as consumers and businesses continue the shift from using paper checks toward electronic payments. As part of these changes, the Federal Reserve Banks will discontinue check processing at locations in San Francisco, Kansas City, Mo., and Helena, Mont. Volume from these locations will be shifted to other Reserve Bank check processing centers. No firm date for the transition has been determined, but it is expected to take place in 2007 or the first half of 2008. "The changes announced today will help to ensure ongoing efficiency improvements for the Reserve Banks' check processing operations while we continue to provide high-quality services to depository institutions throughout the country and further encourage the greater use of electronics within the nation's check collection system," said Gary Stern, chairman of the Reserve Banks' Financial Services Policy Committee and president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. "These changes will help the Reserve Banks reduce our check service operating costs in line with the continuing shift in consumer and business preferences for electronic payments. In addition, these changes support our long-term business strategy to use the authority provided by Check 21 to collect more checks electronically, reducing the reliance on the physical transportation of checks." Today's announcement marks the Reserve Banks' fourth annual review of their check infrastructure. Since 2003, the Reserve Banks have reduced the locations where they process checks from 45 to 23 as of today. An additional two locations, previously announced, will no longer process checks, further reducing the number to 21. After the changes announced today are completed, the Reserve Banks will process checks from 18 locations nationwide. The new round of restructurings will transfer check processing operations from three locations: San Francisco to Los Angeles, Kansas City to St. Louis, and Helena to Denver. This decision impacts the Canadian check collection service provided by the Helena office. An announcement regarding the transfer of the Canadian check collection service to another Reserve Bank will be made by the end of 2006. Additionally, the Reserve Banks will streamline their check adjustment function, discontinuing adjustments at the Detroit, Helena, Houston, Memphis, Tenn., and San Francisco offices. (The term "check adjustments" refers to the part of the check processing operation in which check processing errors are resolved.) As a result of the action announced today, the Reserve Banks will reduce their overall check staff by approximately 280 positions, representing about 8 percent of the Reserve Banks' current check employees. Some staff reductions may occur through attrition and there may be some opportunities for reassignment. To assist affected staff, the Reserve Banks will offer a variety of programs, including separation packages, extended medical coverage, and career transition assistance. The Reserve Banks estimate that they will add approximately 150 positions in locations that will be receiving check processing and adjustments volume. As a direct result of previous restructuring efforts and other efficiency improvements implemented since 2003, the Reserve Banks earned revenues in 2005 that exceeded the actual and imputed costs of providing check services to depository institutions as well as their targeted level of profitability for the first time in several years. But check volumes have continued to decline, and further decline is anticipated in the coming years. The most recent Federal Reserve study of the nation's payment system revealed that about 37 billion checks were paid in the United States in 2003--down from 42 billion in 2001 and 50 billion in 1995--as electronic payments, including those made by credit cards, debit cards, and automated clearinghouse transactions, increased considerably. Further Reserve Bank restructuring efforts will be necessary as check volumes continue to decline and as more depository institutions begin to collect checks electronically using the authority provided by Check 21. The Federal Reserve Banks' long-term check processing strategy is to reduce costs and restructure their check processing operations in line with declining check volumes while encouraging the greater use of electronics in the collection of checks. This strategy will allow the Reserve Banks to meet the expectations of the 1980 Monetary Control Act. That act requires the Federal Reserve to set prices to recover, over the long run, its total operating costs of providing payment services to financial institutions, as well as the imputed costs it would have incurred and the profits it would have expected to earn had the services been provided by a private business firm. Federal Reserve System2006 Check Restructuring Fact Sheet Federal Reserve check processing locations:The Reserve Banks today process checks at 23 sites nationwide with two more sites (previously announced) on target to discontinue operations in addition to the three locations identified in today's announcement. Staff levels:The Federal Reserve System, including the Board of Governors, employs over 21,000 staff nationwide; approximately 3,400 of these employees work in the check function. National check volumes:By Federal Reserve estimates, roughly 37 billion checks were paid in the United States in 2003, down from about 42 billion in 2001 and 50 billion in 1995 (based on data from the Reserve Banks' latest available payments study). The Reserve Banks handled over 11 billion checks in 2005. Listing of specific Federal Reserve locations District 1:Boston, Mass. (head office, no check processing); Windsor Locks, Conn. District 2:New York City, N.Y. (head office; a payments operations center is located in East Rutherford, N.J., no check processing)*; Buffalo, N.Y. (branch, no check processing); Utica, N.Y. District 3:Philadelphia, Pa. (head office) District 4:Cleveland, Ohio (head office); Cincinnati, Ohio (branch); Pittsburgh, Pa. (branch, no check processing) District 5:Richmond, Va. (head office, no check processing); Baltimore, Md. (branch); Charlotte, N.C. (branch) District 6:Atlanta, Ga. (head office); Birmingham, Ala. (branch, no check processing); Jacksonville, Fla. (branch); Miami, Fla. (branch, no check processing); Nashville, Tenn. (branch, no check processing)*; New Orleans, La. (branch, no check processing) District 7:Chicago, Ill. (head office; the payments center is located at Midway Airport); Detroit, Mich. (branch, no check processing); Des Moines, Iowa District 8:St. Louis, Mo. (head office); Little Rock, Ark. (branch, no check processing); Louisville, Ky. (branch, no check processing); Memphis, Tenn. (branch) District 9:Minneapolis, Minn. (head office); Helena, Mont. (branch)** District 10:Kansas City, Mo. (head office)**; Denver, Colo. (branch); Oklahoma City, Okla. (branch, no check processing); Omaha, Neb. (branch, no check processing) District 11:Dallas, Texas (head office); El Paso, Texas (branch, no check processing); Houston, Texas (branch, no check processing); San Antonio, Texas (branch, no check processing) District 12:San Francisco, Calif. (head office)**; Los Angeles, Calif. (branch); Phoenix, Ariz. (cash processing facility); Portland, Ore. (branch, no check processing); Salt Lake City, Utah (branch, no check processing); Seattle, Wash. (branch) *Previously announced sites that will be discontinuing check processing operations.Return to text. **Site from today's announcement that will be discontinuing check processing operations.Return to text.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the United States Senate Chairman Shelby, Senator Sarbanes, and members of the Committee: I am pleased to be here to discuss financial literacy and financial education. My remarks will emphasize the importance of financial literacy, both as a source of better decisionmaking by consumers and as a means of improving the functioning of financial markets. I will also highlight various Federal Reserve System initiatives to promote financial education and address some of the opportunities and challenges that policymakers and financial educators face as they seek to improve financial literacy. Technological advances have dramatically transformed the provision of financial services in our economy. Notably, increasingly sophisticated information technologies enable lenders to collect and process data necessary to evaluate and price risk much more efficiently than in the past. For example, the expanded use of credit-scoring models, by reducing the costs of making loans and by increasing the range of assets that can be securitized, has facilitated greater extension of credit to a larger group of borrowers. Indeed, we have seen an increasingly wide array of products being offered to consumers across a range of incomes, leading to what has been called the democratization of credit. Likewise, innovation has enhanced financial services, such as banking services, and increased the variety of financial products available to investors. Even as the availability of credit has increased, so has the range of potential providers. In particular, in recent years, the number of nonbank entities providing credit products and other financial services has increased significantly. Data from a recent paper on alternative providers of financial services revealed that, between 1996 and 2001, the number of nonbank check-cashing establishments doubled in the United States. Payday lending outlets, a source of credit that was almost non-existent a decade ago, now number more than 10,0001. Data from the Federal Reserve Board’s 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances indicate that the share of households with a loan from a finance company increased from 13 percent of households in 1992 to 25 percent of households in 20042. While many of these providers cater to low- and moderate-income consumers, their customers include people with a wide range of incomes and financial experience3. Clearly, to choose wisely from the variety of products and providers available, consumers must have the financial knowledge to navigate today’s increasingly complex financial services marketplace. Consumers with the necessary skills to make informed financial decisions about purchasing a home, financing an education or their retirement, or starting a business will almost certainly be economically better off than those lacking those vital skills. Informed financial decisionmaking is also vital for the healthy functioning of financial markets. Like any other businesses, financial service firms will provide better products at better prices when they are subject to market pressures imposed on them by informed consumers. Regulators have an important role in helping to ensure that financial service companies provide necessary information to their customers, but such information is of value only to the extent that it can be understood and applied by potential users of these services. Market competition among financial providers for the business of informed consumers is, in my judgment, the best mechanism for promoting the provision of better, lower-cost financial products. Research on the Impact of Financial EducationResearch suggests that financial education can help consumers make better choices. For example, for many decades, various nonprofit organizations have offered homebuying programs and credit counseling to improve consumers’ financial management skills and reduce the risk of default or delinquency. Research on the effectiveness of these programs has generally associated financial counseling with improvements in consumers’ credit management. For example, one study that analyzed nearly 40,000 affordable mortgage loans targeted to lower-income borrowers found that counseling before the purchase of a home reduced ninety-day delinquency rates by 19 percent on average4. This study also documented a 34 percent reduction in mortgage delinquency rates among borrowers who received individual counseling rather than classroom or telephone instruction. In another study, researchers found that credit counseling had a positive effect on creditworthiness, especially for individuals with the lowest credit scores. They examined credit bureau data on 14,000 recipients of one-on-one credit counseling and found that, over a three-year period, these borrowers reported reduced debt levels and delinquency rates5. Another, preliminary study found that after receiving on-line instruction in credit management new or recently delinquent credit cardholders were more likely to pay on time and to have lower revolving balances6. Other research has looked at the link between financial knowledge and broader financial management skills. For example, one study examined the relationship between financial knowledge and financial behavior such as cashflow management, savings, and investing. Overall, the study found a significant correlation between the level of financial knowledge and good financial management practices. Individuals who were familiar with financial concepts and products were found to be more likely to balance their checkbook every month, budget for savings, and hold investment accounts7. Similarly, another study on consumer creditworthiness and consumer literacy determined that financial knowledge is the single best predictor of behaviors, such as budgeting, saving, and shopping responsibly, that translated into positive outcomes on credit bureau reports. This study also found that the main sources of knowledge were bad experiences, school instruction, and other education8. The Federal Reserve System’s Commitment to Financial LiteracyThe Federal Reserve System has long recognized the value of economic and financial education for producing better-informed citizens and consumers. Broadly, our financial education activities fall into five primary categories: (1) increasing access to information about financial products and services, (2) promoting awareness of the importance of financial literacy, (3) collaborating with educational and community organizations, (4) supporting research and identifying best practices, and (5) providing financial education for its own employees. I will briefly comment on each of these. Increasing Access to Information about Financial Products and ServicesOne important means by which the Federal Reserve helps consumers make better informed financial decisions is through its consumer protection rule-writing. For example, in pursuit of the goals set by the Congress, our regulations require the disclosure of specific information on terms and fees associated with credit and deposit accounts. The Truth in Lending Act of 1968 (as implemented by Regulation Z) requires uniform methods for computing the cost of credit and for disclosing terms on a broad range of credit products--credit cards and other lines of credit, automobile loans, student loans, and home-purchase and other home-secured loans. In addition, the Truth in Savings Act, implemented by Regulation DD, requires uniform disclosure of certain cost information on deposit accounts, including the annual percentage yield. These disclosures provide consumers with the essential information they need to assess the costs and benefits of financial services offered by different providers. Standardization of disclosures allows for comparison among similar products and thus provides consumers with an important shopping tool. One of the challenges of creating effective disclosures is presenting information so that it is as accessible and understandable as possible. To address this issue, we conduct focus groups and consumer testing to inform the rule-writing process. Because regulatory language can be quite technical, the Federal Reserve also publishes numerous brochures that explain the terminology and consumers’ rights in straightforward terms or provide useful information on particular areas of concern, such as predatory lending and identity theft. Focus groups convened over the years have found that the Federal Reserve’s consumer brochures were regarded as high-quality, unbiased publications. We have also found that counselors and educators often use our brochures when teaching about financial products and services. Promoting Awareness of the Importance of Financial Education and LiteracyThe Federal Reserve System has also worked to promote awareness of the importance of financial education and literacy. In May 2003, the Board and the twelve Reserve Banks participated in a national campaign to call attention to the value of personal financial education and the wide variety of financial literacy tools and resources available. This multi-media initiative, entitled "There’s a Lot to Learn about Money," included a public service announcement and a toll-free number for obtaining financial education resources. Consumers were also directed to our education website, www.federalreserveeducation.org, to obtain more-substantive information, ranging from materials about personal financial literacy to interactive tools for economic education. The website links to a wide variety of financial education resources at the national, regional, and local levels. Collaborating with Educational and Community OrganizationsA third piece of the Federal Reserve’s financial education effort is its collaboration with a wide range of educational and community organizations. Staff members from the Federal Reserve Board advise and assist national organizations such as the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy, the Conference of Mayors’ DollarWi$e Campaign, Operation HOPE, the American Savings Education Council, and America Saves on the development of policies, programs, and partnerships. The Federal Reserve Banks also join with regional organizations to address financial education needs. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland has worked with community financial educators to form regional networks that combine resources and share best practices. The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago sponsors "MoneySmart Week," partnering with banks, businesses, government agencies, schools, community organizations, and libraries to host activities designed to help consumers learn how to manage money. The Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco and Minneapolis have worked with leaders in the Native American community to develop financial education materials. As you are aware, the Federal Reserve Board also participates in the federal government’s Financial Literacy and Education Commission. Collaboration with outside organizations also plays a central role in the Federal Reserve’s support for broader economic education. We believe that a better understanding of how the economy works promotes both better citizenship and greater personal economic success. As one means of supporting this objective, Reserve Bank staff members advise high-school teachers on ways to help students understand economics. Perhaps the best-known economic education initiative in the Federal Reserve System is the Fed Challenge. This academic competition offers high-school students the opportunity to learn more about how the Federal Reserve develops monetary policy and how those policies affect the economy. Federal Reserve Bank economists provide instruction guides for developing a Fed Challenge team. These teams compete at local, regional, and national levels. The competition hones students’ analytical and presentation skills, while expanding their knowledge of economic principles. I have personally judged the national finals of this competition on two occasions and can attest to the remarkable economic knowledge displayed by these students. I have included an appendix to this testimony describing some of the significant System and Federal Reserve District programs and collaborative efforts in financial and economic education. Promoting Research and Identifying Best PracticesThe Federal Reserve also promotes, and engages in, research relevant to financial literacy. For example, understanding how families are doing financially helps financial educators decide how best to focus their efforts. The Federal Reserve Board conducts the triennial Survey of Consumer Finances to gain insight into U.S. families’ assets, borrowing, retirement saving, and use of financial institutions. Many researchers and practitioners use this unique data set in analyzing conditions and trends in consumer finances. Given the significant commitment to financial education by government, private-sector, and nonprofit organizations, it is important to determine whether such programs actually improve consumer financial literacy and behavior. Toward this end, the Federal Reserve undertakes and promotes research that aims to increase our understanding of the financial education programs and delivery channels that work best. For example, the Board’s Division of Consumer and Community Affairs engages in research on learning preferences and consumer financial behavior. Currently, Federal Reserve researchers are collaborating with the Department of Defense to conduct a three-year longitudinal study of the effect of military-sponsored financial education on soldiers’ financial behaviors. Since 1999, the Federal Reserve System’s biennial Community Affairs Research conference has generated and highlighted new research on the efficacy of financial education. In fact, much of the research that I cited earlier has been presented at these conferences. The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago maintains the Financial Education Research Center, which provides access to online resources for researchers, educators, and program developers. Economists at the Federal Reserve Banks also assess the effects of financial education. The Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City is currently evaluating the role that financial knowledge and education play in personal money management behavior. In addition, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston plans a year-long evaluation of its credit repair education program, which is provided to taxpayers filing for the Earned Income Tax Credit at volunteer tax preparation sites where Reserve Bank staff offer their assistance. This study seeks a better understanding of the underlying determinants of credit problems and ways in which credit counseling can improve individuals’ credit scores. Employee Financial EducationBesides these externally focused initiatives, the Federal Reserve seeks to improve the financial literacy of its own workforce. The Board offers a comprehensive financial education program to help employees plan their retirements and better use their benefits. We also offer regular seminars on topics ranging from budgeting and saving to buying a home or investing for children’s education. The Board maintains an internal website with links to information on quality-of-life matters, including managing finances. The website is organized by age groups and life events to help employees identify the information resources that are most relevant to their circumstances. We view our employee education program as a win-win proposition. Research has determined that such programs benefit employers as well as employees. For example, one study found that workplace financial education programs contribute to improved worker performance, increased job satisfaction, and decreased absenteeism9. The Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City is studying how financial education programs affect employers’ bottom lines. Challenges and OpportunitiesFinancial education is a critical component of a robust and effective financial marketplace, but it is not a panacea. Clear disclosures, wise regulation, and vigorous enforcement are also essential to ensuring that financial service providers do not engage in unfair or deceptive practices. Even the most financially savvy consumer may fall victim to fraud or deception. As policymakers and educators know, providing effective financial education presents many challenges. Efforts to increase financial literacy are resource- and time-intensive. Counseling programs require trained instructors and, to be most effective, must be available to consumers near the time at which they are making an important financial decision, such as whether to buy a home. Some school programs now include financial literacy courses or modules, but curricula must be regularly updated to remain relevant and teaching methods must be adapted to the backgrounds and interests of students. In some cases, financial education efforts are constrained by gaps in math and reading literacy, which impede comprehension of fundamental financial concepts. Recent findings by the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy illustrate the magnitude of the challenges still facing us, particularly in the case of young people.10The Coalition has administered financial literacy tests to high-school students annually for the past nine years. Student performance on these tests has not improved during that time: The average score reported in the 2006 survey was 52.4 percent, up from the low of 50.2 percent in 2002 but below the 1998 score of 57.3 percent. The survey results also show a gap in financial literacy between minority and non-minority students: In the most recent survey, white students scored an average of 55 percent while African-Americans scored 44.7 percent and Hispanics scored 46.8 percent. Clearly, there is still much work to do to understand how to improve the financial literacy of young people. On the other hand, the Jump$tart survey does confirm the importance of financial literacy, in that students who score higher on the test tend to make better financial decisions. For instance, students who reported having bounced a check averaged just 45.8 percent on the financial literacy test while students with checking accounts who had never bounced a check scored higher on average, at 53.4 percent. Because financial literacy leads to better outcomes for individual consumers and for our economy generally, continued effort in this area is highly desirable. Fortunately, given the current level of interest in improving financial literacy and education both in the United States and internationally, opportunities abound for cooperation and collaboration among public, private, academic, and community institutions. Advances in technology also offer great promise for improving the quality and delivery of financial information and for sharing of research and best practices among financial education providers. In closing, I want to reaffirm the Federal Reserve System’s commitment to increased financial literacy and improved financial education. We look forward to continuing our collaboration with the many partners who share these objectives. In Order of Federal Reserve Bank District American Savings Education Councilis a national coalition of public- and private-sector institutions committed to making saving and retirement planning a priority for all Americans. ASEC is a program of the Employee Benefit Research Institute Education and Research Fund (EBRI-ERF). ASEC brings together public- and private-sector partners to share information on best practices and to collaborate on financial-security initiatives, including the federal government'sSavings Matterscampaign (now in its tenth year), theChoose to Save®public service campaign, and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission’sFacts on Saving and Investingcampaign. The Federal Reserve Board is an ASEC mission partner, along with other government agencies, educational institutions, and nonprofit organizations committed to increasing awareness of the importance of saving and financial education. The Federal Reserve is active in theAmerica Savesinitiative and serves on the National Savings Forum, its national advisory committee. The mission of this nationwide campaign--sponsored by nonprofit, corporate, and government groups--is to help individuals and families save and build wealth. The program is targeted at low- and moderate-income families, to raise their awareness and support their efforts to become more financially secure. Through local and regional campaigns,America Savesrecruits "savers," who commit to the program and pledge to save. As a result of their commitment, savers receive information and education about strategies for fulfilling their financial goals, such as reducing debt, building an emergency fund, and saving for a home, education, or retirement. The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland played a significant leadership role in developing and launching Cleveland Saves, a pilot program for the nationalAmerica Savescampaign. The program has also launched the targeted initiativesBlack America Saves, Hispanic America Saves,andMilitary Saves. Financial Literacy and Education Commission (FLEC), established by Congress in 2003 through the passage of the Financial Literacy and Education Improvement Act, was created to "improve the financial literacy and education of persons in the United States through development of a national strategy to promote financial literacy and education." The Federal Reserve, along with numerous other federal government agencies, is a member of this commission, which is supported by the Treasury Department’s Office of Financial Education. U.S. Conference of Mayors’ National DOLLAR WI$E Campaignwas developed to encourage the development of ongoing local strategies to educate citizens about financial issues. With improved basic money management and financial planning skills, citizens are in a better position to own homes, raise healthy families, educate their children, and invest in small businesses. The Federal Reserve Board serves as an advisor to the National DOLLAR WI$E Campaign. The Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Chicago, and St. Louis provide supporting programs that have been described as best practices by the U.S. Conference of Mayors. Operation HOPEis a nonprofit organization that provides lower-income and minority populations and communities with financial education and access to financial services. Its mission is to improve asset-building skills and accessibility of mainstream financial services for its constituencies. The organization, founded in 1992, is effective in creating public-private collaborations to fulfill its mission. Among its many national partners are the Federal Reserve Board, the FDIC, the Department of Commerce, H&R Block, E*Trade, Citigroup, and Bank of America. The Federal Reserve System has partnered with Operation HOPE in launching its youth financial education programBanking on Our Futurein Washington, D.C.; Providence, Rhode Island; Atlanta, Georgia, and Los Angeles, California. A Federal Reserve Board staff member serves on Operation HOPE’s Mid-Atlantic advisory board. The Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy, in its 10-year history, has brought visibility and--through its biennial survey of high school seniors--research-based data to the financial literacy movement. Jump$tart is a Washington, D.C.-based not-for-profit organization that seeks to improve the personal financial literacy of students in kindergarten through college. The coalition has grown to include more than 170 national partners and 43 affiliated state coalitions. One of its premier services is the Jump$tart Personal Finance Clearinghouse (www.jumpstartclearinghouse.org), a web site that lists more than 580 financial literacy titles and provides information about speakers and training programs. The Federal Reserve is a partner and serves on the Jump$tart Coalition board of directors. The Fed Challenge, in its twelfth year, is an academic competition in which five-member student teams play the role of monetary policy makers. In this role, each team makes a presentation in which it analyzes the current economic situation and advocates a monetary policy prescription. The team then engages in a question-and-answer session in which the judges probe to examine students’ understanding of the mechanics of monetary policy, macroeconomic concepts, and the workings of the Fed. The Fed Challenge has been a great success, as measured by participants’ grades on Advance Placement Exams, adoption of the program by other central banks (for example, the central banks of England, New Zealand, and South Korea); recommendations in the New York State Economics Syllabus, textbooks, and the National Academy Foundation’s Academy of Finance curriculum; and anecdotal evidence offered by teachers that the Fed Challenge profoundly affects participants’ career choices. The Fed Challenge is organized by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and many other Federal Reserve Banks participate. FederalReserveEducation.orgis the Federal Reserve System’s recently redesigned financial education web site, designed to increase the use of Federal Reserve educational materials and promote financial education in the classroom. The web site has material intended for the general public, as well as materials specifically geared toward teachers and high school and college students. It provides easy access to free educational materials, a resource search engine for teachers, and games for various ages and knowledge levels. FederalReserveEducation.org is maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Federal Reserve Community Affairs Research Conferencesare sponsored to invite and highlight research on a variety of issues that affect consumer financial service policies and practices. Since 1999, this biennial event has featured research that evaluates and explores the role of financial education in improving financial outcomes for consumers, particularly those with lower incomes. The New England Economic Adventureis an hour-and-a-half interactive exhibit at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston that highlights New England entrepreneurs Francis Cabot Lowell, Colonel Albert Pope, and Ken Olson and investment decisions they made that enabled workers to be more productive. Increased productivity helped to raise the standard of living of the average New Englander and contributed to the overall economic growth of the region. Program use and effectiveness is tracked through visitor and teacher evaluations and an online evaluation form. Numbers of visitors, including those from low- and moderate-income communities, are also recorded. Peanuts & Crackerjacksis a frequently visited online economic education program that simulates a baseball game to teach economic concepts. Pitches are questions, correct answers to questions about the economics of team sports lead to hits and runs, and wrong answers are outs. The site also includes a teacher's guide. The next iteration,Economics of Entertainment, is due out in this fall. It will focus more on the abstract concept of markets and will draw from the music industry to tap into students’ own experience. Talking About Collegeis a curriculum created in collaboration with Citizen Schools, the national after-school program. It was created for middle school students to nurture their aspiration to attend college and to assist them in financial planning and the college-selection process. This curriculum has been taught as a financial literacy "apprenticeship" in after-school programs in the Boston Public Schools. The curriculum includes a built-in assessment. It’s All About Your Moneyis a program, offered in two formats, that promotes financial awareness among students in grades 4 to 8. In one format, groups of 30 to 35 students visit the Bank for roughly three hours to take part in a series of activities, including a play about bartering; an active-learning exercise about how money has changed over time; social studies lessons derived by examining foreign currency notes; and several team and individual activities focusing on budgeting, saving, and other personal finance topics. In the second format, teachers direct all of the activities described in the first format in their own classrooms by using a package of materials and guides ordered directly from the Bank through the Internet. Success is measured by the teachers, who engage students in activities and assignments before and after their visit to the Bank. Students then write letters to the Bank discussing what they learned and what they intend to do differently as a result of the program. In the 2005–2006 school year, the program was presented to 55 schools, mainly in low- and moderate-income communities, as planned. Foundations of Finance: Money Management for High School and College Studentsis a money management workshop that teaches students basic sound practices that foster wise financial decision making. Workshop content is flexible and can be adapted to the content, format, and time specifications set forth by each host school or college. Frequently requested topics include college financing, the benefits and risks of credit use, financing life’s expected and unexpected contingencies, budgeting and building net worth, taxes and other financial obligations, wise consumer practices, work and compensation, and common financial mistakes. Success is measured by school administrators and educators, who meet to determine the extent to which the workshops helped to encourage changes in curricula and mandates. Ideally, the workshop results in the development of new courses, mandated personal finance awareness sessions for all students, or changes in course content. An attempt is made to contact all students who participated in the workshop to determine how it changed their financial practices. Wall Street Economics and Finance Clubreaches approximately 50 high school students from throughout the Second Federal Reserve District who convene for eight two-hour monthly meetings at the New York Fed to learn more about the structure and functions of the financial system. Students take part in numerous activities, including discussions with economists, analysts, and traders at private-sector financial institutions; visits to trading floors and financial exchanges; their own presentations about financial developments and issues; and educational competitions that lead directly to internships. The Bank measures success by participating in discussions with educators involved in the program, attempting to determine the extent to which club activities resulted in changes in lesson plans, curricula, course offerings, and students’ performance and interest in finance-related topics. Students in the club become ambassadors to their classmates, encouraging greater interest in economics and finance as a course of study or career. Finding the Keys to Your Financial Successis an annual, free, five-day training program for educators on a curriculum created by the Bank, the University of Delaware, the Delaware Bankers' Association, and the Consumer Credit Counseling Services of Maryland and Delaware. The program is used extensively in Delaware schools, and over the past two years it has been promoted it to schools in seven Pennsylvania and New Jersey school districts. Buried by Debt: the Dangers of Borrowingis a 14-minute video for adults that describes the pitfalls of borrowing against your home. On the video, six Philadelphia District residents tell the viewers, in their own words, how they lost or nearly lost their homes by making unwise borrowing decisions. The Bank created the video at the request of ministers who were contacted to assist with outreach to low- and moderate-income minority homeowners who were most at risk because of lending abuses. The Bank has distributed over 4,000 copies to organizations throughout the United States and abroad. The video is shown at training events conducted for faith-based organizations interested in delivering financial education programs. A Spanish version is also available. Money and Banking for Educators, the Bank’s signature free summer professional development course for teachers, is in its third year of existence. It is designed to provide teachers with active learning techniques to enhance students' understanding of the economy, the Federal Reserve System, and monetary policy. Those who elect to receive graduate-level credits for the course enroll through a participating university. Personal Finance for the Middle School Classroomis a five-day professional development course for K-12 educators taught by Federal Reserve economic education specialists and staff from the state centers for economic education. The course covers how to teach students about money, banking, and the Federal Reserve System. Emphasis is placed on strategies for active and collaborative learning. Personal Financial Education Curricula and Compendium of Providersprovides information on training materials and other resources available to the public, as well as organizations that offer educational services in the Third Federal Reserve District. The Learning Center and Money Museumwas opened in January 2006. The Learning Center features over 30 interactive exhibits and related educational programs centered around the theme "What gives money value?" The educational programs were designed by the Bank, with teacher input, based on state educational benchmarks. Programs include lessons on saving and spending, inflation, barter, and the Federal Reserve System. The Learning Center hosted over 2,500 visitors in its first quarter of operations, and reservations for Learning Center educational programs are booking seven months in advance. All program participants "strongly agree" that their Learning Center visit provided a valuable learning experience. The center has been endorsed by the Ohio Council on Economic Education. Fourth District Financial Education Consortialaunched in June 2003 with a series of roundtable meetings with financial institutions, government agencies, and community-based nonprofits. These meetings were convened to coordinate financial education programs and discuss how to improve financial education delivery in the Fourth District, in part in response to the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland’s financial education survey "Financial Education: What Is It and What Makes It So Important," published earlier that year. The meetings were also a response to the growing complexity of financial services, predatory lending, wide gaps between white and minority homeownership rates, record low savings rates, and increases in personal bankruptcies and debt among American consumers. The roundtable meetings resulted in the formation of several financial education networks, or "consortia," in the Cincinnati, Cleveland, and Pittsburgh regions. The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland has staff in each of those cities who act as coordinators for these initiatives. The Essay Contestis an annual competition for area high school students. Essay topics are chosen with an eye toward engaging a broad range of students, not just students in economics classes. Topics have included the economics of children's literature, the economics of rock music, and economics on TV. The Bank also participates in theFed Challengeand hosts a number of other programs for teachers and students throughout the year, including workshops and student competitions with various partners such asOhio Jump$tart, the Ohio Council on Economic Education, Junior Achievement, and local public libraries. My Moneyis an educational package for elementary school students that includes a teacher’s guide and student workbooks featuring lessons entitled "What is Money?", "Money Equivalents," and "Jobs, Money, Goods and Services." Over 1,100My Moneypackages have been shipped to elementary schools worldwide since early 2006. Teacher feedback gathered from evaluation cards has been overwhelmingly positive. The Essay Contestis an annual fall contest, sponsored by the Bank, designed to reach students who may not be enrolled in an economics class and have limited knowledge about personal finance and the Federal Reserve. High school juniors and seniors write a three-page essay on a financial literacy topic or the Federal Reserve. Winners receive savings bonds at an awards luncheon held at the Bank. In the fall of 2005, the essay theme highlighted the importance of saving at a young age. There were over 250 entries. Financial Literacy Fairsare sponsored by the Bank for its employees each year, during Financial Literacy Month. Financial seminars address issues ranging from free credit reports, saving for retirement, and paying off credit card debt. The Bank also partners with local and regional financial and economic education organizations, including theCouncil on Economic Educationin Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina. Monetary Policy: Part Art, Part Scienceis a DVD-based lesson that focuses on the structure and functions of the Federal Reserve System, the Fed’s role in formulating monetary policy, and how members of Reserve Banks’ board of directors contribute to interest rate-setting decisions. This video was originally used as part of the Atlanta tour program; however, because of its popularity, it was adapted for use across the District and for distribution to educators. As part of this extension, a lesson plan entitled "Monetary Policy Starts in Your Own Backyard" was developed to accompany the DVD. The lesson and video were distributed to more than 4,300 educators in the spring 2006Extra Credite-newsletter. Extra Credit, an e-newsletter published twice a year, is designed to help teachers looking for information, lesson plans and activities, and ideas for teaching economics and personal finance to middle school and high school students. The second edition of the e-newsletter, available on the Internet, was distributed in spring 2006 to more than 4,300 educators. Financial Education Day at the Fed, an annual event, teaches eighth-grade students about personal financial education. More than 40 employee volunteers teach roughly 250 students money management skills through lectures and interactive exercises dealing with budgeting, credit, and saving. To measure the knowledge gained, students are given a test--both before and after the event--on the topics covered. Workshops and toursreached roughly 2,000 educators and over 15,300 students in 2005. In addition to conducting workshops and tours, the Bank works with other organizations to collaborate on various initiatives to provide quality learning experiences for educators. In July 2005 the Bank--in cooperation with the St. Louis Fed’s Memphis Branch, the Mississippi Council on Economic Education, and Mississippi Jump$tart--conducted a three-day economic and financial education workshop that reached over 100 educators each day. Similar collaborations are planned for 2006 throughout the District. The Bank also works closely with the stateDepartment of Educationand state legislators on legislation and on a curriculum for a high school personal finance course. It also works with organizations that promote financial literacy, such asJunior Achievement, Jump$tart Coalition, and theAcademy of Finance. Money Smart Week, an annual event, continues to be the Bank’s premier program for promoting the importance of financial and economic education to the Chicago community. In line with our goals to continue growth, participating partner organizations numbered 192 (up from 134 a year ago) and events numbered 274 (up from 220 in 2005). The campaign included promotional and marketing components such as a direct mail campaign to one million households, distribution of almost 400,000 Money Smart bookmarks to grades K-6 within the Chicago public schools, and street marketing campaigns to distribute 40,000 event calendars. In addition, 5,000 Spanish language event calendars were distributed as part of the program. Financial Education Research Centeris a database of research on the impact of financial education programs. The goal of the center is to promote excellence in the field by providing online resources for researchers, educators, program directors, and others interested in supporting these types of programs and initiatives. The web-based tool also offers a listing of national financial education programs available to the public and educators. Power of Money Curriculum Packageincludes two lesson plans and a nine-minute video about the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. Since its inception in 2003, the package has been distributed to almost 2,200 high schools in the five-state region. The total audience for the project is upwards of 250,000 students. The Visitors Center and Tour Programcontinues to grow and receive positive feedback from the students, teachers, and members of the general public who visit the facility. Surveys in which visitors rated their experience in the Visitors Center show an 87 percent satisfaction rate, defined as a score of 4.5 on a 5-point scale. The total number of counted visitors in the Visitors Center during 2005 was 23,623, a 9 percent increase over 2004. Uncounted (walk-in visitors) are estimated to have totaled more than 5,000 in 2005. This was the second year in a row in which the number of counted visitors has exceeded 20,000. Since the museum opened in June 2001, new attendance records have been set each year. Making Sense of Money and Bankingis a one-week, three-credit college course hosted by the Bank in conjunction with the University of Missouri–St. Louis and Southern Illinois University–Edwardsville. The course is offered to K-12 teachers to help them integrate money and banking topics into social studies, language arts, and math lessons. Guest speakers from the St. Louis Fed are featured. June 2006 will mark the eleventh year of the course, which draws 25 to 35 educators each year. The success of the course is measured by attendance, formal course evaluations, and general commentary by actual and prospective students. Teach Children to Save Dayis a national event developed by the American Bankers Association Education Foundation in cooperation with the Bank, the University of Missouri--St. Louis Center for Entrepreneurship and Economic Education, and a number of metro area banks. Students in the first, second, and third grades are given 45-minute lessons on the importance of saving and then receive piggy banks. Of the 148 volunteers who delivered the program to 287 area classrooms, 68 were Bank employees. Success is measured by participation and by reaction from teachers and students. Your Paycheckis a program conducted with Culver-Stockton College of Canton, Missouri, that focuses on teenagers earning their first paychecks and facing challenges related to money, credit, and financial responsibility. The program is sponsored by Quincy, Illinois, businesses that often employ teens. The program's trainers are Culver-Stockton students who are trained by Bank employees. Success is measured by evaluations from the student trainers and the program students. Learn Before You Leapis a series of brochures listing counseling agencies that provide advice on every step of the home-buying process, from budgeting income to negotiating a contract to closing on a loan. Each of the brochures focuses on one of the Federal Reserve Bank’s regional areas--St. Louis,Little Rock,Louisville, andMemphis. Supply, Demand, and Deadlinesis an annual economics workshop for journalists. In its sixth year, the workshop--sponsored by the Bank and the University of Minnesota’s Journalism School--was founded on the premise that a better understanding of economics can improve the reporting skills of journalists from all news beats, not just the business section. Roughly two dozen journalists from all types of media spend three days learning about economic principles and participate in a thorough case study. The workshop faculty includes college professors and experienced professional journalists. All participants are surveyed six months after the course to determine how they are applying what they have learned. The Essay Contest for High School Students, has, since 1998, challenged hundreds of high school students from the District to look through an economic lens to address questions about poverty, the environment, banking, economic development, and even illegal drug markets. The top 30 essay writers, along with their parents and teachers, are invited to the Bank for an educational program on that year’s subject and to receive an award. Many teachers also use the contest materials in their class curriculum to apply economics to real-world issues. The Bank works with District teachers to regularly evaluate the effectiveness of this program. The Bank has also assisted with the formation of local financial education organizations, including theMontana Financial Education Coalition (MFEC), theMontana Jump$tart Coalition affiliate, and theMinnesota Jump$tart Coalition affiliate. The Bank partners with theNative Financial Education Coalition (NFEC), created to promote financial education in native communities, and its Youth Initiatives Committee for the Building Native Communities adult financial education curriculum; theMinnesota Council of Economic Education; theMontana Council of Economic Education; theSouth Dakota Council of Economic Education; theMinnesota Saves Network; and theUniversity of Minnesota's Center for Personal and Family Financial Education (CPFFE). The Workplace Financial Education Programencourages employers to offer financial education classes to employees. The program is a series of seminars that include budgeting for current and future needs, reducing debt, increasing savings, understanding how credit works, improving credit ratings, building a relationship with financial institutions, and maximizing retirement funds. To complement the classroom settings, each participant is offered up to two hours of confidential one-on-one counseling with a certified financial planner. This program was piloted by the Bank in October 2005. Kansas City's community affairs research economist conducts surveys, before and after the program, in order to publish results and findings from the program. Jump$tart Your Moneywas organized in Oklahoma in 2005 and has successfully raised the profile of personal financial education. The event, one week of programs focusing on personal financial education, is sponsored by over 60 statewide partners. The Bank is working to replicate this program by establishing coalitions in Missouri, Kansas, and Nebraska. The Bank is also developing a comprehensive database and a public web site to create awareness of financial education resources and services. The Bank also participates in financial education networks in Oklahoma, Colorado, New Mexico, and Wyoming--most notablyTeach Children to Save Day(Denver and Kansas City),Oklahoma Jump$tart Coalition, and theDenver Financial Literacy Network. Building Wealth: A Beginner’s Guide to Securing Your Financial Futureis a publication that introduces individuals and families to the idea of developing a plan for building personal wealth. It contains four sections: Learn the Language, Budget to Save, Save and Invest, and Take Control of Debt. Written in both English and Spanish, it is available in print and as an interactive web site.Building Wealthis widely used as a basic financial education tool by a broad range of professionals, including bankers and other lenders, credit counselors, homebuyer education providers, employers, and real estate professionals. Its popularity has increased steadily since its introduction in October 2000, and over 170,000 copies have been printed and distributed across the country. In addition, it is the most frequently downloaded publication on the Bank’s web site, with over 130,000 downloads in 2005. Rx: Financial Healthis the Bank’s 2006 personal financial education workshop. It will address topics related to achieving financial health--such as credit scoring, banking services, and tax preparation--and will touch on state-legislated personal finance education initiatives. This workshop, open to all high school educators, is part of a series of annual workshops hosted by the Bank in partnership with the Texas Council on Economic Education. Several presentations will be conducted by representatives of both private and public organizations, including the Internal Revenue Service, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, and the Texas Council on Economic Education. The workshop was held in Dallas and at the Bank Branches. Where Did My Money Go? Making Money, Spending It, and Keeping Itwas the Bank’s 2005 workshop series, which focused on money in the form of income, how personal choices affect future income, and the difference between money made and money kept. More than 300 high school teachers attended workshops conducted by Dallas Fed economists, the Consumer Credit Counseling Services, and Citigroup’s Office of Financial Education. The one-day events were held at the Bank in Dallas and at Branches throughout the District. Riding the Waves of the Global Economywas a Bank-hosted two-day economic summit for more than 130 high school faculty. The program focused on the world economy and international issues, with special emphasis on technology, financial markets, poverty, and outsourcing. Dallas Fed President Richard Fisher and Fordham University economics professor Darryl McLeod were featured speakers. There’s a Lot to Learn About Moneyis the Bank’s one-hour personal finance session for high school students, which supplements the Bank’s tour program. This interactive session teaches students how to take control of their finances by understanding the time value of money through saving and investing, how to develop a budget, and how to use credit wisely. Since the program was launched in the fall of 2005, a total of 69 workshops have been held, reaching 1,620 students. Teachers also have access to the program curriculum through the Bank’s web site. Open and Operating: The Federal Reserve Responds to September 11is a video-based lesson that gives history and economics teachers a tool for introducing their students to the Federal Reserve System. The video combines news footage and interviews with Federal Reserve officials to illustrate how the Fed functions in the real world. The events of September 11, 2001, provide the context for this lesson, documenting how the Federal Reserve acted decisively to calm the financial markets, keep funds moving, and stabilize the economy. The program includes a videotape/DVD, a lesson plan booklet, and web-based resources. In the first quarter of 2006, 2,500Open and Operatingkits were distributed to high school teachers, reaching more than 17,500 students across the country. The International Economic Summit (IES)is a program that educates high school students about the benefits of world trade while exploring the controversies associated with globalization. Working in small groups, student teams adopt a country and take on the role of economic advisor. Each student team evaluates conditions within their country and develops a strategic plan to improve living standards. A typical event hosts 300 to 400 students representing 60 to 80 countries. The event concludes with an awards ceremony recognizing those teams of economic advisors who achieved the goals of their strategic plan. Student teams also compete for awards in creative costume and table displays. The Bank established a partnership with the IES Foundation in 2003 to promote and support the program throughout the District. Since then, approximately 25,000 students have participated in the IES simulation in high school classrooms throughout California, Idaho, and Washington. Most recently, the first bi-national IES event hosted 300 high school seniors from San Diego County and Ensenada, Mexico. Building Native Communitiesis a series of workshops offered in Portland, Sacramento, Seattle, and Phoenix to train tribal members and representatives of Native American community organizations to teach financial education curricula in their communities. Individual Development Account Initiativeswere launched in the District to establish partnerships for sponsoring match savings account programs for low- and moderate-income populations to save for buying a home, starting a small business, or pursing education. The programs include financial education for participants. Footnotes 1.Noah Sawyer and Kenneth Temkin (2004),"Analysis of Alternative Financial Service Providers" (782 KB PDF), prepared for The Fannie Mae Foundation by the Urban Institute Metropolitan Housing and Communities Policy Center.Return to text 2.Survey of Consumer Finances(2004), Federal Reserve Board of Governors.Return to text 3.Gary Elliehausen, Ph.D and Edward C. Lawrence, Ph.D, (2001),"Payday Advance Credit in America: An Analysis of Customer Demand" (653 KB PDF).Return to text 4.Abdughani Hirad and Peter Zorn (2001),"A Little Knowledge Is a Good Thing: Empirical Evidence of the Effectiveness of Pre-Purchase Homeownership Counseling" (467 KB PDF).Return to text 5.Gregory Elliehausen, E. Christopher Lundquist, Michael Staten (2003),"The Impact of Credit Counseling on Subsequent Borrower Credit Usage and Payment Behavior" (January), (305 KB PDF).Return to text 6.Kimberly Gartner and Richard Todd (2005),"Effectiveness of Online ‘Early Intervention’ Financial Education for Credit Cardholders" (July), (189 KB PDF).Return to text 7.Jeanne M. Hogarth and Marianne A. Hilgert (2003),"Patterns of Financial Behaviors: Implications for Community Educators and Policymakers" (1.8 MB PDF).Return to text 8.Marsha Courchane and Peter Zorn (2005),"Consumer Literacy and Creditworthiness" (1.2 MB PDF).Return to text 9.E. Thomas Garman, Jinhee Kim, Constance Y. Kratzer, Bruce H. Brunson, and So-hyun Joo (1999), "Workplace Financial Education Improves Personal Financial Wellness," Financial Counseling and Planning Journal, vol. 10.Return to text 10.Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy (2006),"2006 Survey of Financial Literacy Among High School Students".Return to text
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 5 percent. Economic growth has been quite strong so far this year. The Committee sees growth as likely to moderate to a more sustainable pace, partly reflecting a gradual cooling of the housing market and the lagged effects of increases in interest rates and energy prices. As yet, the run-up in the prices of energy and other commodities appears to have had only a modest effect on core inflation, ongoing productivity gains have helped to hold the growth of unit labor costs in check, and inflation expectations remain contained. Still, possible increases in resource utilization, in combination with the elevated prices of energy and other commodities, have the potential to add to inflation pressures. The Committee judges that some further policy firming may yet be needed to address inflation risks but emphasizes that the extent and timing of any such firming will depend importantly on the evolution of the economic outlook as implied by incoming information. In any event, the Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to support the attainment of its objectives. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Susan S. Bies; Jack Guynn; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Jeffrey M. Lacker; Mark W. Olson; Sandra Pianalto; Kevin M. Warsh; and Janet L. Yellen. In a related action, the Board of Governors unanimously approved a 25-basis-point increase in the discount rate to 6 percent. In taking this action, the Board approved the requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Dallas, and San Francisco.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s 2006 Financial Markets Conference, Sea Island, Georgia Thank you for inviting me to speak today. In keeping with the theme of this conference, I will offer some thoughts on the systemic risk implications of the rapid growth of the hedge fund industry and on ways that policymakers might respond to those risks. The collapse of Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) in 1998 precipitated the first in-depth assessment by policymakers of the potential systemic risks posed by the burgeoning hedge fund industry. The President's Working Group on Financial Markets, which includes the Federal Reserve, considered the policy issues raised by that event and, in 1999, issued its report,Hedge Funds, Leverage, and the Lessons of Long-Term Capital Management. The years since then have offered an opportunity to consider whether the Working Group's recommendations for addressing those issues have been effective and whether new concerns have arisen that warrant an alternative approach. LTCM and the Working Group's RecommendationsAs the title of the report indicated, the Working Group focused on the potential for leverage to create systemic risk in financial markets. The concern arises because, all else being equal, highly leveraged investors are more vulnerable to market shocks. If leveraged investors default while holding positions that are large relative to the markets in which they have invested, the forced liquidation of those positions, possibly at fire-sale prices, could cause heavy losses to counterparties. These direct losses are of concern, of course, particularly if they lead to further defaults or threaten systemically important institutions; but, in addition, market participants that were not creditors or counterparties of the defaulting firm might be affected indirectly through asset price adjustments, liquidity strains, and increased market uncertainty. The primary mechanism for regulating excessive leverage and other aspects of risk-taking in a market economy is the discipline provided by creditors, counterparties, and investors. In the LTCM episode, unfortunately, market discipline broke down. LTCM received generous terms from the banks and broker-dealers that provided credit and served as counterparties, even though LTCM took exceptional risks. Investors, perhaps awed by the reputations of LTCM's principals, did not ask sufficiently tough questions about the risks that were being taken to generate the high returns. Together with the admittedly extraordinary market conditions of August 1998, these risk-management lapses were an important source of the LTCM crisis. The Working Group's central policy recommendation was that regulators and supervisors should foster an environment in which market discipline--in particular, counterparty risk management--constrains excessive leverage and risk-taking. Effective market discipline requires that counterparties and creditors obtain sufficient information to reliably assess clients' risk profiles and that they have systems to monitor and limit exposures to levels commensurate with each client's riskiness and creditworthiness. Placing the onus on market participants to provide discipline makes good economic sense; private agents generally have strong incentives to monitor counterparties as well as the best access to the information needed to do so effectively. For various reasons, however, creditors may not fully internalize the costs of systemic financial problems; and time and competition may dull memory and undermine risk-management discipline. The Working Group concluded, accordingly, that supervisors and regulators should ensure that banks and broker-dealers implement the systems and policies necessary to strengthen and maintain market discipline, making several specific recommendations to that effect. The Working Group's recommendations on this point have largely been followed. Domestically, regulatory authorities issued guidance on risk-management practices, and bank supervisors now actively monitor and conduct targeted reviews of banks' dealings with hedge funds. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) intensified its risk-management inspections of the larger broker-dealers after LTCM. Internationally, both the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the International Organization of Securities Commissions produced papers on sound practices in dealings with highly leveraged institutions, and the Basel Committee conducted a series of follow-up studies. An alternative policy response that the Working Group considered, but did not recommend, was direct regulation of hedge funds. Direct regulation may be justified when market discipline is ineffective at constraining excessive leverage and risk-taking but, in the case of hedge funds, the reasonable presumption is that market discipline can work. Investors, creditors, and counterparties have significant incentives to rein in hedge funds' risk-taking. Moreover, direct regulation would impose costs in the form of moral hazard, the likely loss of private market discipline, and possible limits on funds' ability to provide market liquidity. In focusing on counterparty risk management in its recommendations, the Working Group did not intend to prevent failures in the hedge fund industry. Hedge funds offer their investors high prospective returns but also high levels of risk. Experienced investors know, or should know, that in any given year some hedge funds lose money for their investors and some funds go out of business. Those occurrences are only normal and to be expected in a competitive market economy. The Working Group's recommendations were aimed, instead, at ensuring that when hedge funds fail, as some inevitably will, the effects will be manageable and the potential for adverse consequences to the broader financial system or to real economic activity will be limited. Effectiveness of the Working Group's ApproachHas the approach proposed by the President's Working Group worked? Any answer must be provisional, but, to date, it apparently has been effective. Since the LTCM crisis, ongoing improvements in counterparty risk management and the resultant strengthening of market discipline appear to have limited hedge fund leverage and improved the ability of banks and broker-dealers to monitor risk, despite the rapidly increasing size, diversity, and complexity of the hedge fund industry. Many hedge funds have been liquidated, and investors have suffered losses, but creditors and counterparties have, for the most part, not taken losses. The general perception among market participants is that hedge funds are less highly leveraged today than in 1998 though, to be sure, meaningful and consistent measurements of leverage are not easy to come by and many newer financial products embed significant leverage in relatively nontransparent ways. According to bank supervisors and most market participants, counterparty risk management has improved significantly since 1998. Some of this progress is due to industry-led efforts, such as two reports by the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group (CRMPG) that lay out principles that institutions should use in measuring, monitoring, and managing risk. Reviews conducted by bank supervisors in 2004 and 2005 indicated that banks have become more diligent in their dealings with hedge funds. In most cases, substantial resources have been devoted to expanding and improving the staffing of the risk-management functions related to hedge fund counterparties. Dealers universally require hedge funds to post collateral to cover current credit exposures and, with some exceptions, require additional collateral, or initial margin, to cover potential exposures that could arise if markets moved sharply. Now, risk managers can more accurately measure their current and projected exposures to hedge fund counterparties, and more firms use stress-testing methodologies to assess the sensitivity of their exposures to individual counterparties if the market moves substantially. Despite this progress, some concerns about counterparty risk management remain and may have become even more pronounced given the increasing complexity of financial products. I will note four of these concerns. First, hedge funds are profitable customers for dealers, and our supervisors are concerned that competition for hedge fund business has eroded initial margin levels. Second, given the increasing volume of complex transactions with hedge funds, we are also concerned whether counterparty exposures in such complex transactions are being measured accurately. Supervisors are monitoring banks with these issues in mind. Third, our supervisors are concerned that more extensive stress-testing should be done. Although stress-testing of exposures at the level of the individual hedge fund counterparty is becoming more common, still-wider application of this technique would be useful. Similarly, aggregate stress tests--by which a dealer evaluates its exposure to the hedge-fund sector in the event of a large market move--merit wider use. Aggregate stress tests are a desirable complement to stress tests of individual hedge fund counterparties because funds sometimes imitate each others' strategies or choose strategies that are affected by common market factors. Supervisors are encouraging the expanded use of stress-testing when it is appropriate. Fourth, supervisors are concerned that the assessment of counterparty risks should be better tied to the amount of transparency offered by hedge funds. In particular, good risk management should link the availability and the terms of credit granted to a hedge fund to the fund's willingness to provide information on its strategies and risk profile. Our supervisors are pushing banks to clearly link transparency with credit terms and conditions. Since the Working Group report was issued, hedge funds have greatly expanded their activities and strategies, and their interactions with counterparties and creditors have accordingly become more complex. The continuing challenge for supervisors, counterparties, and hedge funds is to ensure that rigorous and appropriate methods of risk management are brought to bear even as institutions, instruments, and markets change. Two recent challenges of note are the spread of prime brokerage services and the emergence of operational issues in the settling of trades in newer types of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives, particularly credit derivatives. Hedge funds have long used arrangements that allow them to execute trades with several dealers but then to consolidate the clearing and settlement of their trades at a single firm, the "prime broker." The prime broker typically provides financing and back-office accounting services to the hedge fund as well as settlement services. In the past couple of years, prime brokerage has expanded beyond cash trades for securities to include foreign exchange and OTC derivative trades, and more firms are offering prime brokerage services. Prime brokerage poses some unique challenges for the management of counterparty credit and operational risk. Prime brokers must ensure that they have adequate information and controls to protect against counterparty credit risk arising both from the client and from the executing dealer. They also must implement internal controls to monitor and track transactions executed as part of the prime brokerage agreement and to ensure that the transactions meet the terms of the agreement. Supervisors of firms that offer prime brokerage services, particularly supervisors of new entrants, must ensure that the firms are fully aware of the risks involved and effectively manage them. The proliferation of new financial products also poses risk-management challenges, including challenges on the operational side. For example, trading in credit derivatives has grown dramatically in recent years, and firms have had difficulties in processing and settling these and other OTC derivative trades in a timely way. These problems are not limited to hedge funds but affect all participants in the OTC derivatives market and all dealers in credit derivatives. Recently, supervisors in several jurisdictions, working with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, have pushed firms to improve their processes for confirming and assigning trades. So far, good progress has been made, with private-sector participants meeting most of their objectives for reducing backlogs. Commitments are in place to effect still further improvement. A noteworthy feature of these efforts is the cooperation among authorities. The Federal Reserve has devoted more effort in recent years to maintaining a dialogue with international supervisors, such as the U.K. Financial Services Authority, and we will continue to do so. Domestically, the Federal Reserve is coordinating with the SEC, which is the primary regulator of several large firms that deal in OTC derivatives or engage in prime brokerage activities. Proposals for Creating a Database of Hedge Fund PositionsFollowing the LTCM crisis and the publication of the Working Group's recommendations, the debate about hedge funds and the broader effects of their activities on financial markets abated for a time. That debate, however, has now resumed with vigor--spurred, no doubt, by the creation of many new funds, large reported inflows to funds, and a broadening investor base. Renewed discussion of hedge funds and of their benefits and risks has in turn led to calls for authorities to implement new policies, many of which will be topics of this conference. I will briefly discuss one of these proposals: the development of a database that would contain information on hedge-fund positions and portfolios. It is commonly observed that hedge funds are "opaque"--that is, information about their portfolios is typically limited and infrequently provided. It would be more accurate to say that the opacity of hedge funds is in the eye of the beholder; the information a fund provides may vary considerably depending on whether the recipient of the information is an investor, a counterparty, a regulatory authority, or a general market participant. From a policy perspective, transparency to investors is largely an issue of investor protection. The need for counterparties to have adequate information is a risk-management issue, as I have already discussed. Much of the recent debate, however, has focused on the opacity of hedge funds to regulatory authorities and to the markets generally, which is viewed by some as an important source of liquidity risk. Liquidity in a particular market segment might well decline sharply and unexpectedly if hedge funds chose or were forced to reduce a large exposure in that segment. Concerns about hedge fund opacity and possible liquidity risk have motivated a range of proposals for regulatory authorities to create and maintain a database of hedge fund positions. Such a database, it is argued, would allow authorities to monitor this possible source of systemic risk and to address the buildup of risk as it occurs. Various alternatives that have been discussed include a database maintained by regulators on a confidential basis, a system in which hedge funds submit position information to an authority that aggregates that information and reveals it to the market, and a public database with nonconfidential information on hedge funds. I understand the concerns that motivate these proposals but, at this point, remain skeptical about their utility in practice. To measure liquidity risks accurately, the authorities would need data from all major financial market participants, not just hedge funds. As a practical matter, could the authorities collect such an enormous quantity of highly sensitive information in sufficient detail and with sufficient frequency (daily, at least) to be effectively informed about liquidity risk in particular market segments? How would the authorities use the information? Would they have the authority to direct hedge funds or other large financial institutions to reduce positions? If several funds had similar positions, how would authorities avoid giving a competitive advantage to one fund over another in using the information from the database? Perhaps most important, would counterparties relax their vigilance if they thought the authorities were monitoring and constraining hedge funds' risk-taking? A risk of any prescriptive regulatory regime is that, by creating moral hazard in the marketplace, it leaves the system less rather than more stable. A system in which hedge funds and other highly leveraged market participants submit position information to an authority that aggregates that information and reveals it to the market would probably not be able to address the concern about liquidity risk. Protection of proprietary information would require so much aggregation that the value of the information to market participants would be substantially reduced. Timeliness of the data would also be an issue. A public database of nonproprietary information could provide the public with a general picture of hedge-fund activity without creating the false impression that the authorities were engaged in prudential oversight of hedge funds. Such a public database might demystify hedge funds, but it would not address the central policy concern that opacity creates liquidity risk. I expect discussion and analysis of the potential costs and benefits of increased disclosures will continue, as well as suggestions about how such disclosures might be structured and disseminated. The important challenge is to structure any disclosures in a way that does not generate moral hazard or weaken market discipline.ConclusionIn the final analysis, authorities cannot entirely eliminate systemic risk. To try to do so would likely stifle innovation without achieving the intended goal. However, authorities should (and will) try to ensure that the lapses in risk management of 1998 do not happen again. Private market participants, too, have their role to play in ensuring that such lapses do not recur. The principles articulated in the CRMPG's reports are a good starting place for firms, and senior management should rigorously assess their operations against those principles and commit the resources to address deficiencies. Authorities' primary task is to guard against a return of the weak market discipline that left major market participants overly vulnerable to market shocks. Continued focus on counterparty risk management is likely the best course for addressing systemic concerns related to hedge funds. This public policy approach does not entail the moral hazard concerns created by authorities' monitoring of positions using a private database. Rather, a focus on counterparty risk management places the responsibility for monitoring risk squarely on the private market participants with the best incentives and capacity to do so.
Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the Global Association of Risk Professionals' Basel II & Banking Regulation Forum, Barcelona, Spain Thank you for the invitation to speak here today. I am honored to be with this distinguished group of risk-management professionals from around the world. In my remarks, I will focus primarily on the choices and challenges associated with Basel II implementation. In particular, I want to reaffirm the Federal Reserve’s commitment to Basel II and the need for continual evolution in risk measurement and management at our largest banks and then discuss a few key aspects of Basel II implementation in the United States. Given the international audience here today, I also plan to offer some thoughts on cross-border implementation issues associated with Basel II, including so-called home-host issues. Moving to Basel IIBy now most of you are aware that on March 30 the Federal Reserve Board approved adraft of the U.S. notice of proposed rulemaking(NPR) on the Basel II capital framework. The NPR is expected to be issued in the Federal Register once all of the U.S. banking agencies have completed their individual review and approval processes, at which time it will be “officially” out for comment. We recognize the significance of this development to the industry, the U.S. Congress, and others who have waited for greater specificity on the proposed revisions. But before commenting further on the NPR and the U.S. Basel II process, I want to reiterate our rationale for pursuing Basel II. Rationale for Moving to Basel IIThe current Basel I capital framework, adopted nearly twenty years ago, has served us well but has become increasingly inadequate for large, internationally active banks that are offering ever more complex and sophisticated products and services. We need a better capital framework for these large, internationally active banks, and we believe that Basel II is such a framework. One of the major improvements in Basel II is the closer link between capital requirements and the way banks manage their actual risk. The current Basel I measures have very limited risk-sensitivity and do not provide bankers, supervisors, or the marketplace with meaningful measures of risk at large complex organizations. Under Basel I, a bank’s capital requirement does not adequately reflect gradations in asset quality and does not change over time to reflect deterioration in asset quality. Further, there is no explicit capital requirement for the operational risk embedded in many of the services from which the largest institutions generate a good portion of their revenues. In addition to strengthening the link between regulatory capital and the way banks manage their actual capital, Basel II should make the financial system safer by encouraging continual improvement in risk-measurement and risk-management practices at the largest banks. Basel II is based on many of the economic capital principles used by the most sophisticated banks and therefore brings minimum regulatory capital requirements closer to banks’ internal capital models. By providing a consistent framework for the largest banks to use, supervisors will more readily be able to identify portfolios and banks whose capital is not commensurate with their risk levels. Through ongoing and regular dialogue, this process will in turn help management to be better informed about how their proprietary models compare to the range of practices currently in use so they can better prioritize where enhancements are needed. We have already seen some progress in risk measurement and management at many institutions in the United States and around the globe as a result of preparations for Basel II. Admittedly, banks have told us that some of the costs for Basel II would have been incurred anyway. But if anything, Basel II has accelerated the pace of this change. Basel II can also provide supervisors with a more conceptually consistent and more transparent framework for evaluating systemic risk in the banking system through credit cycles. Thus it improves on Basel I, which requires banks to hold the same level of capital for a given portfolio, no matter what its inherent risk may be. Further, as bankers gain experience with the advanced approaches under Basel II, they will have better information on how their risk taking may vary through credit cycles. Therefore, Basel II establishes a more coherent relationship between how supervisors assess regulatory capital and how they supervise banks, enabling examiners to better evaluate whether banks are holding prudent capital levels, given their risk profiles. The reasons I’ve just given for pursuing Basel II also provide justification for the recent Basel revisions to the 1996 Market Risk Amendment (MRA). Since adoption of the MRA, banks’ trading activities have become more sophisticated and have given rise to a wider range of risks that are not easily captured in their existing value-at-risk (VaR) models. For example, more products related to credit risk, such as credit default swaps and tranches of collateralized debt obligations, are now included in the trading book. These products can give rise to default risks that are not captured well in methodologies required by the current rule specifying a ten-day holding period and a 99 percent confidence interval. The inability of VaR calculations to adequately measure the risks of certain traded positions may give rise to arbitrage opportunities between the banking book and the trading book because of the lower capital charge that may be afforded trading positions under a VaR approach that is not optimally risk-sensitive. The U.S. banking agencies are in the process of developing a notice of proposed rulemaking to implement the market risk revisions in the United States. These revisions will apply to those banks with significant trading activity, regardless of their Basel II status. Bridging the Gap between Regulatory Capital Requirements and Internal Bank PracticeWith Basel II, U.S. supervisors are attempting to use the internal risk-measurement and -management information produced by large complex institutions to manage their own risks in such a way as to augment the risk sensitivity and overall meaningfulness of minimum regulatory capital measures. Basel II, by tying regulatory capital calculations to bank-generated inputs, offers greater transparency about risk-measurement and management practices that stand behind the inputs provided by banks and exactly how they are calculated. Supervisors, through their analysis of bank inputs to Basel II, will develop an even better assessment of institutions’ risk-measurement and risk-management practices. Furthermore, the added transparency in Pillar 3 disclosures is expected to give market participants a better understanding of an institution’s risks and its ability to manage them. Of course, we understand that the extent that internal inputs from bankers can be used in regulatory capital requirements is limited, for a variety of reasons. Today’s banks have highly customized models for running their businesses, which of course is entirely appropriate. But, as supervisors, we need to ensure adequacy and enforceability of our minimum regulatory requirements and maintain some consistency across banks. Naturally, as we seek to develop a common framework that will work for large complex banks globally, we recognize an inherent tension between our regulatory rules and internal bank practice. We are working to strike the right balance to achieve our goals without making Basel II purely a compliance exercise and creating undue burden. Need for Strong CapitalBasel II is intended to improve regulatory capital requirements, especially for large complex organizations, through greater risk sensitivity of regulatory capital and improved linkage to banks’ actual capital risk management. That is why we have chosen to adopt only the most advanced options for credit risk and operational risk minimum regulatory capital calculations in the United States, and to limit the requirement of Basel II to only a small number of banking institutions that fit the definition of large, complex, and internationally active. It is also important to recognize that Basel II is a complete capital framework consisting of three pillars. While much of the focus to date has been on the calculation of minimum regulatory capital in Pillar I, it should be remembered that Pillar 2, which provides for supervisory oversight of an institution’s overall capital adequacy, and Pillar 3, which requires enhanced transparency via disclosure, are also important parts of this new framework. Let me assure you that we at the Federal Reserve would not be pursuing Basel II if we thought that it would in any way undermine the strong capital base that U.S. institutions now have. As a central bank and a supervisor of banks, bank holdings companies, and financial holding companies, the Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that the Basel II framework delivers a strong and risk-sensitive base of capital for our largest and most complex banking institutions. That is why we supported moving ahead with the NPR, which includes modifications to address concerns identified in the fourth quantitative impact study, known as QIS4, and additional safeguards to ensure strong capital levels during the transition to Basel II. We will remain vigilant in monitoring and assessing Basel II’s impact on individual and aggregate minimum regulatory capital levels on an ongoing basis. As an extra degree of precaution, the U.S. banking agencies also decided to delay for a year the start of the parallel-run period. Starting with the parallel run, and both duringandafter the transition to Basel II, the Federal Reserve will rely upon ongoing, detailed analyses to evaluate the results of the new framework to ensure prudent levels of capital. Basel II represents a major shift in how we think about regulatory capital, especially as we will implement it in the United States. It is complex, reflecting the complexity of risk measurement and management for the largest, most complex banking institutions, and the banking institutions and the supervisors will need to have ongoing dialogue and work diligently to make sure it is working as we expect it to. But we believe it is a powerful approach to making regulatory capital more risk-sensitive. To be quite clear, the Federal Reserve believes that strong capital is critical to the health of our banking system, and we believe that Basel II will help us continue to ensure that U.S. banks maintain capital levels that serve as an appropriate cushion against their risk-taking. Some Aspects of U.S. ProposalsAs you know, the draft U.S. Basel II NPR is based on the 2004 framework issued by the Basel Committee and adheres to the main elements of that framework. But the U.S. agencies have exercised national discretion and tailored the Basel II framework to fit the U.S. banking system and U.S. financial environment, as have their counterparts in other countries. For example, as I have just mentioned, the U.S. agencies continue to propose that we implement only the advanced approaches of Basel II, namely the advanced internal-ratings-based approach (AIRB) for credit risk and the advanced measurement approaches (AMA) for operational risk. The U.S. agencies also included in the NPR a more gradual timetable and a more rigorous set of transition safeguards than those set forth in the 2004 Basel II framework. For instance, the U.S. agencies are proposing three years of transition floors below which minimum required capital under Basel II will not be permitted to fall, relative to the general risk-based capital rules. The first transition year would have a floor of 95 percent, the second 90 percent, and the third 85 percent. Part of the justification for implementing a more gradual transition timetable was the recognition that banks needed more time to prepare and we as supervisors needed more time to analyze transition information and ensure there would be no unintended consequences. As you are aware, the QIS4 exercise identified some areas requiring further clarification by regulators and additional work by bankers on risk models and databases. One of the key areas in the NPR influenced by these results pertains to banks’ estimates of loss given default (LGD). Many QIS4 participants had difficulty computing LGDs, which must reflect downturn conditions, in part because their data histories were not long enough to capture weaker parts of the economic cycle. As a result, the agencies have proposed a supervisory mapping function that can be used by those institutions unable to estimate appropriate LGDs. The mapping function allows an institution to take its average LGDs and “stress” them to generate an input to the capital calculation that conforms to the Basel II requirements and hence produces a more appropriate capital requirement. The Federal Reserve believes this supervisory mapping function is an important component of Basel II because the QIS4 results showed the difficulty some banks are likely to have in producing acceptable internal estimates of LGD that are sufficient for risk-based capital purposes. The bank will shift from use of the mapping function to its own internal estimates of LGDs when they become reliable. Another key area in the U.S. Basel II proposals relates to regulatory reporting and data requirements. The agencies expect to issue information about this aspect of our proposals soon, so I will offer only a few general thoughts here. As you know, risk managers need to be able to discern whether fluctuations in risk exposures and capital are due to external effects, such as changes in the economy and the point in the economic cycle where decisions are being made, or are more related to their individual business decisions, including product characteristics, customer mix and underwriting criteria. We will continue to expect bankers to anticipate the effects of such economic fluctuations and business decisions, not just analyze them after the fact. As we move toward greater risk sensitivity in our regulatory capital framework, and greater alignment with what banks are doing internally to manage risk, the way in which we as supervisors assess the adequacy of capital levels must consider the sources of these fluctuations more than ever before. This requires both bankers and supervisors to place a greater emphasis on high-quality data and sound analysis. For example, data should contain enhanced look-back capabilities, so that we and bankers will be able to assess fluctuations within an institution over time. Unfortunately, in our QIS4 analysis we were unable to decompose changes we observed into those attributable to the economic cycle and those attributable to a bank’s individual portfolio composition because the QIS4 data were collected at a single point in time. Even comparisons of QIS4 information to previously collected QIS3 data were limited because there was no direct link between the two data samples. As part of the move toward greater risk sensitivity, and noting that different institutions have different risk profiles, we expect to place increased emphasis on sound economic analysis that focuses on changes observed at a single institution over time, as well as more traditional analysis across institutions. Basel I ModificationsAt this point I would like to say just a few words about ongoing efforts to revise existing Basel I regulatory capital rules for non-Basel II institutions. We expect only one or two dozen banks to move to the U.S. version of Basel II in the near term, meaning that the vast majority of U.S. banks would be able to continue operating under Basel I, which will be amended through a separate rulemaking process. The Basel I framework has already been amended more than twenty-five times in response to changes in banking products and the banking environment and as a result of a better understanding of the risks of individual products and services. The U.S. agencies believe that now is another appropriate time to amend the Basel I rules. The U.S. agencies have issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking discussing possible changes to enhance the risk sensitivity of U.S. Basel I rules and to mitigate potential competitive distortions that might be created by introducing Basel II. We are now in the process of reviewing the comments and working on a draft notice of proposed rulemaking. We are mindful that amendments to Basel I should not be too complex or too burdensome for the large number of banks to which the revised rules will apply. With regard to both Basel II proposals and proposed Basel I amendments, we understand the need for full transparency. For that reason, we expect to have overlapping comment periods for both the Basel II NPR and the NPR for the proposed Basel I amendments. In fact, we want all interested parties to compare, contrast, and comment on the two proposals in overlapping timeframes. Accordingly, our proposals could change as a result of comments received or new information gathered by the U.S. agencies. Cross-Border Implementation of Basel IIAs I noted earlier, each country must implement Basel II as appropriate for the particular jurisdiction. To that end, the U.S. agencies are taking actions to ensure that implementation in the United States is conducted in a prudential manner and without generating competitive inequalities in our banking sector. We recognize that the differing approaches to Basel II that are being adopted by various countries may create challenges for banking organizations that operate in multiple jurisdictions. It is good to remember that cross-border banking has always raised specific challenges that supervisors from various countries have worked hard to address. Let me assure all bankers here that supervisors are aware that the process of change to new national versions of Basel II has heightened concerns about home-host issues. The Federal Reserve and other U.S. agencies have, for many years, worked with international counterparts to limit the difficulty and burden that have arisen as foreign banks have entered U.S. markets and as U.S. banks have established operations in other jurisdictions. The U.S. is working to complete its national standard setting process since we recognize that the lack of a final rule raises uncertainty for both banks and foreign supervisors about exactly what will be required. As you are aware, the Accord Implementation Group has been working for the past few years identifying issues arising from differences in national standards of the Basel II framework. All of the supervisory bodies participating in that effort are committed to making the transition to Basel II successful. We have heard from bankers that they are concerned about home-host issues. The U.S. banking agencies all encourage regular meetings between bankers and supervisors. These meetings provide a forum for bankers to make supervisors aware of implementation plans and progress at individual banks, and for supervisors to make bankers aware of current supervisory expectations. They also provide bankers opportunities to raise specific implementation issues. Of course, all Basel-member countries have their own rollout timelines and their own ways of addressing items that are left to national discretion under the Accord, which is entirely appropriate. We also want you to let us know any concerns you have about cross-border implementation. We would be grateful if you could be as specific as possible about your concerns, since that would greatly assist in the resolution of the issues. ConclusionIn conclusion, we are encouraged by the progress that international supervisors and banking organizations have made in preparing for the implementation of Basel II, and we look forward to the continuing dialogue which will help inform further refinements to our approach. The preparations for Basel II have already had a positive impact on banks’ efforts to update their risk-measurement and -management processes. As risk management continues to become more complex and quantitative, it will underscore the importance of further improvements in data architecture and information technology systems development. Of course, a lot of work remains as we move toward a final rulemaking in the United States. We actively seek comments on our proposed rule and encourage an open dialogue with the banking industry and other interested parties, since such communications will undoubtedly improve the proposal. Substantial benefits can be derived from the more risk-sensitive approach to regulatory capital and the continual improvement in risk measurement and management that are the central themes of Basel II.
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the National Association for Business Economics Professional Development Seminar for Journalists, Washington, D.C. Accurate and timely statistics are fundamental to sound financial and economic decisionmaking in both the private and public sectors. The quality of the economic statistics in the United States is among the best, if not the best, in the world, but that should not make us complacent. The U.S. economy is extremely dynamic, and improvements in our economic statistics should reflect--and measure--that ever-present change. Naturally, markets work best when people are well informed. Business people rely on economic statistics when they make and execute plans for production, investment, and hiring. Academics and researchers around the world also use economic statistics to evaluate alternative models and theories that further our understanding of how the economy and financial markets operate. Reliable and timely economic statistics are crucial to the formulation and evaluation of budgetary and monetary policies. Measuring U.S. gross domestic product (GDP), for example, is an enormously difficult task, but accurate measurements are extremely important for policymakers' decisions. An error of just 1/10 percentage point in projections of long-term real GDP growth, for instance, can result in an error of approximately $270 billion in a ten-year budget forecast. Monetary policy relies crucially upon sound statistics. I am sure that many of you have heard the analogy comparing a monetary policy maker to the driver of a car. The policymaker is faced with the decision of whether to tap on the accelerator or the brake to maintain the proper speed for the economy. In 2004, then-Governor Bernanke commented that, in part given the imperfect nature of economic statistics, "if making monetary policy is like driving a car, then the car is one that has an unreliable speedometer, a foggy windshield, and a tendency to respond unpredictably and with a delay to the accelerator or the brake."1Trying to fix that speedometer and to clear some of the fog from the windshield is what I want to focus on in my remarks today. Let me start with a couple of concrete examples of the importance of improving economic statistics for monetary policy. The first concerns the measurement of productivity, that is, the amount of output for each hour of labor. Productivity is a key element in the evaluation of how rapidly the economy can grow before raising concerns about inflationary pressures. Errors in measuring either output or hours of work--unless they are in both and just happen to exactly offset each other--will lead to distortions in the measurement of productivity. Such a distortion occurred in the mid-1990s. Work done at the time by the Board's staff suggested that measured productivity in some sectors of the economy was implausibly low.2As a consequence, Chairman Greenspan urged the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to pursue a more accommodative monetary policy than the published productivity statistics, at the time, might have suggested. The result was a period of high economic growth and low inflation. Prices are another set of data that are important for monetary policy. The primary responsibility of monetary policy is to ensure that we have a low and stable rate of inflation and the maximum sustainable rate of employment growth. Inaccurate price measurement could result in inaccurate forecasts of the direction of inflation and, thereby, lead to policy choices that are too tight or too accommodative. As a researcher, I find that timely and reliable information is critical for analyzing, measuring, and calibrating the ways in which the various parts of our complex economy operate. Although most people think of banks, money, and interest rates when they hear mention of the Federal Reserve, the central bank is also an important producer of economic statistics. Among other things, the Federal Reserve publishes data on interest rates, industrial production, and financial accounts for the nation--the flow of funds system. The Federal Reserve also has a strong commitment to promoting economic education and financial literacy. Recently we have begun using the latest Internet-based technology to make the data we publish more accessible and easier to understand. In particular, last month we added to our web site a newdata download application, which provides interactive access to Federal Reserve statistical data in a variety of electronic formats. We view this new feature as a key element in our mission of promoting financial education. A Cost-Benefit FrameworkAs an economist, I like to think about the issues surrounding the improvement of economic statistics using the framework of cost-benefit analysis. As applied to economic statistics, cost-benefit analysis essentially says that because the federal government has limited resources, it's important that the statistical agencies and the nation get the biggest bang possible for the buck. The goal is to allocate resources most efficiently and effectively, focusing on the data that are most important for private and public decisionmaking.3 Improving the cost-benefit tradeoff for economic statistics has several elements, and I will focus on two in my remarks. The common theme is that innovations in economic statistics must keep pace with innovations in the economy. One element to improving the cost-benefit tradeoff is removing legislative barriers that raise costs without providing benefits. Sometimes individual federal statistical agencies must separately collect information from the public on the same subject because the agencies are prohibited by law from sharing the information with each other. In 2002, the Congress enacted an important piece of legislation called the Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act (CIPSEA). As a member of the President's Council of Economic Advisers at the time, I helped lead the effort to urge passage of CIPSEA.4 CIPSEA tackled two important issues. First, the act strengthens the safeguards that protect the confidentiality of information provided by the public. The legislation applies clear and uniform statutory restrictions on the use of confidential statistical information. In particular, information about individuals or organizations acquired for exclusively statistical purposes and under a pledge of confidentiality can be used only for statistical purposes. The act replaced a patchwork of safeguards with consistent tough penalties for the unauthorized disclosure of confidential statistical information. Second, the act authorized the limited sharing of business data among the Bureau of the Census, the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), and the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) for statistical purposes. Allowing the agencies to share certain businesses data has improved the accuracy and reliability of economic statistics. In particular, enhanced data sharing among the agencies has improved the ability of the Census Bureau, the BEA, and the BLS to track rapidly changing trends in the U.S. economy. In addition, it has helped to reduce the duplicative paperwork burdens imposed on businesses. Even with the 2002 legislation, however, more can be done to realize the full benefits of data sharing. What I'm about to discuss is going to sound very arcane, but it is quite important for the improvement of economic statistics. So please bear with me. The Census Bureau conducts a large number of business surveys the results of which are key inputs into the estimation of the nation's GDP. The Census Bureau selects businesses to survey from a list of establishments called a "business register." The Census Bureau uses tax reports as a way of identifying establishments to include in its business register. It's very important to note that the Census Bureau is not rummaging through individual line items on company tax reports but rather is using the reports only to identify companies for inclusion in its surveys. Meanwhile, every month the BLS conducts a survey of establishments to find out about such things as employment and earnings. The BLS also uses a business register to decide which establishments to contact. However, the BLS register comes from reports filed by firms to state unemployment insurance offices. Here's the rub: In many instances establishments show up as being part of different industries in the two registers. As a result, industry analyses that use survey data on employment or prices from the BLS and survey data on shipments from the Census Bureau may well provide unreliable characterizations of changes in real output and productivity for particular industries. How important is this problem? Let me give you a few examples. A limited study compared the Census Bureau's and BLS's business registers for 1994 and found that 30 percent of the same single-establishment firms had been assigned different detailed industry codes. Staff work at the Federal Reserve Board found that, according to the BLS in 1997, 1.1 million workers were employed in the industry category known as Management of Companies, whereas the Census Bureau tallied employment at 2.6 million for that year!5In other industries, the differences in 1997, though not as large, still are dramatic. In the Oil and Gas Extraction industry, the employment counts differ by more than 30 percent. In the Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing industry, the BLS and Census counts differ by more than 12 percent, and so on. The reason the two business registers have not been harmonized is that current law prevents the BLS from having the same access as the Census Bureau to business identifiers on tax forms. Removing this barrier to sharing such data for statistical purposes would have significant payoffs. Sharing of business registers would help provide for more accurate measures of industry output, compensation, and productivity trends. It would permit the statistical agencies to keep abreast of our dynamic economy by producing statistical samples that are consistently adjusted for the entry and exit of new businesses in a timely manner, and it would allow the agencies to correct errors quickly and efficiently. This is especially important for fast-growing and innovative industries such as information technology. Such improvements would improve our ability to perceive emerging trends in the economy and more accurately forecast economic activity. The BEA, the statistical agency responsible for estimating GDP and the other components of the national income and product accounts, cannot currently access information from business taxes. Allowing the BEA to obtain certain aggregate numbers from business tax returns for statistical purposes would let the BEA significantly improve its estimates of the role of noncorporate businesses in the economy. This is important, in part, because many entrepreneurial start-up firms, which are a source of dynamism in the economy, begin their lives organized as sole proprietorships or partnerships--that is, not as corporations. Permitting the BEA to use limited business tax information for statistical purposes could appreciably improve the measurement of this vibrant part of the economy and, once again, improve our ability to spot new trends and forecast economic activity. Of course, in obtaining this information, the BEA would continue to be subject to the strict confidentiality requirements and disclosure penalties embodied in CIPSEA. Protecting data privacy is of utmost concern, and I would certainly not suggest changes that would compromise confidentiality. I now would like to turn to the second element I want to emphasize in improving the cost-benefit trade off for economic statistics, namely, that the statistical agencies hasten their move toward a more effective allocation of current resources. The usefulness of economic statistics--the benefit side of the cost-benefit tradeoff--is the key. The economy is constantly changing. In the past, there has been a tendency to persist in a full and expensive compilation of detailed data for heretofore cutting-edge industries far beyond the time at which those industries stopped being prominent in the economy. Consequently, statistical agencies need to be constantly assessing whether their data reflect the changes--that is, you don't want to be spending all your resources on collecting information about buggy whips in the age of the automobile. An innovative economy needs to have innovative statistics. This means that the statistical agencies need to be on the cutting edge in measuring the most dynamic parts of the economy. Typically, we think of dynamism in terms of those segments of the economy--usually industries and sometimes occupations--where output or employment are growing rapidly. But output and employment growth are not the only criteria for dynamism. Rapid increases in what economists call "intangible capital" are another characteristic of dynamic firms. This includes such things as expenditures on scientific research and development (R&D) as well as the breakthrough improvements to businesses processes that have made so many American companies successful. Dynamic firms are also characterized by the proliferation of new products that incorporate large amounts of R&D as well as by rapid improvements in the quality of products. These brisk gains in intangible capital and the quality of products are important because they are an important source of productivity growth. In other words, dynamic firms are the ones making the largest contributions to the nation's overall productivity growth, which is, at bottom, the fundamental source of rising standards of living. Accordingly, it is important that the economic statistical system do a good job of measuring not only output and employment growth but also intangibles, new cutting-edge products, and quality changes. Given the speed and short histories of many of these changes and innovations, however, it is particularly challenging to create statistics for new and dynamic parts of the economy that will be as reliable as those in the more traditional sectors. We need to be mindful of the difficult burden that the statistical agencies face in trying to maintain their very high standards for quality in such areas. Re-allocation of resources is rarely easy since it means cutting back on something. It is not appropriate for the Federal Reserve to get into the details of how the Congress or the statistical agencies should spend the taxpayers' money. However, as consumers of the data produced by the agencies, it is fitting for the Federal Reserve to indicate improvements to economic statistics that would enhance their usefulness for the analyses and forecasts upon which we base our decisionmaking. Indeed, in our role as data consumers, the agencies often seek our recommendations.6So, with that in mind, let me offer some specifics. I'll start with the way in which the Census Bureau classifies the outputs of the economy into particular categories for data collection purposes. The Census Bureau creates a list of so-called "product codes" that identify the types of goods and services that companies produce and sell. They group similar products into larger categories, but innovations in the economy have made those groupings woefully out of date. For the past several years, the Census Bureau has been developing more extensive product codes for services, and that effort is to be applauded. It is precisely the right response to a dynamic economy in which services have become much more important over time. In addition, improving product codes for communications equipment and other high-tech components of manufacturing also should be given high priority. To illustrate, consider the product category "broadcast, studio, and related equipment." The Census Bureau publishes sixteen subcategories of product data--items such as AM and FM radio transmitters, for which shipments in 2004 were valued at $103 million; or cable-TV subscriber equipment (decoders, switches, and so forth), with shipments worth $41 million; or studio transmission links (the hardware to bring a live reporter's feed back to the studio), for which shipments were worth $18 million.7 Now, contrast this with the product code called "data communications equipment." Unlike "broadcast, studio, and related equipment," there are no break-downs into subcategories. Such leading-edge products as large enterprise routers, gateways, bridges, and terminal servers are combined into a single category. In 2004, shipments from manufacturers of data communications equipment totaled more than $10-1/2 billion. The current system of product codes thus provides as much information about a well-established technology with shipments worth $18millionas a grouping of rapidly changing technology products with shipments worth more than $10-1/2billion. Similarly, the current system of product codes tell us as much about shipments of public pay telephone as it does about shipments of cellular system equipment--an industry that is more than 230 times larger ($43 million versus nearly $10 billion). The task of updating product lists is resource intensive and time consuming, but it is critical to gaining a more comprehensive understanding of developments in the most vibrant sectors of our economy. In addition to updating product codes to reflect change, another data challenge of our dynamic economy is to adjust the prices of high-tech equipment for improvements in quality. By adjusting for quality, I mean price statistics that recognize that a computer that costs $1,000 today is several times more powerful than a computer that cost $1,000 ten years ago. Accordingly, after taking account of the quality improvements, one can say that today's computers cost far less than computers cost ten years ago because you get much more for your money today. Government price data for computers do try to adjust for quality improvements, and the agencies must be applauded for undertaking such adjustments to keep pace with innovations in the economy. Many dynamic sectors, however, still await adjustments for quality improvements. As a result, the statistical measurement system is not fully capturing these critical technology improvements, which are a key source of productivity gains in the IT sector.8Many types of logic chips that are now common in everything from cell phones to DVD players have been improving rapidly. Their prices, however, have not been adjusted for quality and such chips are simply lumped in with "other semiconductors." Because semiconductor prices are often used as a gauge of technological progress--the faster the prices fall, the faster technology is improving--inadequate price measurement may be leading to inadequate assessment of the pace of technological progress. Another product for which improved price statistics could be particularly valuable is medical diagnostic equipment--the forgotten part of the high-tech equipment sector.9Government price statistics combine all medical diagnostic equipment (CT scanners, MRI scanners, and the like) into a single bundle. The pace of technological advances for these types of equipment has been breathtaking and reflects, in part, ongoing miniaturization afforded by the increased use of embedded computer-like components. Gathering additional information about high-tech medical equipment would not only round out our picture of high-tech equipment and components but also shed light on some, though certainly not all, of the questions that have been posed about the contribution of medical technology to health-care costs.10 Let me leave price measurement and conclude with another area where innovative statistics are valuable for enhancing our understanding of the economy. As I mentioned previously, intangible capital is an important characteristic of dynamic firms. Currently, however, the government publishes no comprehensive statistics on intangible capital. In their pathbreaking work, Federal Reserve economists Carol Corrado and Daniel Sichel, along with University of Maryland economist Charles Hulten, identify three broad types of intangible capital: computerized information--primarily software; innovative property--knowledge acquired through scientific R&D and nonscientific inventive and creative activities; and economic competencies--knowledge embedded in firm-specific human and structural resources.11 Later this year the BEA plans to issue a satellite account that will treat scientific R&D as investment. This is a significant and valuable step forward. Scientific R&D is measured by an important survey sponsored by the National Science Foundation and conducted by the Census Bureau. As Corrado, Sichel, and Hulten note, entrepreneurs and businesses also devote a broad array of "nonscientific" resources, including the development of entertainment and artistic originals, to develop new products and processes. Further work to investigate the feasibility of capturing such information at reasonable cost could produce benefits of increasing our understanding of productivity and growth trends.12 In applying a cost-benefit framework, I think that it would be valuable for the statistical agencies to continue to seek opportunities to partner with the private sector in order to boost efficiencies.13Perhaps the private sector could help collect data and even help to process and disseminate it. Retail chains have extensive electronic data systems on the details of consumer purchases--a wealth of data on consumer spending patterns that is now being analyzed for statistical purposes.14And high-tech firms have excellent information on inventories, sales, and prices, which could help to provide a better snapshot of innovations that are driving the most dynamic parts of the economy. To some extent, the statistical agencies, including the Federal Reserve, already use data--both public and proprietary--that are collected by the private sector. The key issue is finding more opportunities for private-public partnerships that are efficient, mutually beneficial, and do not compromise the high quality of federal statistics that we have come to expect. Summary and ConclusionAs I noted in my introduction, the U.S. enjoys among the best, if not the best, economic statistics in the world. My remarks have been focused on building on that excellent foundation using a cost-benefit framework. Innovations in economic statistics must keep pace with innovations in the economy. Barriers to useful sharing of information across statistical agencies should be removed to reduce costs and enhance benefits, but in no way should we compromise the high standards of privacy protection embodied in CIPSEA and other statutes. And allocating resources to better measure the most dynamic parts of the economy will help us get the most bang per buck in economic statistics by enhancing our ability to spot trends and improve forecasts of the direction of the economy. Policymakers, businesses, and average Americans are able to make better decisions with economic statistics that reflect the latest innovations in the economy. Achieving an innovation-sensitive statistical system can be fostered by removing legislative barriers that impose costs on the system with no (or little) benefit. Also, statistical agencies need to be nimble at recognizing and responding promptly to emerging trends in the structure of the economy. One way of achieving nimbleness is by getting feedback from users in government, in the academy and in business. The Federal Economic Statistics Advisory Committee and the BEA advisory committee are good examples of statistical agencies trying to increase the amount of feedback they receive. And organizations like the National Association for Business Economics can communicate more widely the importance of innovative statistics for a dynamic economy. Together we can try to fix the speedometer and clear the fog from the windshield to improve both public and private decisionmaking. Footnotes 1.Ben S. Bernanke (2004),"The Logic of Monetary Policy", speech delivered before the National Economists Club, December 2, 2004.Return to text 2.Carol Corrado and Lawrence Slifman (1999), "Decomposition of Productivity and Unit Costs,"American Economic Review, vol. 89 (May), pp. 328 -32.Return to text 3.Former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, in comments submitted to the Senate Banking Committee in 2002, said: "I am reluctant to support increased spending. In the case of certain economic statistics, however, the benefits are so large relative to cost that there should be little question as to its desirability" (Alan Greenspan, 2002, "Response to Written Questions," inFederal Reserve'sSecond Monetary Policy Report for 2002, hearing before the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, July 16, 107 Cong. (Washington: Government Printing Office), p. 47.Return to text 4.Randall S. Kroszner (2002), "Prepared Statement", inH.R. 5215, Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act of 2002, hearing before the Subcommittee on Government Efficiency, Financial Management and Intergovernmental Relations of the Committee on Government Reform, U.S. House of Representatives, Sept. 17, 107 Cong. (Washington: Government Printing Office), pp. 36-39.Return to text 5.Remarks of Carol Corrado in "Monetary Policy and Research at the Federal Reserve," in chap. 3 of Caryn Kuebler and Christopher Mackie, rapporteurs (forthcoming),Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a Workshop(Washington: National Academies Press).Return to text 6.For example, Lawrence Slifman (2002), "Bureau of Economic Analysis' Strategic Plan for 2001-2005: Comments" (636 KB PDF),Survey of Current Business(May), pp. 9-10.Return to text 7.U.S. Census Bureau (2005), "Communication Equipment: 2004" (293 KB PDF), Current Industrial Reports, MA334P(04)-1 (Washington: Census Bureau, August).Return to text 8.See Stephen D. Oliner and Daniel E. Sichel (2000). "The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s: Is Information Technology the Story?"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 14 (Fall), pp. 3-22; and Dale W. Jorgenson and Kevin J. Stiroh (2000), "Raising the Speed Limit: U.S. Economic Growth in the Information Age,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 125-211.Return to text 9.The discussion of medical equipment is based on Jack E. Triplett and Barry P. Bosworth (2004),Productivity in the U.S. Services Sector(Washington: Brookings Institution Press), pp. 304-20.Return to text 10.Refer, for example, to Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel (2003), "The Economic Value of Medical Research," in Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel, eds.,Measuring the Gains from Medical Research: An Economic Approach(Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 41-73.Return to text 11.Carol Corrado, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel (2005), "Measuring Capital and Technology: An Expanded Framework," in Carol Corrado, John Haltiwanger, and Daniel Sichel, eds.,Measuring Capital in the New Economy(Chicago: University of Chicago Press ), pp. 11-45.Return to text 12.Carol Corrado, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel (2006),"Intangible Capital and Economic Growth", NBER Working Paper Series 11948 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January).Return to text 13.Randall S. Kroszner (2002),"Bureau of Economic Analysis' Strategic Plan for 2001-2005: Comments" (636 KB PDF),Survey of Current Business(May), pp. 10-11Return to text 14.For example, Robert C. Feenstra and Matthew D. Shapiro, eds. (2003),Scanner Data and Price Indexes, Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 64 (Chicago : University of Chicago Press); and Erik Hurst and Mark Aguiar (2005),"Lifecycle Prices and Production", NBER Working Paper Series 11601 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September).Return to text Data Download
Governor Donald L. Kohn At the 2006 Payments Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak at this conference on investing in payments innovations.1We are living in a period of rapid innovation and technological change. The productivity of the U.S. economy accelerated in the mid-1990s and productivity has grown at an even more rapid pace this decade, as new technologies and increasingly sophisticated capital equipment have made it possible to produce and deliver goods and services more efficiently and cost effectively. Technological advancements have made the payments system a very dynamic part of the U.S. economic infrastructure. The increasing availability and convenience of payment alternatives, along with generally lower costs, have affected how people choose to pay for their purchases. Payments that a few years ago were being made in paper form--by checks or in cash--are today being made electronically. Indeed, a recent Federal Reserve study found that the number of retail electronic payments in the United States--such as credit cards, debit cards, or automated clearinghouse (ACH) payments--exceeded check payments for the first time in 2003. On at least one network, debit card payments have recently surpassed credit card payments, reflecting the rapid growth in debit card use that has been evident for a number of years. Given this changing environment, the Federal Reserve is planning to repeat its triennial retail payments survey next year to help quantify recent trends. The check-processing system is also evolving rapidly. The changing character of the payments business is challenging long-held assumptions about the payments infrastructure, as well as business relationships in the payments industry. My remarks today, which reflect my own thoughts and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board, will provide an overview of some of the recent changes in retail payments, the challenges of innovation, and the Federal Reserve’s role in the retail payments system. Changes in the Retail Payments SystemFor many reasons, I believe the pace of change we have experienced in the retail payments system over this past decade will continue or even accelerate. Much of the needed electronic infrastructure is in place today, both in homes and at businesses. As new generations grow up in the PC age and as older generations become increasingly computer literate, people are becoming more comfortable with using electronic technology in their daily lives. At the same time, the emergence of interstate banking has removed institutional barriers to the development of national electronic debit systems. Innovation in payments systems has also become a global phenomenon, and successful innovations outside the United States will likely influence developments here. These and other factors will likely spur further changes in our payments system in the years to come. New technologies are at the heart of this evolution. Laws, regulations, and rules have also been modified to remove barriers to innovation and experimentation in the payments system. These factors are driving the changes we see today. Consumers and businesses are increasingly using debit and credit cards instead of paper checks and cash at the point of sale, and technology has allowed the payments industry to develop new payment instruments to meet new business needs. For example, over the past decade, Internet-based payment options, such as PayPal, have grown rapidly and facilitated commerce on the web. In addition, closed-network, prepaid payment alternatives, which use chip-based technology, have been successful in collecting tolls on the nation’s highways. Likewise, the combination of new technologies and changes to the rules and regulations governing the ACH network has facilitated the use of this network for one-time, nonrecurring payments. In the past, the ACH was mainly used for recurring payments, such as payroll, mortgage, and utility payments. Today, consumer purchases at stores, over the telephone, or over the Internet can be completed using the ACH. Regulatory changes have also facilitated the use of the ACH to convert checks that consumers mail to businesses into electronic payments. These new uses of the ACH for one-time payments have driven continuing double-digit growth rates of ACH transaction volume. Legal and technological changes are also affecting how banks process checks. For example, the Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act, or Check 21, has facilitated the ability of banks to collect checks electronically. Depository institutions are using the authority granted under Check 21 to apply communications and imaging technologies to long-established check-collection processes. Ultimately, these changes will not only reduce check-processing and transportation costs but also diminish the importance of geography in check processing. However, banks seeking to implement a full end-to-end electronic check-processing environment must reengineer their back-office systems to integrate the more complex aspects of electronic check receipt into their core banking and risk-management systems. We are beginning to see evidence that depository institutions are starting this reengineering process. Generally, Check 21 volumes at the Reserve Banks are increasing rapidly, reflecting the efficiency gains that will inexorably lead to the electronic processing of almost all checks in the not-too-distant future. The greater use of electronic payments has not been uniform across all market segments. A closer look at payment trends reveals that consumers and businesses may have different perspectives on electronic payments. Businesses have been encouraging consumers to use electronic payment alternatives and have been the driving force behind the conversion of consumer checks into ACH payments. In turn, consumers, recognizing the convenience of electronic payments, have allowed their checks to be converted into ACH payments and have initiated an increasing number of their payments electronically. Businesses, on the other hand, have been more cautious about having their own checks converted into ACH payments or switching from paper to electronics. There are some obvious reasons for this behavior. First, businesses often have cash-management processes or legacy accounting systems in place that rely on paper checks. A payments conference hosted by the Federal Reserve in 2003 found that businesses face organizational and technical challenges in moving to electronics. For example, businesses may need to make significant investments in their back-office payment, billing, and accounting systems before they can use electronic payments more frequently. In addition, many businesses are reluctant, from a control perspective, to allow others to debit funds electronically from their accounts. If businesses can overcome these challenges, they should be able to make and receive a much larger portion of their payments electronically. At the same time, the financial incentives for businesses to make these changes will increase as the relative costs of electronic versus paper payments continue to shift in favor of electronic payments. Challenges of Payment System InnovationIn addition to low costs, successful innovations must satisfy at least three criteria: meet end-user needs, address network externalities, and provide sufficient controls over risks. To be successful, new payment instruments, and changes to existing instruments, must ultimately be more convenient and cost-effective for end users. Consumers and businesses are not likely to modify their payment behavior unless they are shown how they will benefit from a change. A Federal Reserve Board staff study conducted in 2002, “The Future of Retail Electronic Payments Systems,” highlighted this observation. The study was based on interviews with payment system innovators, many of whom had experience during the years of the Internet boom. The interviews emphasized that providers of payment services cannot assume that an innovative service will generate significant demand simply because it provides new and creative technical capabilities. Providing net benefits to one or more key participants in a transaction, while not materially affecting other participants negatively, appears to be the most important requirement for any innovation to be successful. The benefits may accrue to the providers of payment services in the form of lower costs, but they cannot adversely affect end users. This interaction between the preferences of payments users and the choices offered by payments providers determines which payment instruments will become successful in the long run. Successful electronic payment instruments, by their very nature, require large networks with wide reach. That is, the instruments require a critical mass of both payers and payees. Developing large networks and attaining critical mass, however, are often difficult tasks. Consumers may be cautious about using new payment methods and will have particular concerns about how providers protect users’ funds, security, and privacy. In complex payment systems, users may need a significant amount of time to become familiar with and learn to trust a new system. Moreover, potential providers of new payment services may be cautious about investing before they understand how many consumers would want to use a new payment instrument or system. As a result, innovators face the classic “chicken and egg” problem when assessing the network economics of establishing new systems. In the late 1990s, attempts to establish large-scale stored-value card networks in the United States faced these problems and were ultimately not successful. However, the likelihood of overcoming these network problems appears to be higher if a particular innovation meets a significant need that existing instruments do not. For example, the growth of Internet commerce created a new need for a payment method that would allow both consumers and businesses to make and receive relatively low-value electronic payments. While credit cards and debit cards have become the primary means of conducting these transactions, a segment of the market, specifically individuals and small businesses, could not readily accept card payments from others. This demand for an alternative way to make payments on the Internet eventually led to the development of new payment options, such as PayPal. The economics of networks and of scale may also interact and accelerate change in traditional systems. For example, the clearing system for paper checks includes a high-fixed-cost physical transportation system. Declines in check volumes generally, as well as declines in the collection of checks in paper form, will likely result in higher unit costs to collect paper checks, as the fixed costs of the network are spread over ever-decreasing volumes. The increases in unit costs, in turn, will cause banks to examine less expensive electronic processing alternatives, as check-collection intermediaries raise prices to recover their costs. As a result, market dynamics will continue to lead to the greater use of electronic check processing. Managing risk is also critical to successful payments innovation. These risks include fraud, operational, financial, and legal risks. Understanding the relationship between innovation and risk is particularly important in today’s evolving payment system because concerns about risk can inhibit the adoption of innovative payment products and services. Payment innovations can potentially reduce risk within a payment system, but in a complex environment, innovation may also shift risks or even increase them. Both the design of payments systems and the way participants use them can affect risk. For example, because a depository institution’s ACH and check systems may not be integrated, stop payments on checks may not work as intended, thereby increasing the risk that fraud may slip through the system. Innovations in the use of payment networks, such as the ACH, have led to greater complexity in roles and responsibilities. Both depository institutions and ACH operators are actively examining their risk-management capabilities to determine whether new risks resulting from innovation are being adequately managed. The use of Check 21 authority to process checks has altered operational, legal, and fraud risks, which has led depository institutions to reexamine and, as necessary, modify their processes and procedures to ensure that these risks continue to be well managed. In this time of transition in the payment system, both providers and users of payments systems will need to manage their risks more comprehensively. Traditionally, risk has been managed with a segmented, payment-specific approach. This made sense when payments systems were largely independent of one another. Today, the conversion of checks to electronic payments, as well as the technical integration of electronic networks and systems, requires providers and users to adopt a more strategic approach to managing products, infrastructure, and risk across traditional payments silos. They need to consider not only the financial and business cases for adopting a particular payments strategy but also how the risks associated with the strategy will be managed. The payments industry has been actively discussing this issue, and I expect that the industry will develop effective and comprehensive risk-management approaches. The Federal Reserve’s Role in the Payments SystemThe Federal Reserve will continue to play an important role in fostering a smoothly functioning payments system that is safe, efficient, and accessible. We also need to be flexible in carrying out our traditional functions within the payments system--as a provider of payment services, regulator, and catalyst for change--in this rapidly changing environment. In its role as service provider, the Federal Reserve will continue to promote the efficiency of the nation’s payments system. The Reserve Banks are now pricing their check services to encourage the greater use of electronic check products relative to paper check products. The Reserve Banks are also leaders in providing Check 21 services to encourage depository institutions to shift to the greater use of electronics in check processing and have been working collaboratively with the industry on electronic check standards and other technical issues. Most importantly, the Reserve Banks will continue to compete as payment services providers on a fair and equitable basis by pricing their services to recover their costs, including imputed profits and taxes, as required by the Monetary Control Act of 1980. In its role as a regulator, the Federal Reserve will need to be alert to the application of regulations in changing circumstances. In some cases, regulations may impede the ability of service providers and consumers to take advantage of new technology. For example, the Federal Reserve has clarified the application of Regulation E to the new ACH services I discussed earlier involving check conversions. In some other cases, payments innovations can expose consumers to new risks--risks with which they may not be familiar. In addressing these situations, the Federal Reserve must ensure that consumers have adequate protection and that regulations are consistent with the changing technological environment. Changing payment practices can also expose financial institutions to growing risks. Last year, for example, the Federal Reserve modified its Regulation CC to reallocate the liability for unauthorized, remotely created checks among depository institutions, shifting liability to institutions that are better positioned to influence and mitigate those risks. Finally, in its role as a catalyst for change, the Federal Reserve will work with the private sector to identify and, when appropriate, address barriers to payments system innovation. Last month, the Federal Reserve combined the duties of two of its internal committees that deal with payments issues. The newly expanded Payments System Policy Advisory Committee will provide the Federal Reserve with an overall view of strategic developments in both wholesale and retail payment systems. In addition to supporting sound policy development, the committee will sponsor research on payments issues that will help inform policymakers, the industry, and the public. We will also promote dialogue with a wide range of participants in the retail and wholesale payments systems to better understand a variety of perspectives on key issues. We will continue to sponsor different types of forums as an important part of our public outreach activities. ConclusionDespite the many challenges associated with the rapid evolution I have discussed today, the United States continues to enjoy a safe, efficient, and reliable payment system. The strength of its financial institutions, as well as its payments and settlement systems, are the bedrock of the country’s financial infrastructure. As innovations occur in the payments system, market forces will determine which of these innovations will ultimately best serve the needs of consumers and businesses. We, at the Federal Reserve, need to continue to address barriers to innovation to give the private sector scope to experiment with new payment services, while we continue to fulfill our responsibilities to foster a robust payments system that protects and benefits its participants. At this time of strategic change, I believe that dialogue among payments system participants and users will help all of us identify and address issues of innovation and risk in a balanced and thoughtful manner. This conference is a welcome and constructive element in this important dialogue. Footnotes 1.Edwin J. Lucio, Helena L. Tenenholtz, and Jeffrey S. H. Yeganeh, of the Board’s staff, contributed to this speech.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on May 10, 2006. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The summary description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's web site atwww.federalreserve.gov/fomc. Minutes of Federal Open Market Committee, May 10, 2006
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against United Bank, Parkersburg, West Virginia, a state member bank. United Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board’s Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires United Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $16,350, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on May 19,2006, announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Yolanda Salido, a former institution-affiliated party of Gulf Bank, Miami, Florida. Ms. Salido, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order due to her alleged participation in violations of law and breaches of fiduciary duty to the bank and its customers as a result of her alleged embezzlement of funds from the bank through a variety of schemes over several years. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced amendments to Appendix A of Regulation CC that reflect the previously-announced restructuring of the Federal Reserve's check processing operations in the Second and Third Districts. Appendix A provides a routing number guide that helps depository institutions determine the maximum permissible hold periods for most deposited checks. As of August 19, 2006, the East Rutherford office of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York no longer will process checks, and banks currently served by that office will be reassigned to the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. To ensure that the information in Appendix A accurately describes the structure of check processing operations within the Federal Reserve System, the final rule deletes the reference in Appendix A to the New York Reserve Bank's East Rutherford office and reassigns the routing numbers associated with the East Rutherford office to the Philadelphia Reserve Bank. To coincide with the effective date of the underlying check processing changes, the amendments are effective August 19, 2006. As a result of these changes, some checks deposited in the affected regions that currently are nonlocal checks will become local checks that are subject to shorter permissible hold periods. The Board's notice is attached. Attachment (35 KB PDF)
Statement by Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke:"I am very pleased the President hasannounced his intentto nominate Don Kohn as Federal Reserve Board Vice Chairman. Governor Kohn has made crucial contributions to the work of the Federal Reserve in his more than thirty years of service. He is highly respected by his colleagues for his sound judgment, keen analytical insight, and strong leadership. I look forward to working with him in this new role upon his confirmation by the Senate."
Statement by Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben S. Bernanke "I have greatly enjoyed the opportunity to work with Secretary Snow. I commend him for his years of dedicated and able service. Mr. Paulson is highly respected throughout the financial world. I look forward to a close working relationship with him in this new role."
Statement by Federal Reserve Board Governor Donald L. Kohn:“I am deeply honored that President Bush haschosen to nominate meas Vice Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. It has been a great privilege to serve with my colleagues on the Board, the Open Market Committee and the staff. I look forward to working closely with Chairman Bernanke and my other colleagues in my new role, if I am confirmed by the Senate.”
Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the Bank Administration Institute Treasury Management Conference, Orlando, Florida Thank you for the invitation to speak today. I know we have a mix of bankers in the audience from institutions of all sizes that are engaged in asset/liability and treasury management. So I am going to discuss some issues that are relevant to banks of various types. First, I am going to comment on the proposed guidance for commercial real estate and nontraditional mortgages. Then, I want to discuss changing risk exposures in market risk and the related capital regulations. Finally, I will focus on recent regulatory actions that relate to small bank holding company capital and trust preferred securities. Proposed Supervisory GuidanceIt is my understanding that many of you are aware of proposed supervisory guidance relating to commercial real estate and nontraditional mortgages. We have received many comments on both proposals--perhaps even from some of you. Naturally, bankers may be somewhat concerned about the effect that this proposed guidance could have on their business. But I think it is helpful to remember that the primary responsibility of regulators is to ensure that the United States has a safe and sound banking system. When we see possibly excessive risk-taking or inappropriate risk management or controls, we must act. While most U.S. banks operate in a safe and sound manner, we must always be vigilant for problems that may arise in the future. Commercial Real EstateFirst, I would like to underscore that the proposed commercial real estate (CRE) guidance focuses on "true" CRE loans. It does not concern commercial loans for which a bank looks to a borrower's cash flow as the source of repayment and accepts real estate collateral as a secondary source of repayment. Rather, it addresses bank lending on commercial real estate projects for which repayment is dependent on third-party rental income or the sale, refinancing, or permanent financing of the property. With "true" commercial real estate lending, repayment depends on the condition and performance of the real estate market. I would also like to mention up front that the proposed guidance is not intended to cap or restrict banks' participation in the commercial real estate sector, but rather to remind institutions that proper risk management and adequate capital are essential components of a sound CRE lending strategy. In fact, both of these components are already in place at many institutions. No element of the proposed guidance is intended to act as a "trigger" or "hard limit" signaling the need for an immediate cutback in or reversal of CRE lending; rather, the thresholds in the proposed guidance are intended as benchmarks identifying cases for further review. Supervisors focus on commercial real estate because that sector played a central role in the banking problems of the late 1980s and early 1990s and has historically been a highly volatile asset class. Past problems in the sector have generally come at times when the broader market encountered difficulties. Therefore, banks should not be surprised by the emphasis of the proposed guidance on the importance of portfolio risk management and concentrations. One reason supervisors are proposing CRE guidance at this point is that we are seeing high and rising concentrations of CRE loans relative to capital. For certain groups of banks, such as those with assets between $100 million and $1 billion, average CRE concentrations are about 300 percent of total capital. This is twice the concentration level of about 150 percent in the late 1980s and early 1990s for this same bank group, when we last went through the bottom of a CRE credit cycle. While banks' underwriting standards are generally stronger now than in the 1980s and 1990s, the agencies are proposing the guidance now to reinforce sound portfolio-management principles that a bank should have in place when pursuing a commercial real estate lending strategy. In addition to monitoring the performance of individual loans, bankers should also be monitoring the mix of property types and performance of their portfolio as a whole and the performance of local real estate markets in which they are lending. A bank targeting commercial real estate lending as a primary business activity needs to consider that the risk exposure arising from the performance of its total CRE loan portfolio--the concentration risk--depends on broader real estate market conditions. For example, if a bank has several borrowers with similar projects that encounter problems--such as longer absorption periods, higher marketing costs, or higher vacancy rates--weaknesses in the broader real estate market can have a cascading effect on the quality of the bank's CRE portfolio as real estate values erode. In evaluating the impact of their commercial real estate concentrations, bankers should also pay attention to geographic factors. A bank may lend successfully within a certain geographic area but may encounter problems when it begins to lend outside its market, or "footprint," for which it typically has better market intelligence. In recent years, supervisors have observed banks, in order to maintain a customer relationship, going beyond their established footprint and lending in real estate markets with which they have less experience. The challenge can be even greater when the borrower is also venturing into a new market. In prior CRE credit downturns, such practices have led to significant losses. Nontraditional Mortgage ProductsOver the past few years, the agencies have observed an increase in the number of residential mortgage loans that allow borrowers to defer repayment of principal and, sometimes, interest. These loans, often referred to as nontraditional mortgage loans, include "interest-only" (IO) mortgage loans, on which the borrower pays no loan principal for the first few years of the loan, and "payment-option" adjustable-rate mortgages (option ARMs), for which the borrower has flexible payment options--and which could also result in negative amortization. IOs and option ARMs are estimated to have accounted for almost one-third of all U.S. mortgage originations in 2005, compared with less than 10 percent in 2003. Despite their recent growth, however, these products, it is estimated, still account for less than 20 percent of aggregate domestic mortgages outstanding of $8 trillion. While the credit quality of residential mortgages generally remains strong, the Federal Reserve and other banking supervisors are concerned that current risk-management techniques may not fully address the level of risk inherent in nontraditional mortgages, a risk that would be heightened by a downturn in the housing market. Mortgages with some of the characteristics of nontraditional mortgage products have been available for many years; however, they have historically been offered to higher-income borrowers. More recently, they have been offered to a wider spectrum of consumers, including subprime borrowers, who may be less suited for these types of mortgages and may not fully recognize the embedded risks. These borrowers are more likely to experience an unmanageable payment shock during the life of the loan, meaning that they may be more likely to default on the loan. Further, nontraditional mortgage loans are becoming more prevalent in the subprime market at the same time risk tolerances in the capital markets have increased. Banks need to be prepared for the resulting impact on liquidity and pricing if and when risk spreads return to more "normal" levels and competition in the mortgage banking industry intensifies. Supervisors have also observed that lenders are increasingly combining nontraditional mortgage loans with weaker mitigating controls on credit exposures--for example, by accepting less documentation in evaluating an applicant's creditworthiness and not evaluating the borrower's ability to meet increasing monthly payments when amortization begins or when interest rates rise. These "risk layering" practices have become more and more prevalent in mortgage originations. Thus, while some banks may have used elements of the product structure successfully in the past, the easing of traditional underwriting controls and sales of products to subprime borrowers may have unforeseen effects on losses realized in these products. In view of these industry trends, the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies decided to issue the draft guidance on nontraditional mortgage products. The proposed guidance emphasizes that an institution's risk-management processes should allow it to adequately identify, measure, monitor, and control the risk associated with these products. It reminds lenders of the importance of assessing a borrower's ability to repay the loan including when amortization begins and interest rates rise. These products warrant strong risk-management standards as well as appropriate capital and loan-loss reserves. Further, bankers should consider the impact of prepayment penalties for ARMs. Lenders should provide borrowers with enough information to clearly understand, before choosing a product or payment option, the terms of and risks associated with these loans, particularly the extent to which monthly payments may rise and that negative amortization may increase the amount owed above the amount originally borrowed. Lenders should recognize that certain nontraditional mortgage loans are untested in a stressed environment; for instance, nontraditional mortgage loans to investors that rely on collateral values could be particularly affected by a housing price decline. Investors have represented an unusually large share of home purchases in the last two years. Past loan performance indicated that investors are more likely to default on a loan when housing prices decline, than owner occupants. Ongoing Efforts to Update and Improve the Market Risk AmendmentLet me now describe the changes that are occurring in market risk capital. While only banks with large trading books hold capital for market risk, the issues that the proposed changes are designed to address can be considered by treasurers, asset/liability managers, and traders to determine whether their risk management practices are keeping pace with the changing nature of risks. As you are no doubt aware, about a decade ago the U.S. banking agencies developed regulatory capital requirements specifically for market risk. These requirements, set forth in the Market Risk Amendment (MRA) to the Basel Capital Accord, were an attempt to keep up with the financial innovation that was occurring in the industry. The Basel MRA is only applied to banks with sizable market risk exposures. The U.S. banking agencies adopted the internal models approach to capturing the market risk arising from traded exposures. The internal models approach, which is the only one offered in the United States, is based on the widely used value-at-risk (VaR) methodology with a uniform ten-day holding period and a 99 percent confidence interval. At the time the Market Risk Amendment was adopted, the soundness standard set forth in the internal models approach worked well for the traded positions of a large number of banks. However, even then, banks and supervisors recognized that certain risks, such as fat tails and model risks, were not well captured in VaR models. Supervisors were led to impose a multiplier of 3 on internally modeled estimates of general market risk and a multiplier of 4 on internally modeled estimates of specific market risk that do not adequately capture event and default risk. Since adoption of the Market Risk Amendment, banks' trading activities have become more sophisticated and have given rise to a wider range of risks that are not easily captured in a VaR model. For example, more products related to credit risk, such as credit default swaps and tranches of collateralized debt obligations, are now included in the trading book. These products can give rise to default risks that are not captured well in models specifying a ten-day holding period and a 99 percent confidence interval, particularly if the bank has concentrations across various trading portfolios, such as bonds, credit derivatives, and other structured credit products. In addition, structured and exotic traded products may give rise to liquidity, correlation, concentration, and skew risks, which are difficult to capture adequately in a VaR model. The inability of VaR calculations to adequately measure the risks of certain traded positions may give rise to arbitrage opportunities between the banking book and the trading book because of the lower capital charge that may be afforded trading positions under a VaR approach that is not optimally risk sensitive. When the Basel Committee published its revised capital framework in June 2004,1the focus was on banks' credit and operational risks, not on their trading activities. However, in releasing the revised framework, the Basel Committee indicated that work should begin immediately on applying the revised framework to banks' exposures arising from trading activities. Thus was convened a working group that included representatives of both the Basel Committee and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), given the interest of the securities regulators in the same issues related to trading book risks. The Basel-IOSCO working group issued a consultative paper in April 2005 and subsequently received comments from banks, investment firms, industry associations, supervisory authorities, and other interested parties. The working group considered these comments in formulating revisions to the MRA, which were published in July 2005.2The revisions attempt to enhance the risk sensitivity of the capital charges for positions assigned to the trading book by promoting improved market risk methodologies. The U.S. banking agencies are in the process of developing a notice of proposed rulemaking to implement the Basel-IOSCO market risk revisions in this country. We expect that the current market risk revisions, like the current U.S. rules implementing the MRA for U.S. banking organizations, will apply only to banking organizations meeting the current threshold criteria for application of the market risk rules--that is, to those organizations having aggregate trading assets and liabilities, as reported on the Call Report, of (1) 10 percent or more of total assets or (2) $1 billion or more. These revised market risk amendments would be applied by banking organizations meeting either criterion, whether or not the organization is adopting the credit and operational portions of the Basel II framework. We expect that a small number of banking organizations will remain under the Basel I rules (as amended) but will also compute a market risk charge. Banking organizations that do not meet one of the criteria would not be subject to a market risk capital charge, regardless of whether they apply the Basel I or Basel II rules for credit and operational risk. This expectation is consistent with our view--since the inception of the market risk rules--that imposing the burden of calculating a market risk capital charge is not appropriate when market risk exposure does not meet the threshold criteria. These Pillar 1 revisions in the area of market risk are supplemented and supported by revisions in the areas of supervisory review (Pillar 2) and market discipline (Pillar 3), just as are the revisions for credit risk and operational risk. The Pillar 2 changes seek to strengthen firms' assessments of their internal capital adequacy in the area of market risk, taking into account the output of their VaR models, valuation adjustments, and stress tests. Internal capital assessments must factor in: illiquidity; concentrated positions; nonlinear and deep out-of-the-money products; events and jumps-to-default; and significant shifts in correlations. The Pillar 3 changes increase the robustness of trading book disclosures; specifically, firms must demonstrate how they combine their risk measurement approaches to arrive at an overall internal capital assessment. We expect to issue this NPR sometime this summer. Innovations in Capital InstrumentsNaturally, in determining capital adequacy ratios, supervisors focus not just on defining risk positions--the denominator--but also on defining the components of capital--the numerator. Over the years there have been a number of innovations in capital instruments; one particularly innovative area has been the structuring of preferred stock and hybrid securities for inclusion in tier 1 capital. The Federal Reserve refined its framework for the components of tier 1 capital in a final rule issued in March 2005. The final rule allows bank holding companies to continue to include trust preferred securities in tier 1 capital, much of which they invest in the common stock of their depository institution subsidiaries. However, the final rule also imposes stricter quantitative limits and qualitative standards on trust preferred securities and on other restricted core capital elements included in tier 1 capital. The Federal Reserve's goal in framing the final rule was to allow innovation and adaptation in capital funding for bank holding companies--much of which are aimed at increased cost effectiveness--while ensuring consistency with the Federal Reserve's focus on the quality and strength of institutions' capital bases. To this end, the final rule states that common stock and noncumulative perpetual preferred stock should make up no less than three quarters of a banking organization's tier 1 capital. We believe that the continued strength of the capital base of U.S. bank holding companies is a critical component of the safety and soundness of the industry we supervise. The Federal Reserve considers many factors when it evaluates eligible capital for BHCs, especially for innovative capital instruments. Thus, our decision to allow BHCs to continue to include trust preferred stock in tier 1 capital came only with stricter quantitative standards that apply to a range of non-common equity capital elements. In our view, the continued inclusion of trust preferred securities in tier 1 capital is merited because our experience has shown that this instrument can provide financial support to banking organizations if their financial condition deteriorates. Also, from a competitive point of view, poolings of trust preferred stock have enabled smaller BHCs to enter the capital markets for tier 1 capital, which larger BHCs have long been able to access. A recent innovation that banking organizations have been considering is a modified trust preferred security that continues to receive tier 1 capital treatment but is given increased equity credit from the rating agencies. Although the Federal Reserve is working with institutions on possible modifications to conventional trust preferred securities that meet this objective, our focus is on ensuring that the instruments continue to provide capital strength and do not give rise to supervisory problems. Our experience with conventional trust preferred securities has been largely positive, and we hope to maintain that track record with any modified trust preferred securities we eventually approve. Thus, while we are cognizant that a large volume of trust preferred securities will begin to become callable at the end of this year, making institutions especially keen to find a replacement security with higher rating-agency equity credit, we intend to move judiciously in approving modifications. As always, we will do our best to respond to the business needs of the banking organizations we supervise in a timely manner and to accommodate them to the extent possible within the bounds of our prudential framework. Changes to the Small Bank Holding Company Policy StatementFinally, knowing that many of you represent smaller banks, I want to highlight a recent change in the Federal Reserve's Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement. That statement was originally issued in 1980 to facilitate the transfer of ownership of small community-based banks in a safe and sound manner. It permits the formation and expansion of small bank holding companies (BHCs) that have debt levels higher than would be permitted for larger BHCs. The statement previously applied to those BHCs (qualifying small BHCs) that had pro forma consolidated assets of less than $150 million and met certain qualitative criteria. The Federal Reserve follows the general principle that bank holding companies should be a source of strength for their subsidiary banks. When a bank holding company incurs debt and relies on the earnings of its subsidiary banks to repay the debt, the probable effect on the financial condition of the holding company and its subsidiary bank or banks becomes a concern. The Federal Reserve believes that a high level of debt at the parent holding company level can impair the BHC's ability to provide financial assistance to its subsidiary bank or banks; in some cases, the servicing requirements on such debt may be a significant drain on the bank's resources. Nevertheless, the Federal Reserve recognizes the need for flexibility in the formation and expansion of small bank holding companies that have debt levels higher than would be permitted for larger bank holding companies. Notably, approval of the higher debt levels has been given on the condition that the small bank holding companies demonstrate the ability to service debt without straining the capital of their subsidiary banks and, further, that the companies restore their ability to serve as a source of strength for their subsidiary bank within a relatively short period. In September 2005, the Federal Reserve requested comment on proposed amendments to the rule. After reviewing the comments on the proposal, the Federal Reserve in February 2006 approved a final rule very similar to the proposal. The final rule raised the small BHC asset size threshold from $150 million to $500 million for determining whether a small BHC would be eligible for the Policy Statement and exempt from the Capital Guidelines. The Federal Reserve also adopted several modifications to the qualitative criteria under which a BHC not exceeding the asset size threshold nevertheless would be ineligible for application of the Policy Statement and would be subject to the Capital Guidelines. These modifications were intended to ensure that factors related to safety and soundness, not just to size, are also taken into account. The final rule also clarified that subordinated debt associated with issuances of trust preferred securities generally would be considered debt for most purposes under the Policy Statement, but provided a five-year transition period for subordinated debt issued before the date of the proposed rule. The new threshold and amended qualitative criteria are designed to reflect changes in the industry since the Policy Statement was first issued in 1980. With respect to the amended qualitative criteria, the final rule excludes from Policy Statement eligibility any small BHC that is engaged in significant nonbanking activities; is engaged in significant off-balance sheet activities, including securitizations or assets under management; or has a material amount of debt registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission or equity securities outstanding. Federal Reserve staff expect that relatively few small BHCs will be excluded under these criteria. Whereas the treatment of subordinated debt associated with trust preferred securities was not previously defined, the final rule clarifies that such subordinated debt is considered debt for most purposes under the Policy Statement. It provides for a five-year transition period, however, to give qualifying small BHCs sufficient time to conform their debt structures. The rule also allows small BHCs to refinance existing issuances of trust preferred securities without losing the exempt status of the related subordinated debt during the transition period, so long as the amount of the BHC's subordinated debt does not increase in the aggregate. Finally, the notice informs the public that the Federal Reserve expects to review the asset threshold at least once every five years to determine whether further adjustments might be appropriate. ConclusionThe Federal Reserve believes that ensuring strong capital levels and good risk management at U.S. banking organizations is critical to the health of our banking and financial system. Our regulatory and supervisory efforts support this broad objective. That is why we provide guidance around emerging risk issues, such as the current proposals for commercial real estate and nontraditional mortgages. We also work to make sure innovations in financial instruments are encouraged and used in appropriate risk-management frameworks, and we periodically will change regulatory policy to support sound risk management. At the end of the day, it is our job as bank supervisor and central bank to ensure that banks are operating in a safe and sound manner, and that financial stability is maintained. Thank you. Footnotes 1.Basel Committee on Banking Supervision,International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards: A Revised Framework(Basel, June 2004), available online atwww.bis.org/publ/bcbs107.htm.Return to text 2.See Bank for International Settlements, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision,The Application of Basel II to Trading Activities and the Treatment of Double Default Effects(July 2005),www.bis.org.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur. Huntington Bancshares Incorporated, Columbus, OhioWritten Agreement dated February 28, 2005Terminated May 10, 2006
Governor Donald L. Kohn At the Conference on New Directions for Understanding Systemic Risk, New York, New York I am very pleased to participate in a conference seeking new directions for understanding systemic risk. Let me begin by thanking the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for hosting the conference and for organizing, along with the National Academy of Sciences, an impressive program that will facilitate interdisciplinary discussion on a topic of intense interest to central bankers.1 The Evolution of Institutions and MarketsMaintaining the stability of the financial system and containing the systemic risk that may arise in financial markets has been central to the Federal Reserve’s mission for as long as there has been a Federal Reserve. Indeed, Congress passed the Federal Reserve Act in 1913 to provide the nation with a safer and more stable monetary and financial system. Thus, the focus of this conference--understanding systemic risk--is not new, though some of the names have changed. At the beginning of the twentieth century, banks were virtually the only financial intermediary available. Periodically, these highly leveraged institutions lost the confidence of depositors, fell into crisis, and reduced their lending to creditworthy borrowers, thereby accentuating economic downturns. The tools that were developed to prevent and to manage financial crises--lender-of-last-resort facilities, supervision and regulation aimed at bank safety and soundness, deposit insurance, and the provision of payment system services--were geared toward a bank-denominated system. Today, multiple avenues of financial intermediation are available, and the financial system has become much more market-dominated. This evolution of financial institutions and markets probably has made the financial system more resilient. Financial innovations, such as the development of derivatives markets and the securitization of assets, have enabled intermediaries to diversify and manage risk better. Moreover, as markets have become more important, ultimate borrowers have acquired more avenues to tailor their risk profiles and are less dependent on particular lenders, and savers have become better able to diversify and to manage their portfolios. Consequently, the economy has become less vulnerable to problems at individual types of institutions. However, the evolution of financial institutions and markets has not removed the underlying risks and uncertainty associated with financial transactions. Financial institutions and other market participants must still make decisions and take actions with incomplete knowledge about the condition of their counterparties. Actual (or perceived) information asymmetries can increase enormously during times of heightened market volatility or economic stress. In addition, in such circumstances, investors may become very uncertain about the behavior of other market participants and the resulting path of asset prices and extent of market liquidity, creating a situation in which each market participant waits to see how other investors will react. When this happens, the typical correlations derived from historical experience tend to break down, liquidity may be more costly to obtain or unavailable, normal risk management strategies may no longer be useful, questions about counterparty solvency escalate, and the result can be a financial crisis. In times of such high uncertainty, it is human nature to act very cautiously. Investors uncertain about what shocks other market participants have experienced and unsure about what those other market participants are likely to do tend to withdraw from potentially risky financial activities and to hold safer and more liquid assets, such as government securities. As a consequence, creditworthy borrowers may not be funded, just like in the old days when banks fell into crisis. These disruptions in the flow of credit in turn can have real effects on the macroeconomy. Moreover, these real effects can create feedback effects on market participants that exacerbate the original financial crisis. These motivations and reactions persist in the twenty-first century, and thus so does the possibility of financial crisis, even if the key propagation mechanisms for crisis in our financial system may have changed. The shift from a bank-dominated financial system to a combination of centralized and decentralized markets has increased the importance of market liquidity for determining asset prices and for managing portfolios. The increased importance of markets also has created new and complex interactions among participants in the financial system and heightened the reliance on key market utilities. We are in the process of adapting the tools that were developed to prevent and manage financial crises in a bank-dominated financial system to prevent and manage financial crises in the more market-dominated financial system. This is an ongoing process that is very much informed by our experience with past financial crises. In that regard, the 1987 stock market crash and the liquidity crisis in the fall of 1998 are likely to be more typical of modern financial events. In the rest of my talk, I will discuss the following aspects of these two events: their common elements, the Federal Reserve’s response, lessons learned for crisis management, and implications for crisis prevention in the more market-driven financial system. Two Modern Financial CrisesThe 1987 stock market crash may have been the first modern financial crisis in the United States. Unlike previous financial crises, the 1987 stock market decline was not associated with a deposit run or any other problem in the banking sector. Instead, the 20 percent decline on October 19, 1987, in the Standard & Poor’s 500 index--the largest single-day decline since the Great Depression--was driven by investor decisions to reduce equity exposures and by the resulting chaotic trading in the stock markets. Indeed, trading was so chaotic that stock prices were difficult to determine. The liquidity crisis in the fall of 1998 was triggered by the Russian debt default in August and then aggravated by the problems at the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management. During the 1998 crisis, risk spreads widened sharply, stock prices fell, and liquidity became so highly valued that the spread between on- and off-the-run Treasury securities widened substantially. Of even more concern, the capital markets virtually seized up as market participants retreated from risk taking, and, for a time, credit was simply unavailable to many private borrowers at any price. The events of 1987 and 1998 had several common elements. First, they began with sharp movements in asset prices. Second, these price movements were exacerbated by market participants trying to protect themselves--with portfolio insurance in 1987 and by closing out positions in 1998. Third, market participants became highly uncertain about the dynamics of the market, the “true” value of assets, and the future movement of asset prices. As a consequence, with their standard risk-management systems seemingly inapplicable, they pulled back from making markets and taking positions and further exacerbated the price action. Fourth, the large and rapid price movements called into doubt the creditworthiness of counterparties, which could no longer be judged by now obsolete financial statements; credit decisions were further complicated by uncertainty about the value of collateral. In turn, the defensive behavior of market participants escalated and reinforced adverse market dynamics. Finally, the decline in asset prices reduced wealth and raised the cost of capital, which seemed likely to reduce both consumption and investment. Naturally, the Federal Reserve’s response to these crises also had several common elements. We publicly acknowledged that a crisis was under way, and through this recognition and our follow-up actions, we sought to reassure participants that we were doing what we could to limit the possible systemic effects on the economy. The hope was that such reassurance might encourage a return to risk-taking. Accordingly, open market operations were directed toward an easing of reserve-market conditions and were guided by day-to-day developments. For example, in October 1987, open market operations accommodated substantially enlarged desires for excess reserves and a large increase in required reserves associated with a sharp rise in transactions deposits. We monitored the flow of credit through the financial system, and we pointed out to lenders their collective interest in avoiding a credit gridlock that would only tend to accentuate asset price movements. We worked with other agencies to identify weak points in the market and impediments to its functioning. We also eased the stance of monetary policy to counteract the systemic consequences of the ongoing financial crisis. Principles to be Drawn From Recent Financial CrisesWhat are the principles for Federal Reserve actions that we can draw from these experiences, as well as from other recent, but less severe periods of financial turmoil? First and foremost, the management of financial crisis is easier, and the consequences are less severe, if the economy is in healthy condition. Partly as a consequence in neither 1987 nor in 1998 did the crisis lead to a recession. As monetary policy makers, we improve the odds of financial stability over time when we focus on the fundamentals of maintaining price stability and sustainable growth. When the Federal Reserve conducts monetary policy so as to create low and stable inflation and to firmly anchor expectations that inflation will be contained, it best positions itself to forcefully offset the ill effects of a financial crisis without generating deep concerns that such actions will result in sharply higher inflation. Some argue that economic stability can set the stage for financial instability by breeding complacency about risk. Perhaps, but surely the benefits of macroeconomic stability far outweigh its possible costs. Another principle is that a healthy banking system works hand-in-hand with a healthy economy to substantially mitigate the consequences of financial crisis. Banks continue to play critical roles in the market-dominated system, including financing market participant’s holdings of securities and clearing and settling their trades. Healthy banks can be bulwarks against the propagation of financial turmoil; in contrast, questions about the health of banks would raise additional concerns during the course of a crisis. A third principle is that the actions taken to prevent a crisis should not raise the odds of creating more problems in the future. In particular, the problem of moral hazard is a significant concern. If market participants begin to rely too much on regulators and central bankers to manage possible future crises, they may act in a way that has the effect of raising the risk of a financial crisis. For example, they may fail to engage in adequate due diligence when extending credit to other market participants or to maintain adequate capital for the risks they undertake. And they might come to believe that the government possesses more tools and resources than are actually available to shield them from the consequences of poor risk management. The central bank can draw from a menu of actions that involve varying degrees of moral hazard. Those actions range from loans to individual institutions that otherwise would not have access to credit, to moral suasion, to open market operations, which allow the markets to distribute credit and should not cause distortions in private-sector decisionmaking. Heightened uncertainty is the key characteristic of episodes of financial instability. The central bank may not have any more information than market participants do; in economic models based on such uncertainties, it is the central bank’s willingness to act in the face of uncertainty that differentiates it from other market participants and gives it a positive role to play during financial crises. Its willingness to act ameliorates the negative effects of the uncertainty of other market participants about the solvency of counterparties and the status of markets. Still, the more information the central bank has, the easier it is for it to choose the best course of action. Policymakers want to choose the path with the lowest moral-hazard consequences to leave market participants with incentives to manage risk appropriately. But policymakers are in a difficult position in a crisis. The costs of not acting forcefully enough will be immediate and obvious--additional disruption to the financial markets and the economy. The costs of acting too forcefully--of interfering unnecessarily in markets and creating moral hazard--manifest themselves over a longer period and may never be traceable to a particular policy choice. The natural inclination to take more intrusive actions that minimize the risks of immediate disruption is probably exacerbated by ignorance and uncertainty; the less you know, the easier it is to imagine bad outcomes and the more reliant you may be on people in the market whose self-interest may well color the information they are giving you. In a bank-dominated financial system, the critical information would have come from fellow bank regulators with whom we had been working or from the institutions we collectively had been examining for some time. In a world of financial institutions with a presence in many lines of business crossing national boundaries, obtaining such information, developing cogent analyses, and deciding on a course of action in a crisis requires widespread cooperation among many disparate agencies. Moreover, I should note that, even for possible bank-centric crises, the financial landscape in the United States has changed. The large bank holding companies are involved in a myriad of businesses that cross a multitude of regulatory boundaries. In addition, any future financial crisis that does involve a large, complex banking organization might need to grapple with the “systemic risk exception” that was passed by the Congress in 1993, which requires the boards of the Federal Reserve and of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the President to act jointly. Establishing the needed coordination across many agencies could potentially create delays during a time when quick action is needed. Moreover, different regulators can have different supervisory philosophies. These potential impediments to a timely response suggest that regulators need to be discussing the possibilities associated with financial crisis on an ongoing basis and long before an actual event. These discussions should encompass the possible actions that might be needed and the information that should be on hand to shape those actions in the public interest. Reducing the Odds on Financial CrisesThis brings me to my final and most important principle--an ounce of prevention is worth many pounds of cure. As we’ve seen in recent years, macroeconomic stability has not forestalled large and unexpected movements in asset prices. Shocks occur, or reality catches up to unreasonable expectations, and market prices adjust, sometimes very substantially and suddenly. And although the financial system has become more resilient to such unanticipated developments, it is still subject to bouts of increased uncertainty that could build on themselves to disrupt the normal functioning of markets and send asset prices further away from fundamentals, with potentially adverse implications for the economy. Drawing on our experiences, the Federal Reserve has been working with other regulatory agencies and the private sector both here and abroad to strengthen the financial system in order to lower the odds that a sharp change in prices or questions about a major market participant would lead to a systemic financial crisis. Our collective efforts have been in three areas: enhancing market discipline; encouraging sound risk management; and strengthening clearing and settlement systems. Market discipline through vigilance among private parties is always to be preferred to regulatory dictates as the prime source of constraint on possible crisis-causing behavior. It lessens the odds of a financial crisis and any potential moral hazard that might be created by governmental actions taken during periods of financial market turmoil. Reliance on market discipline becomes even more of an imperative when key market participants are subject to widely varying degrees and types of regulation from different regulators. For market discipline to be effective, counterparties must have a clear understanding of each others’ risk profile. Such transparency can be promoted through sound policies regarding accounting and, where necessary and appropriate, public disclosure. However, a meaningful understanding of risk profiles often requires information that market participants regard as proprietary. Confidentiality agreements between counterparties may be necessary to make them comfortable sharing such information. Counterparties that cannot obtain sufficient information should limit more strictly the amount of credit they supply through, for example, requiring higher margins. In a market-based system, sound risk management byallmarket participants is essential to protect against the risk that a low-probability--or “tail”--event could cause a financial crisis. Such practices enhance financial stability without increasing moral hazard. Indeed, sound risk management by all market participants would reduce moral hazard. Market participants familiar with the risk metrics, the stress-test methodologies (and the associated market scenarios), the models, and other analytics used by their counterparties’ risk managers would be more likely to continue to provide access to credit during periods of systemic and institutional stress. Of course, the more that privately provided credit continues to flow in such circumstances, the lower the odds on a crisis and on the need for government intervention. It is a tall order to “plan” for the unexpected, improbable, and unknowable nature of future financial market crisis, but actions by the authorities, such as supporting risk-management policy groups and promoting stress-testing, should help. For example, bringing together practitioners can potentially improve both the markets’ and the central bank’s understanding of how leverage, liquidity, and concentration are interrelated. In addition, risk-management policy groups can potentially lead to improvements in the reporting of risk information to counterparties and allow for the transfer of best practices across market participants with respect to valuation, exposure measurement, limit setting, and internal checks and balances. Indeed, a lesson drawn by the President’s Working Group from the 1998 crisis was that a lack of basic risk management, and the resulting ability of risk managers to avoid counterparty discipline, was an important factor that enabled key market participants to become so large that their troubles could disrupt entire markets. Stress tests employ either historical data from asset price distributions or hypothetical scenarios that would provide insights into the downside financial risks associated with investments and associated hedging strategies. Focusing market participants on the structure of stress, and thus their risks beyond the range of recent historical experience, might assist in limiting the affects of a highly infrequent but significantly costly tail event. The regulatory capital framework proposed in Basel II would require the largest internationally active banking organizations to enhance measurement and management of their risks, including credit risk and operational risk. It would also require these entities to have rigorous processes for assessing overall capital adequacy in relation to their total risk profile and to publicly disclose information on their risk profile. Because such actions would likely provide market participants with a better sense of how others might act during a crisis, these actions would likely help mitigate the adverse consequences created by financial market turmoil. Risk cannot be managed if participants are uncertain about their exposures to counterparty credit risk and to changes in prices. It is important for trades to be cleared and settled when expected at the agreed upon price with the anticipated counterparties. As a result, the central bank must promote robust payment and settlement systems. Sound risk-management practices and stress testing by operators of the settlement infrastructure are critically important in this domain. If payment and settlement systems have adequate collateral and liquidity to settle during turbulent periods, they reduce the threat of contagion across institutions and markets. To this end, the Federal Reserve actively participates in international groups, such as the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, that identify and promulgate best practices. Counterparty discipline, sound risk management, and strong and resilient clearing and settlement are all in the interest of private parties. Nonetheless, government has a role to play, especially when it senses moral hazard is weakening market discipline on risk taking and leaving the broader interests of society inadequately protected. Regulators may need to insist on minimal capital levels and on actions to strengthen private systems. In addition, they may need to work with disparate private parties and help market competitors take collective actions to solve problems that such competitors might otherwise find difficult to solve by themselves. For example, the Federal Reserve Board recently endorsed the chartering of a dormant bank, referred to as NewBank, which would be available for activation to clear and settle U.S. government securities. Such activation would occur if an existing clearing bank could not operate and no well-qualified bank stepped forward to purchase its clearing business. Similarly, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and other regulatory bodies have met with major dealers to strengthen the clearing and settlement infrastructure for the credit derivatives markets. ConclusionMaintaining the stability of the financial system and containing the systemic risk that may arise in financial markets is central to the Federal Reserve’s mission. Recent financial crises within the United States have been well contained. However, with the rapid evolution of the financial system, there is a real possibility that markets are evolving faster than the efforts by market participants to better control risk and to improve the payment and settlement infrastructure. New markets have been tested to some extent--by the stock market crash, by the widening of spreads in 2001 and 2002, and by the problems of the auto companies and their suppliers. So far, despite some glitches, markets have adapted and changed when deficiencies became obvious. No doubt, markets and institutions have become more flexible and resilient. But perhaps we have also been lucky; prudence dictates that we identify points of weakness and strengthen them. And, in a rapidly evolving financial system, we need to think creatively about where the weakness might be and how disturbances might be transmitted and amplified. Thus, this conference has the potential to contribute materially to our ability to continue to fulfill our most basic mandate: To foster an efficient, stable financial system in support of our nation’s economic welfare. Footnotes 1.The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of other members of the Board of Governors or the Federal Reserve more generally.Diana Hancockand Wayne Passmore, of the Board’s staff, contributed to these remarks.Return to text
Patrick M. Parkinson, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics Before the Subcommittee on Securities and Investment, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Chairman Hagel, Senator Dodd, and members of the Subcommittee: Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the role of hedge funds in the capital markets. In my remarks today, I will discuss the increasing importance of that role, the public policy issues associated with it, and what the Federal Reserve has been doing to address concerns about potential systemic risks from hedge funds’ activities. Role of Hedge Funds in the Capital MarketsThe role that hedge funds are playing in capital markets cannot be quantified with any precision. A fundamental problem is that the definition of a hedge fund is imprecise, and distinctions between hedge funds and other types of funds are increasingly arbitrary. Hedge funds often are characterized as unregulated private funds that can take on significant leverage and employ complex trading strategies using derivatives or other new financial instruments. Private equity funds are usually not considered hedge funds, yet they are typically unregulated and often leverage significantly the companies in which they invest. Likewise, traditional asset managers more and more are using derivatives or are investing in structured securities that allow them to take on leverage or establish short positions. Although several databases on hedge funds are compiled by private vendors, they cover only the hedge funds that voluntarily provide data.1Consequently, the data are not comprehensive. Furthermore, because the funds that choose to report may not be representative of the total population of hedge funds, generalizations based on these databases may be misleading. Data collected by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) from registered advisers to hedge funds are not comprehensive either. The primary purpose of registration is to protect investors by discouraging hedge fund fraud. The SEC does not require an adviser to a hedge fund, regardless of how large it is, to register if the fund does not permit investors to redeem their interests within two years of purchasing them.2While registration of advisers of such funds may well be unnecessary to discourage fraud, the exclusion from the database of funds with long lock-up periods makes the data less useful for quantifying the role that hedge funds are playing in the capital markets. Even if a fund is included in a private database or its adviser is registered with the SEC, the information available is quite limited. The only quantitative information that the SEC currently collects is total assets under management. Private databases typically provide assets under management as well as some limited information on how the assets are allocated among investment strategies, but they do not provide detailed balance sheets. Some databases provide information on funds’ use of leverage, but their definition of leverage is often unclear. As hedge funds and other market participants increasingly use financial products such as derivatives and securitized assets that embed leverage, conventional measures of leverage have become much less useful. More meaningful economic measures of leverage are complex and highly sensitive to assumptions about the liquidity of the markets in which financial instruments can be sold or hedged.3 Although the role of hedge funds in the capital markets cannot be precisely quantified, the growing importance of that role is clear. Total assets under management are usually reported to exceed $1 trillion.4Furthermore, hedge funds can leverage those assets through borrowing money and through their use of derivatives, short positions, and structured securities. Their market impact is further magnified by the extremely active trading of some hedge funds. The trading volumes of these funds reportedly account for significant shares of total trading volumes in some segments of fixed income, equity, and derivatives markets.5 In various capital markets, hedge funds clearly are increasingly consequential as providers of liquidity and absorbers of risk. For example, a study of the markets in U.S. dollar interest rate options indicated that participants viewed hedge funds as a significant stabilizing force. In particular, when the options and other fixed income markets were under stress in the summer of 2003, the willingness of hedge funds to sell options following a spike in options prices helped restore market liquidity and limit losses to derivatives dealers and investors in fixed-rate mortgages and mortgage-backed securities.6Hedge funds reportedly are significant buyers of the riskier equity and subordinated tranches of collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) and of asset-backed securities, including securities backed by nonconforming residential mortgages.7 At the same time, however, the growing role of hedge funds has given rise to public policy concerns. These include concerns about whether hedge fund investors can protect themselves adequately from the risks associated with such investments, whether hedge fund leverage is being constrained effectively, and what potential risks the funds pose to the financial system if their leverage becomes excessive. Investor ProtectionHedge funds and their investment advisers historically were exempt from most provisions of the federal securities laws.8Those laws effectively allow only institutions and relatively wealthy individuals to invest in hedge funds. Such investors arguably are in a position to protect themselves from the risks associated with hedge funds.9However, in recent years hedge funds reportedly have been marketed increasingly to a less wealthy clientele. Furthermore, pension funds, many of whose beneficiaries are not wealthy, have increased investments in hedge funds. Concerns about the potential direct and indirect exposures of less wealthy investors from hedge fund investments and hedge fund fraud contributed to the SEC’s decision in December 2004 to require many advisers to hedge funds that are offered to U.S. investors to register with the commission. The SEC believes that the examination of registered hedge fund advisers will deter fraud. But fraud is very difficult to uncover, even through on-site examinations.10Therefore, it is critical that investors do not view the SEC registration of advisers as an effective substitute for their own due diligence in selecting funds and their own monitoring of hedge fund performance. Most institutional investors probably understand this well. In a survey several years ago of U.S. endowments and foundations, 70 percent of the respondents said that a hedge fund adviser’s registration or lack of registration with the SEC had no effect on their decision about whether or not to invest because the institutions conducted their own due diligence.11 In the case of pension funds, sponsors and pension fund regulators should ensure that pension funds conduct appropriate due diligence with respect to all their investments, not just their investments in hedge funds. Pension funds and other institutional investors seem to have a growing appetite for a variety of alternatives to holding stocks and bonds, including real estate, private equity and commodities, and investments in hedge funds are only one means of gaining exposures to those alternative assets. The registration of hedge fund advisers simply cannot protect pension fund beneficiaries from the failures of plan sponsors to carry out their fiduciary responsibilities. As for individual investors, the income and wealth criteria that define eligible investors in hedge funds unavoidably are a crude test for sophistication.12If individuals with relatively little wealth increasingly become the victims of hedge fund fraud, it may become appropriate to tighten the criteria for an individual to be considered an eligible investor. Excessive Leverage and Systemic RiskThe near failure of the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) in September 1998 illustrated the potential for a large hedge fund to become excessively leveraged and raised concerns that a forced liquidation of large positions held by a highly leveraged institution would create systemic risk by exacerbating market volatility and illiquidity. In our market-based economy, the primary mechanism that regulates firms’ leverage is the market discipline imposed by creditors and counterparties. Even when the government has oversight of leverage, as in the case of banks and broker-dealers, such oversight is intended to supplement market discipline rather than to replace it. In the case of LTCM, however, market discipline broke down. In the wake of the LTCM episode, the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets considered how best to constrain excessive leverage by hedge funds. The Working Group concluded that hedge funds’ leverage could be constrained most effectively by promoting measures that enhance market discipline by improving credit risk management by hedge funds’ counterparties and creditors, nearly all of which are regulated banks and securities firms.13The Working Group termed this approach “indirect regulation” of hedge funds. The Working Group considered the alternative of direct government regulation of hedge funds, but it concluded that developing a regulatory regime for hedge funds would present formidable challenges in terms of cost and effectiveness. It believed that indirect regulation would address concerns about systemic risks from hedge funds most effectively and would avoid the potential attendant costs of direct regulation.14 The Federal Reserve and Hedge FundsThe President’s Working Group made a series of recommendations for improving market discipline on hedge funds. These included recommendations for improvements in credit risk management practices by the banks and securities firms that are hedge funds’ counterparties and creditors and improvements in supervisory oversight of those banks and securities firms. As a regulator of banks and bank holding companies, the Federal Reserve has worked with other domestic and international regulators to implement the necessary improvements in supervisory oversight. Regulatory cooperation is essential in this area because hedge funds’ principal creditors and counterparties include foreign banks as well as U.S. banks and securities firms. In January 1999, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) published a set of recommendations for sound practices for managing counterparty credit risks to hedge funds and other highly leveraged institutions. Around the same time, the Federal Reserve, the SEC, and the Treasury Department encouraged a group of twelve major banks and securities firms to form a Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group (CRMPG), which in July 1999 issued its own complementary recommendations for improving counterparty risk management practices.15 The BCBS sound practices have been incorporated into Federal Reserve supervisory guidance and examination procedures applicable to banks’ capital market activities. In general terms, routine supervisory reviews of counterparty risk management practices with respect to hedge funds and other counterparties seek to ensure that banks (1) perform appropriate due diligence in assessing the business, risk exposures, and credit standing of their counterparties; (2) establish, monitor, and enforce appropriate quantitative risk exposure limits for each of their counterparties; (3) use appropriate systems to measure and manage counterparty credit risk; and (4) deploy appropriate internal controls to ensure the integrity of their processes for managing counterparty credit risk. Besides conducting routine reviews and continually monitoring counterparty credit exposures, the Federal Reserve periodically performs targeted reviews of the credit risk management practices of banks that are major hedge fund counterparties. These targeted reviews examine in depth the banks’ practices against the BCBS and Federal Reserve sound practices guidance and the CRMPG recommendations. According to supervisors and most market participants, counterparty risk management has improved significantly since the LTCM episode in 1998. However, since that time, hedge funds have greatly expanded their activities and strategies in an environment of intense competition for hedge fund business among banks and securities firms. Furthermore, some hedge funds are among the most active investors in new, more-complex structured financial products, for which valuation and risk measurement are challenging both to the funds themselves and to their counterparties. Counterparties and supervisors need to ensure that competitive pressures do not result in any significant weakening of counterparty risk management and that risk management practices are evolving as necessary to address the increasing complexity of the financial instruments used by hedge funds. The Federal Reserve has also sought to limit hedge funds’ potential to be a source of systemic risk by ensuring that the clearing and settlement infrastructure that supports the markets in which the funds trade is robust. Very active trading by hedge funds has contributed significantly to the extraordinary growth in the past several years of the markets for credit derivatives. A July 2005 report by a new Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group (CRMPG II) called attention to the fact that the clearing and settlement infrastructure for credit derivatives (and over-the-counter derivatives generally) had not kept pace with the volume of trading.16In particular, a backlog of unsigned trade confirmations was growing, and the acceptance by dealers of assignments of trades by one counterparty without the prior consent of the other, despite trade documentation requirements for such consent, was becoming widespread. To address these and other concerns about the clearing and settlement of credit derivatives, in September 2005 the Federal Reserve Bank of New York brought together fourteen major U.S. and foreign derivatives dealers and their supervisors. The supervisors collectively made clear their concerns about the risks created by the infrastructure weaknesses and asked the dealers to develop plans to address those concerns. With supervisors providing common incentives for the collective actions that were necessary, the dealers have made remarkable progress since last September. The practice of unauthorized assignments has almost ceased, and dealers are now expeditiously responding to requests for the authorization of assignments. For the fourteen dealers as a group, total credit derivative confirmations outstanding for more than thirty days fell 70 percent between September 2005 and March 2006. The reduction in outstanding confirmations was made possible in part by more widespread and intensive use of an electronic confirmation-processing system operated by the Depository Trust and Clearing Corporation (DTCC). The dealers have worked with their largest and most active clients, most of which are hedge funds, to ensure that they can electronically confirm trades in credit derivatives. By March 2006, 69 percent of the fourteen dealers’ credit derivatives trades were being confirmed electronically, up from 47 percent last September. Supervisors and market participants agree that further progress is needed, and in March the fourteen dealers committed themselves to achieving by October 31, 2006, a “steady state” position for the industry.17The steady state will involve (1) the creation of a largely electronic marketplace in which all trades that can be processed electronically will be; (2) the creation by DTCC of an industry trade information warehouse and support infrastructure to standardize and automate processing of events throughout each contracts’s life; (3) new processing standards for those trades that cannot be confirmed electronically; and (4) the creation of an automated platform to support notifications and consents with respect to trade assignments. The principal trade association for the hedge fund industry has stated its support for plans embodied in the dealers’ commitments.18 SummaryHedge funds clearly are becoming more important in the capital markets as sources of liquidity and holders and managers of risk. But as their importance has grown, so too have concerns about investor protection and systemic risk. The SEC believes that the examination of registered hedge advisers will deter fraud. But investors must not view SEC regulation of advisers as an effective substitute for their own due diligence in selecting funds and their own monitoring of hedge fund performance. After the LTCM episode, the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets considered how best to address concerns about potential systemic risks from excessive hedge fund leverage. The Working Group concluded that hedge funds’ leverage could be constrained most effectively by promoting measures that enhance market discipline by improving credit risk management by funds’ counterparties and creditors, nearly all of which are regulated banks and securities firms. The Working Group considered the alternative of direct government regulation of hedge funds but concluded that it would be more costly and would be less effective than an approach focused on strengthening market discipline. The Federal Reserve has been seeking to ensure appropriate market discipline on hedge funds by working with other regulators to promote effective counterparty risk management by hedge funds’ counterparties and creditors. It has also sought to limit the potential for hedge funds to be a source of systemic risk by ensuring that the clearing and settlement infrastructure that supports the markets in which they trade is robust. 1.Examples of hedge fund databases include Trading Advisors Selection System (TASS), Centre for International Securities and Derivatives Markets (CISDM)Hedge Fund Database, andHedge Fund Research Database.Return to text 2.The commission decided not to require such funds to register because it had not encountered significant problems with fraud at private equity or venture capital funds, which are similar in some respects to hedge funds but usually require investors to make long-term commitments of capital.Return to text 3.For a discussion of the definition and construction of economically meaningful measures of leverage, see appendix A in Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group (1999),Improving Counterparty Risk Management Practices(New York: CRMPG, June).Return to text 4.Some of these estimates may double count investments in funds of funds. At the end of last year, and excluding fund of funds, the TASS database included funds that had $979.3 billion in assets. Of course, not all funds are included in this database.Return to text 5.Greenwich Associates estimates that hedge funds in 2004 accounted for 20 to 30 percent of trading volumes in markets for below-investment-grade debt, credit derivatives, collateralized debt obligations, emerging-market bonds, and leveraged loans, and 80 percent of trading in distressed debt. See Greenwich Associates (2004),Hedge Funds: The End of the Beginning?(Greenwich Associates, December). These estimates were based on interviews with hedge funds and other institutional investors that Greenwich Associates conducted from February through April 2004.Return to text 6.Federal Reserve Board (2005),Concentration and Risk in the OTC Markets for U.S. Dollar Interest Rate Options(49 KB PDF)Return to text 7.See Fitch Ratings (2005),Hedge Funds: An Emerging Force in the Global Credit Markets(New York: Fitch Ratings, 2005), p. 6.Return to text 8.The antifraud provisions of the Securities Act and the Securities Exchange Act apply to the sale of a private fund’s securities, whether or not the private fund is registered under the Investment Company Act.Return to text 9.See President’s Working Group on Financial Markets (1999),Hedge Funds, Leverage, and the Lessons of Long- Term Capital Management(Washington: President’s Working Group, April), p. B-13.Return to text 10.For example, three Federal Reserve examinations of the New York branch of Daiwa Bank between 1992 and 1994 failed to uncover $1.1 billion of hidden trading losses. See Alan Greenspan (1996), “Statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, November 27, 1995,”Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 82 (January), pp. 31-35.Return to text 11.See Greenwich associates (2004), p. 3.Return to text 12.Each individual investor in a hedge fund that is subject to the Investment Advisers Act and whose adviser charges a performance fee generally must have a net worth of at least $1.5 million or have at least $750,000 of assets under management with the adviser. In addition, most hedge funds avoid regulation under the Investment Company Act by meeting a requirement that each investor in the fund must be a “qualified purchaser,” which for individual investors means having assets of at least $5 million.Return to text 13.President’s Working Group (1999).Return to text 14.See President’s Working Group (1999), p. 42.Return to text 15.See CRMPG (1999).Return to text 16.Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group II (2005),Toward Greater Financial Stability: A Private Sector Perspective(New York: CRMPG II, July).Return to text 17.See Federal Reserve Bank of New Yorkpress releasedated March 13, 2006.Return to text 18.Seepress release (86 KB PDF)by the Managed Funds Association dated March 13, 2006.Return to text
A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.