Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the Enterprise Risk Management Roundtable, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina Thank you for the invitation to speak today. As you likely know, I am quite interested in the discipline of enterprise risk management (ERM) and believe roundtables such as this are a useful way to share perspectives and approaches to sound ERM. I know that these roundtables cover a wide range of industry sectors, but today I will, naturally, focus on ERM from a banking perspective. I will use some recent cases in which we believe bankers and supervisors have learned some key lessons about ERM and describe how the lessons learned can be more broadly applied to other industries. But before I start discussing particular examples, I want to take a step back and give you my thoughts on ERM more broadly. General Thoughts on Enterprise Risk ManagementThe financial services industry continues to evolve to meet the challenges posed by emerging technologies and business processes, new financial instruments, the growing scale and scope of financial institutions, and changing regulatory frameworks. The Federal Reserve Board, as the primary supervisor of state member banks and the consolidated supervisor of financial holding companies, has been working with other regulators and financial institutions to improve the effectiveness and relevance of regulation and supervision in this changing environment. The Federal Reserve has long emphasized the need for appropriate and strong internal controls in institutions we supervise, and we have taken a continuous-improvement approach to our risk-focused examinations. For many years, enterprise risk management across multiple organizational units within an entity has received increased scrutiny. In some cases, firms may be practicing good risk management on an exposure-by-exposure basis, but they may not be paying close enough attention to aggregation of exposures across the entire organization. Rapid growth can place considerable pressure on, among other areas, an organization's management information systems, change-management controls, strategic planning, credit concentrations, and asset/liability management. An organization must also understand how its various business components, some of which can be quite sophisticated and complex, dynamically interact. A successful ERM process can help to meet many of these challenges. Of course, enterprise risk management is a fairly broad topic that can mean different things to different people. For our purposes here today, I will define ERM as a process that enables management to effectively deal with uncertainty and associated risk and opportunity, enhancing the capacity to build stakeholder value. Borrowing from ERM literature, I would say that ERM includesaligning the entity's risk appetite and strategies,enhancing the rigor of the entity's risk-response decisions,reducing the frequency and severity of operational surprises and losses,identifying and managing multiple and cross-enterprise risks,proactively seizing on the opportunities presented to the entity, andimproving the effectiveness of the entity's capital deployment.Many of you are probably familiar with the ERM framework published over a year ago by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, or COSO. The COSO framework provides a useful way to look at ERM and helps generate further discussion--just what this ERM roundtable is trying to promote.In the COSO framework, ERM consists of eight interrelated components that are derived from the way management runs an enterprise and that are integrated with the management process: (1) internal environment, (2) objective setting, (3) event identification, (4) risk assessment, (5) risk response, (6) control activities, (7) information and communication, and (8) monitoring.Internal environment.The internal environment--thetoneof an organization--is a reflection of the organization's risk-management philosophy, risk appetite, and ethical values. It determines how risk is viewed and addressed by employees throughout the organization. This tone is established at the very top of the organization.Objective setting. Objectives must exist before management can identify events that could affect achievement of objectives. The board of directors approves corporate objectives, and management is responsible for achieving them. Enterprise risk management ensures that the board has in place a process for setting appropriate objectives, which support and align with the company's mission and are consistent with its risk appetite.Event identification. Internal and external events that could affect achievement of a company's objectives must be identified and measured, and a distinction must be made between risks and opportunities. Opportunities are channeled back to management's strategic-planning or objective-setting processes.Risk assessment. The likelihood and the potential impact of various risks are analyzed, as a basis for determining how the bank should manage risks. Risks are assessed on an inherent and a residual basis.Risk response. Management selects risk responses--avoiding, accepting, reducing, or sharing risk--and develops a set of actions to align risks with the organization's risk tolerances and risk appetite.Control activities. Policies and procedures are established and implemented to help ensure that the desired risk responses are effectively carried out.Information and communication. Relevant information is identified, captured, and communicated in a form and timeframe that enable managers and staff to carry out their responsibilities. Effective communication also occurs in a broader sense, flowing across and up and down the organizational structure. Companies often use key risk indicators and key performance indicators to facilitate this communication.Monitoring. The organization's entire enterprise risk management process is monitored, and modifications made as necessary. Monitoring is accomplished through ongoing management activities and separate evaluations. It is a continuous process, unlike testing and auditing, which are periodic.Having laid out some general thoughts about ERM within the COSO framework, I would now like to discuss a few recent examples from banking in which the importance of ERM has been highlighted. With the benefit of hindsight, the financial regulators and the industry have been trying to distill the lessons learned from these recent breakdowns in risk management and internal control in the financial services sector.Compliance RiskOne area in which ERM provides tangible value is the area of compliance risk, which can be defined as the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, financial loss, or damage to an organization's reputation and franchise value. This type of risk may arise when an organization fails to comply with the laws, regulations, or codes of conduct that are applicable to its business activities and functions. The Federal Reserve expects banking organizations to have in place an infrastructure that can identify, monitor, and effectively control the compliance risks that they face. Needless to say, the infrastructure should be commensurate with the nature of the organization's compliance risk. For a large complex banking organization, dealing with compliance risk can be particularly challenging unless it has a well-developed risk-management program.To create appropriate compliance-risk controls, organizations should first understand compliance risk across the entire entity. Managers should be expected to evaluate the risks and controls within their scope of authority at least annually. I should also emphasize the need for the board of directors to establish a top-to-bottom compliance culture that is well communicated throughout the organization by senior management so that all staff members understand their compliance responsibilities and their role in implementing the compliance program. Clear lines of communication and authority help to avoid conflicts of interest.An enterprise-wide compliance-risk management program should be dynamic and proactive, meaning it constantly assesses evolving risks when new business lines or activities are added or when existing activities and processes are altered. The process should include an assessment of how those changes may affect the level and nature of risk exposures, and whether mitigating controls are effective in limiting exposures to targeted levels. This understanding must be constantly evolving, to keep up with not only the organization's own products and business strategies, but also regulatory changes. To avoid having a program that operates on autopilot, an organization must continuously reassess its risks and controls and communicate with its business lines. Also, if compliance is seen as a one-off project, undertaken only when a new regulation or product is introduced, a banking organization is placing itself at risk that, down the road, the lack of a compliance process will not sustain the effectiveness of the program as the organization changes.Compliance-risk management can be more difficult for management to integrate into an organization's regular business processes because it often reflects mandates set out by legislation or regulation that the organization itself does not view as key to its success. For example, bankers understand how vital credit-risk management and interest-rate risk management are to their organizations, because they reduce the volatility of earnings and limit losses. On the other hand, regulations that are enacted for broader societal purposes, but that the enterprise sees as of little benefit to its revenue growth, can be viewed as an expensive mandate. For example, the Patriot Act requires significant reporting of transactions to the government, and many in industry have expressed frustration about the burden associated with such reporting. I can assure you, we recognize banking organizations' investment in and commitment to compliance with regulatory requirements, including those imposed by anti-money-laundering and counter-terrorism regulations. The Federal Reserve will continue to work with our counterparts in the federal government to encourage enhanced feedback on how reporting is contributing to our common fight against money laundering and terrorism.Operational RiskOver the past few years, the Federal Reserve has been increasing its focus on operational risk. For those of you in nonfinancial organizations, the largest share of your enterprise risk is likely to be operational risk, as opposed to credit and interest-rate risk. Banks have learned much from the practices that you have developed over the years. Operational risk has more relevance today for bankers largely because they are able to shed much of their interest-rate and credit risk through sales of loans, use of financial derivatives and sound models to manage the risks that are retained. Further, the revenue streams that are growing the fastest are increasingly related to transaction processing, servicing accounts, and selling sophisticated financial products. To be successful, organizations must have complex systems to execute these activities.Banks are also utilizing advanced models to estimate and manage credit-risk and market-risk exposures. Growing use of sophisticated models requires stronger risk-management practices since weaknesses in the models' operational design and data integrity can lead to significant losses. Thus, effective risk management requires financial institutions to have more-knowledgeable employees to identify system requirements, monitor their effectiveness, and interpret model results appropriately.We have learned quite a bit about operational risk from our examinations of banking organizations. For example, during routine examinations of activities that pose operational risk, we look at the adequacy of banks' procedures, processes, and internal controls. Such reviews include transaction testing of control routines in higher-risk activities. For example, a bank's wire transfer activities and loan administration functions are often targeted for review, and our experiences have identified some common weaknesses in operational control that are worthy of attention.With wire transfers and similar transactions, a banking organization could suffer a significant financial loss from unauthorized transfers and incur considerable damage to its reputation if operational risks are not properly mitigated. A few recurring recommendations from our reviews are to (1) establish reasonable approval and authorization requirements for wire transactions to ensure that an appropriate level of management is aware of the transaction and to establish better accountability; (2) establish call-back procedures, passwords, funds transfer agreements, and other authentication controls related to customers' wire transfer requests; and (3) pay increased attention to authentication controls, since this area may also be particularly susceptible to external fraud.Loan administration is another area where banking organizations could suffer significant financial losses from inappropriate segregation of duties or lack of dual controls. An institution could also incur considerable damage to its reputation if operational risk factors are not properly mitigated. A few recurring recommendations from these types of reviews that may be applied to corporations more generally are to (1) ensure that loan officers do not have the ability to book and maintain their own loans; (2) limit employee access to those loan system computer applications that are inconsistent with their responsibilities; and (3) provide line staff with consistent guidance, in the form of policies and procedures, on how to identify and handle unusual transactions.Operational Risk Arising In Recent Financial RestatementsRisks can sometimes quickly appear where they were not traditionally expected. For example, consider the changes we have seen in financial reporting quality of corporations in all industries. In 2005, there were approximately 1,200 restatements of previously filed financial statements by publicly traded companies--twice the rate for 2004. The complexity of GAAP accounting standards and a more stringent, literal interpretation of the application of those standards by auditors and regulatory bodies, primarily the Securities and Exchange Commission, are two major factors that have led to the restatements.Examples of prominent restatements include FAS 133 hedge accounting and lease accounting issues. In the area of hedge accounting, the restatements generally resulted from the misapplication of the "short-cut" method. The organizations in question did not satisfy all of the criteria for use of the short-cut method but, nonetheless, utilized hedge accounting treatment allowed by this method.In the area of lease accounting issues, most companies simply failed to apply longstanding accounting standards related to revenue recognition reserves, accruals and contingencies, and equity accounting. Most companies believed they were actually reporting correctly prior to the restatements. Virtually all of these companies were audited by auditing firms that are now registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). The PCAOB's inspection process, which involves close scrutiny of registered firms, may be a factor in the increased number of restatements.Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 requires each annual report of a public company to include a report by management on the company's internal control over financial reporting. Looking only at banking organizations, as a result of restatements, the number of material weaknesses in internal control for the 2004 reporting period has been revised up to 52 from the 37 originally reported. This increase implies a significant amount of operational risk associated with the accounting process.Generally, examiners review the Sarbanes-Oxley 404 process to determine whether the organization has a clear understanding of the roles of the audit committee, management, internal audit, and the external auditor and whether the organization has implemented an effective plan to achieve the objectives and requirements of Sarbanes-Oxley 404. Examiners also review the Sarbanes-Oxley 404 process to determine whether the organization has an effective follow-up strategy for the remediation of significant deficiencies and material weaknesses. Examiners are encouraged to utilize the results of the Sarbanes-Oxley 404 process, where possible, in their overall assessment of the organization's risk management and control process and in the risk scoping of safety-and-soundness examinations and inspections.Information SecurityCyber attacks and security breaches involving nonpublic customer information appear in the headlines almost every week. These events have cost the financial services industry millions of dollars in direct losses and have done considerable reputational damage. The cost of identity theft to affected consumers is also significant. With banking organizations increasingly using the Internet to interact with customers, business partners, and service providers, concerns about the use of the Internet as a communication and delivery channel have resulted in the need for and use of more-sophisticated control mechanisms, such as enterprise-wide firewall protections, multifactor authentication schemes, and virtual private-network connections.While many of the widely publicized information security breaches have involved parties outside the affected banking organization accessing the organization's customer information, organizations also remain at risk for breaches or misuses of information by an insider. During our examination activities, we have seen breakdowns in internal control, resulting in operating losses that were traced back to weak controls over insiders' access to information technology systems interfacing with electronic funds transfer networks. Further investigation into these situations suggests that the duration and magnitude of the fraud and resulting losses is a direct function of the internal party's access to accounting and related systems.Several lessons have emerged. First, institutions should tightly control logical access to funds transfer systems and ensure that access settings enforce separation of duties, dual controls, and management sign-offs. Second, an institution's senior management should be restricted from regular access to business-line functional systems, especially funds transfer systems. When such restriction is impractical, additional controls must be in place and functioning effectively. Finally, effective management of information security risk, even when focused on a specific function, requires an enterprise-wide approach to yield a true and complete evaluation of the associated risks.Mutual FundsWell-publicized instances of late trading and market timing at mutual fund firms, and the related investigations, have involved many businesses, including banking, securities, and insurance firms. These types of breakdowns in internal control result in sanctions or financial loss and adversely affect a firm's reputation and franchise value.I would like to highlight a few lessons learned from our experience in investigating control breaches in these mutual fund cases. One of the most obvious is the need to critically evaluate unusual client relationships that require variances from standard procedures. If a high percentage of compensation is derived from a single client, a red flag should immediately go up. Also, organizations should have a formal process for reviewing and approving unique products, customers, and services at the inception of the client relationship. Further, it is always a good idea to shine some light on areas historically labeled "low risk" to validate that assessment. The low occurrence of loss from an activity should not be the only factor considered when assessing risk.Finally, compensation systems that reward employees for sales without adequately monitoring their internal control breaches can create a conflict between the interest of employees and the interest of the enterprise. As companies move away from straight salaries to more incentive-based systems, it is important that personnel departments be included in an effective enterprise-wide risk-management program to consider how changes in compensation practices affect risks to the enterprise.Credit DerivativesFinally, I would now like to turn to one more issue that has relevance to ERM, and that is the importance of companies including an ERM perspective as they design and build new lines of business. As many of you might know, last year a dialogue between supervisors and credit derivatives dealers was initiated to support industry efforts to address weaknesses in the operations surrounding credit default swaps (CDS). While we view these new instruments as an effective way to diversify and mitigate risks related to credit exposures from corporations, an industry-led study, the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group II report, identified significant weaknesses in the infrastructure supporting sales and risk monitoring of these instruments. While the report identified 47 recommendations, regulators in the United States and other countries have focused on two major weaknesses.One weakness is related to the success of the product. Volume of trades has grown so quickly and reached such a significant volume that broker-dealers are not able to keep up with their paper-based systems to record the trades and document the transactions. As a result, significant backlogs of confirmations of these over-the-counter derivatives have built up. This creates concerns that information feeding risk-management systems--information about the volume, term, and counterparty to the trade--is not complete. This problem would be exacerbated in a stress situation, when positions need to be changed very quickly to mitigate risk.Another weakness relates to the lack of discipline in enforcing contract terms. Any time an instrument is traded over the counter, it is important to know who you are doing business with. Since an exchange does not stand between the two sides of the trade, parties make payments directly to each other to honor the terms of the contracts. The market practice is to use collateral or pricing to mitigate the risk that the other side of the trade cannot perform per the agreement. The recent industry study also found that competitive pressures were such that brokers did not enforce the standard CDS agreement and allowed counterparties to assign their side of the trade to another party without notifying the broker. Obviously, this can significantly change the risk profile of a transaction and also make it very difficult to settle payments in a timely manner.About six weeks ago, fourteen major market participants published a letter reiterating their commitment to improving the infrastructure that supports the credit derivatives markets. The market participants are committed to the development and implementation of a set of industrywide guidelines that include a targeted reduction in each market participant's confirmation backlogs and assurance that agreement terms will be enforced. Additionally, the fourteen participants will work to create a largely electronic marketplace where all trades will be processed through an industry-accepted platform, develop a new set of processing standards for those trades that cannot be confirmed electronically, and establish a new procedure for settlement following a credit event.We are generally pleased with both the industry's self-identification of the issues and its commitment to making improvements. But for purposes of our discussion of ERM today, the problems surrounding CDS sales highlight the challenges risk managers face when market pressures make the firm's line management reluctant to initiate appropriate controls on their own. It also illustrates that in new lines of business, sometimes ERM must go outside the enterprise and work with competitors to support the growth of shared systems and standards to mitigate risks.ConclusionAt the Federal Reserve, we believe that all banking organizations need good risk management. An enterprise-wide approach is appropriate for setting objectives across the organization, instilling an enterprise-wide culture, and ensuring that key activities and risks are being monitored regularly. Senior management must be involved in ERM, since they are the ones who decide the level and types of risk the organization is comfortable with accepting and what controls and risk mitigants will be employed to ensure that risk exposures stay within the agreed-upon levels.In addition, it is important for organizations to make sure they do not ignore or accidentally overlook lower-profile activities that still might bear substantial risks. As I noted, such activities can include financial statement reporting, information security, and back-office systems. And operational risk, more broadly, has the potential to create disruptions for the organization that could reduce the value of the organization. Often, the solutions to these problems are basics such as training, developing internal controls, and establishing the appropriate culture across the organization. Therefore, organizations should look at the discipline of enterprise risk management as a way to ensure that they effectively deal with uncertainty and the associated risk and opportunity.Thank you. Many of you are probably familiar with the ERM framework published over a year ago by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, or COSO. The COSO framework provides a useful way to look at ERM and helps generate further discussion--just what this ERM roundtable is trying to promote. In the COSO framework, ERM consists of eight interrelated components that are derived from the way management runs an enterprise and that are integrated with the management process: (1) internal environment, (2) objective setting, (3) event identification, (4) risk assessment, (5) risk response, (6) control activities, (7) information and communication, and (8) monitoring.Internal environment.The internal environment--thetoneof an organization--is a reflection of the organization's risk-management philosophy, risk appetite, and ethical values. It determines how risk is viewed and addressed by employees throughout the organization. This tone is established at the very top of the organization.Objective setting. Objectives must exist before management can identify events that could affect achievement of objectives. The board of directors approves corporate objectives, and management is responsible for achieving them. Enterprise risk management ensures that the board has in place a process for setting appropriate objectives, which support and align with the company's mission and are consistent with its risk appetite.Event identification. Internal and external events that could affect achievement of a company's objectives must be identified and measured, and a distinction must be made between risks and opportunities. Opportunities are channeled back to management's strategic-planning or objective-setting processes.Risk assessment. The likelihood and the potential impact of various risks are analyzed, as a basis for determining how the bank should manage risks. Risks are assessed on an inherent and a residual basis.Risk response. Management selects risk responses--avoiding, accepting, reducing, or sharing risk--and develops a set of actions to align risks with the organization's risk tolerances and risk appetite.Control activities. Policies and procedures are established and implemented to help ensure that the desired risk responses are effectively carried out.Information and communication. Relevant information is identified, captured, and communicated in a form and timeframe that enable managers and staff to carry out their responsibilities. Effective communication also occurs in a broader sense, flowing across and up and down the organizational structure. Companies often use key risk indicators and key performance indicators to facilitate this communication.Monitoring. The organization's entire enterprise risk management process is monitored, and modifications made as necessary. Monitoring is accomplished through ongoing management activities and separate evaluations. It is a continuous process, unlike testing and auditing, which are periodic.Having laid out some general thoughts about ERM within the COSO framework, I would now like to discuss a few recent examples from banking in which the importance of ERM has been highlighted. With the benefit of hindsight, the financial regulators and the industry have been trying to distill the lessons learned from these recent breakdowns in risk management and internal control in the financial services sector.Compliance RiskOne area in which ERM provides tangible value is the area of compliance risk, which can be defined as the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, financial loss, or damage to an organization's reputation and franchise value. This type of risk may arise when an organization fails to comply with the laws, regulations, or codes of conduct that are applicable to its business activities and functions. The Federal Reserve expects banking organizations to have in place an infrastructure that can identify, monitor, and effectively control the compliance risks that they face. Needless to say, the infrastructure should be commensurate with the nature of the organization's compliance risk. For a large complex banking organization, dealing with compliance risk can be particularly challenging unless it has a well-developed risk-management program.To create appropriate compliance-risk controls, organizations should first understand compliance risk across the entire entity. Managers should be expected to evaluate the risks and controls within their scope of authority at least annually. I should also emphasize the need for the board of directors to establish a top-to-bottom compliance culture that is well communicated throughout the organization by senior management so that all staff members understand their compliance responsibilities and their role in implementing the compliance program. Clear lines of communication and authority help to avoid conflicts of interest.An enterprise-wide compliance-risk management program should be dynamic and proactive, meaning it constantly assesses evolving risks when new business lines or activities are added or when existing activities and processes are altered. The process should include an assessment of how those changes may affect the level and nature of risk exposures, and whether mitigating controls are effective in limiting exposures to targeted levels. This understanding must be constantly evolving, to keep up with not only the organization's own products and business strategies, but also regulatory changes. To avoid having a program that operates on autopilot, an organization must continuously reassess its risks and controls and communicate with its business lines. Also, if compliance is seen as a one-off project, undertaken only when a new regulation or product is introduced, a banking organization is placing itself at risk that, down the road, the lack of a compliance process will not sustain the effectiveness of the program as the organization changes.Compliance-risk management can be more difficult for management to integrate into an organization's regular business processes because it often reflects mandates set out by legislation or regulation that the organization itself does not view as key to its success. For example, bankers understand how vital credit-risk management and interest-rate risk management are to their organizations, because they reduce the volatility of earnings and limit losses. On the other hand, regulations that are enacted for broader societal purposes, but that the enterprise sees as of little benefit to its revenue growth, can be viewed as an expensive mandate. For example, the Patriot Act requires significant reporting of transactions to the government, and many in industry have expressed frustration about the burden associated with such reporting. I can assure you, we recognize banking organizations' investment in and commitment to compliance with regulatory requirements, including those imposed by anti-money-laundering and counter-terrorism regulations. The Federal Reserve will continue to work with our counterparts in the federal government to encourage enhanced feedback on how reporting is contributing to our common fight against money laundering and terrorism.Operational RiskOver the past few years, the Federal Reserve has been increasing its focus on operational risk. For those of you in nonfinancial organizations, the largest share of your enterprise risk is likely to be operational risk, as opposed to credit and interest-rate risk. Banks have learned much from the practices that you have developed over the years. Operational risk has more relevance today for bankers largely because they are able to shed much of their interest-rate and credit risk through sales of loans, use of financial derivatives and sound models to manage the risks that are retained. Further, the revenue streams that are growing the fastest are increasingly related to transaction processing, servicing accounts, and selling sophisticated financial products. To be successful, organizations must have complex systems to execute these activities.Banks are also utilizing advanced models to estimate and manage credit-risk and market-risk exposures. Growing use of sophisticated models requires stronger risk-management practices since weaknesses in the models' operational design and data integrity can lead to significant losses. Thus, effective risk management requires financial institutions to have more-knowledgeable employees to identify system requirements, monitor their effectiveness, and interpret model results appropriately.We have learned quite a bit about operational risk from our examinations of banking organizations. For example, during routine examinations of activities that pose operational risk, we look at the adequacy of banks' procedures, processes, and internal controls. Such reviews include transaction testing of control routines in higher-risk activities. For example, a bank's wire transfer activities and loan administration functions are often targeted for review, and our experiences have identified some common weaknesses in operational control that are worthy of attention.With wire transfers and similar transactions, a banking organization could suffer a significant financial loss from unauthorized transfers and incur considerable damage to its reputation if operational risks are not properly mitigated. A few recurring recommendations from our reviews are to (1) establish reasonable approval and authorization requirements for wire transactions to ensure that an appropriate level of management is aware of the transaction and to establish better accountability; (2) establish call-back procedures, passwords, funds transfer agreements, and other authentication controls related to customers' wire transfer requests; and (3) pay increased attention to authentication controls, since this area may also be particularly susceptible to external fraud.Loan administration is another area where banking organizations could suffer significant financial losses from inappropriate segregation of duties or lack of dual controls. An institution could also incur considerable damage to its reputation if operational risk factors are not properly mitigated. A few recurring recommendations from these types of reviews that may be applied to corporations more generally are to (1) ensure that loan officers do not have the ability to book and maintain their own loans; (2) limit employee access to those loan system computer applications that are inconsistent with their responsibilities; and (3) provide line staff with consistent guidance, in the form of policies and procedures, on how to identify and handle unusual transactions.Operational Risk Arising In Recent Financial RestatementsRisks can sometimes quickly appear where they were not traditionally expected. For example, consider the changes we have seen in financial reporting quality of corporations in all industries. In 2005, there were approximately 1,200 restatements of previously filed financial statements by publicly traded companies--twice the rate for 2004. The complexity of GAAP accounting standards and a more stringent, literal interpretation of the application of those standards by auditors and regulatory bodies, primarily the Securities and Exchange Commission, are two major factors that have led to the restatements.Examples of prominent restatements include FAS 133 hedge accounting and lease accounting issues. In the area of hedge accounting, the restatements generally resulted from the misapplication of the "short-cut" method. The organizations in question did not satisfy all of the criteria for use of the short-cut method but, nonetheless, utilized hedge accounting treatment allowed by this method.In the area of lease accounting issues, most companies simply failed to apply longstanding accounting standards related to revenue recognition reserves, accruals and contingencies, and equity accounting. Most companies believed they were actually reporting correctly prior to the restatements. Virtually all of these companies were audited by auditing firms that are now registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). The PCAOB's inspection process, which involves close scrutiny of registered firms, may be a factor in the increased number of restatements.Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 requires each annual report of a public company to include a report by management on the company's internal control over financial reporting. Looking only at banking organizations, as a result of restatements, the number of material weaknesses in internal control for the 2004 reporting period has been revised up to 52 from the 37 originally reported. This increase implies a significant amount of operational risk associated with the accounting process.Generally, examiners review the Sarbanes-Oxley 404 process to determine whether the organization has a clear understanding of the roles of the audit committee, management, internal audit, and the external auditor and whether the organization has implemented an effective plan to achieve the objectives and requirements of Sarbanes-Oxley 404. Examiners also review the Sarbanes-Oxley 404 process to determine whether the organization has an effective follow-up strategy for the remediation of significant deficiencies and material weaknesses. Examiners are encouraged to utilize the results of the Sarbanes-Oxley 404 process, where possible, in their overall assessment of the organization's risk management and control process and in the risk scoping of safety-and-soundness examinations and inspections.Information SecurityCyber attacks and security breaches involving nonpublic customer information appear in the headlines almost every week. These events have cost the financial services industry millions of dollars in direct losses and have done considerable reputational damage. The cost of identity theft to affected consumers is also significant. With banking organizations increasingly using the Internet to interact with customers, business partners, and service providers, concerns about the use of the Internet as a communication and delivery channel have resulted in the need for and use of more-sophisticated control mechanisms, such as enterprise-wide firewall protections, multifactor authentication schemes, and virtual private-network connections.While many of the widely publicized information security breaches have involved parties outside the affected banking organization accessing the organization's customer information, organizations also remain at risk for breaches or misuses of information by an insider. During our examination activities, we have seen breakdowns in internal control, resulting in operating losses that were traced back to weak controls over insiders' access to information technology systems interfacing with electronic funds transfer networks. Further investigation into these situations suggests that the duration and magnitude of the fraud and resulting losses is a direct function of the internal party's access to accounting and related systems.Several lessons have emerged. First, institutions should tightly control logical access to funds transfer systems and ensure that access settings enforce separation of duties, dual controls, and management sign-offs. Second, an institution's senior management should be restricted from regular access to business-line functional systems, especially funds transfer systems. When such restriction is impractical, additional controls must be in place and functioning effectively. Finally, effective management of information security risk, even when focused on a specific function, requires an enterprise-wide approach to yield a true and complete evaluation of the associated risks.Mutual FundsWell-publicized instances of late trading and market timing at mutual fund firms, and the related investigations, have involved many businesses, including banking, securities, and insurance firms. These types of breakdowns in internal control result in sanctions or financial loss and adversely affect a firm's reputation and franchise value.I would like to highlight a few lessons learned from our experience in investigating control breaches in these mutual fund cases. One of the most obvious is the need to critically evaluate unusual client relationships that require variances from standard procedures. If a high percentage of compensation is derived from a single client, a red flag should immediately go up. Also, organizations should have a formal process for reviewing and approving unique products, customers, and services at the inception of the client relationship. Further, it is always a good idea to shine some light on areas historically labeled "low risk" to validate that assessment. The low occurrence of loss from an activity should not be the only factor considered when assessing risk.Finally, compensation systems that reward employees for sales without adequately monitoring their internal control breaches can create a conflict between the interest of employees and the interest of the enterprise. As companies move away from straight salaries to more incentive-based systems, it is important that personnel departments be included in an effective enterprise-wide risk-management program to consider how changes in compensation practices affect risks to the enterprise.Credit DerivativesFinally, I would now like to turn to one more issue that has relevance to ERM, and that is the importance of companies including an ERM perspective as they design and build new lines of business. As many of you might know, last year a dialogue between supervisors and credit derivatives dealers was initiated to support industry efforts to address weaknesses in the operations surrounding credit default swaps (CDS). While we view these new instruments as an effective way to diversify and mitigate risks related to credit exposures from corporations, an industry-led study, the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group II report, identified significant weaknesses in the infrastructure supporting sales and risk monitoring of these instruments. While the report identified 47 recommendations, regulators in the United States and other countries have focused on two major weaknesses.One weakness is related to the success of the product. Volume of trades has grown so quickly and reached such a significant volume that broker-dealers are not able to keep up with their paper-based systems to record the trades and document the transactions. As a result, significant backlogs of confirmations of these over-the-counter derivatives have built up. This creates concerns that information feeding risk-management systems--information about the volume, term, and counterparty to the trade--is not complete. This problem would be exacerbated in a stress situation, when positions need to be changed very quickly to mitigate risk.Another weakness relates to the lack of discipline in enforcing contract terms. Any time an instrument is traded over the counter, it is important to know who you are doing business with. Since an exchange does not stand between the two sides of the trade, parties make payments directly to each other to honor the terms of the contracts. The market practice is to use collateral or pricing to mitigate the risk that the other side of the trade cannot perform per the agreement. The recent industry study also found that competitive pressures were such that brokers did not enforce the standard CDS agreement and allowed counterparties to assign their side of the trade to another party without notifying the broker. Obviously, this can significantly change the risk profile of a transaction and also make it very difficult to settle payments in a timely manner.About six weeks ago, fourteen major market participants published a letter reiterating their commitment to improving the infrastructure that supports the credit derivatives markets. The market participants are committed to the development and implementation of a set of industrywide guidelines that include a targeted reduction in each market participant's confirmation backlogs and assurance that agreement terms will be enforced. Additionally, the fourteen participants will work to create a largely electronic marketplace where all trades will be processed through an industry-accepted platform, develop a new set of processing standards for those trades that cannot be confirmed electronically, and establish a new procedure for settlement following a credit event.We are generally pleased with both the industry's self-identification of the issues and its commitment to making improvements. But for purposes of our discussion of ERM today, the problems surrounding CDS sales highlight the challenges risk managers face when market pressures make the firm's line management reluctant to initiate appropriate controls on their own. It also illustrates that in new lines of business, sometimes ERM must go outside the enterprise and work with competitors to support the growth of shared systems and standards to mitigate risks.ConclusionAt the Federal Reserve, we believe that all banking organizations need good risk management. An enterprise-wide approach is appropriate for setting objectives across the organization, instilling an enterprise-wide culture, and ensuring that key activities and risks are being monitored regularly. Senior management must be involved in ERM, since they are the ones who decide the level and types of risk the organization is comfortable with accepting and what controls and risk mitigants will be employed to ensure that risk exposures stay within the agreed-upon levels.In addition, it is important for organizations to make sure they do not ignore or accidentally overlook lower-profile activities that still might bear substantial risks. As I noted, such activities can include financial statement reporting, information security, and back-office systems. And operational risk, more broadly, has the potential to create disruptions for the organization that could reduce the value of the organization. Often, the solutions to these problems are basics such as training, developing internal controls, and establishing the appropriate culture across the organization. Therefore, organizations should look at the discipline of enterprise risk management as a way to ensure that they effectively deal with uncertainty and the associated risk and opportunity.Thank you. Having laid out some general thoughts about ERM within the COSO framework, I would now like to discuss a few recent examples from banking in which the importance of ERM has been highlighted. With the benefit of hindsight, the financial regulators and the industry have been trying to distill the lessons learned from these recent breakdowns in risk management and internal control in the financial services sector. Compliance RiskOne area in which ERM provides tangible value is the area of compliance risk, which can be defined as the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, financial loss, or damage to an organization's reputation and franchise value. This type of risk may arise when an organization fails to comply with the laws, regulations, or codes of conduct that are applicable to its business activities and functions. The Federal Reserve expects banking organizations to have in place an infrastructure that can identify, monitor, and effectively control the compliance risks that they face. Needless to say, the infrastructure should be commensurate with the nature of the organization's compliance risk. For a large complex banking organization, dealing with compliance risk can be particularly challenging unless it has a well-developed risk-management program. To create appropriate compliance-risk controls, organizations should first understand compliance risk across the entire entity. Managers should be expected to evaluate the risks and controls within their scope of authority at least annually. I should also emphasize the need for the board of directors to establish a top-to-bottom compliance culture that is well communicated throughout the organization by senior management so that all staff members understand their compliance responsibilities and their role in implementing the compliance program. Clear lines of communication and authority help to avoid conflicts of interest. An enterprise-wide compliance-risk management program should be dynamic and proactive, meaning it constantly assesses evolving risks when new business lines or activities are added or when existing activities and processes are altered. The process should include an assessment of how those changes may affect the level and nature of risk exposures, and whether mitigating controls are effective in limiting exposures to targeted levels. This understanding must be constantly evolving, to keep up with not only the organization's own products and business strategies, but also regulatory changes. To avoid having a program that operates on autopilot, an organization must continuously reassess its risks and controls and communicate with its business lines. Also, if compliance is seen as a one-off project, undertaken only when a new regulation or product is introduced, a banking organization is placing itself at risk that, down the road, the lack of a compliance process will not sustain the effectiveness of the program as the organization changes. Compliance-risk management can be more difficult for management to integrate into an organization's regular business processes because it often reflects mandates set out by legislation or regulation that the organization itself does not view as key to its success. For example, bankers understand how vital credit-risk management and interest-rate risk management are to their organizations, because they reduce the volatility of earnings and limit losses. On the other hand, regulations that are enacted for broader societal purposes, but that the enterprise sees as of little benefit to its revenue growth, can be viewed as an expensive mandate. For example, the Patriot Act requires significant reporting of transactions to the government, and many in industry have expressed frustration about the burden associated with such reporting. I can assure you, we recognize banking organizations' investment in and commitment to compliance with regulatory requirements, including those imposed by anti-money-laundering and counter-terrorism regulations. The Federal Reserve will continue to work with our counterparts in the federal government to encourage enhanced feedback on how reporting is contributing to our common fight against money laundering and terrorism. Operational RiskOver the past few years, the Federal Reserve has been increasing its focus on operational risk. For those of you in nonfinancial organizations, the largest share of your enterprise risk is likely to be operational risk, as opposed to credit and interest-rate risk. Banks have learned much from the practices that you have developed over the years. Operational risk has more relevance today for bankers largely because they are able to shed much of their interest-rate and credit risk through sales of loans, use of financial derivatives and sound models to manage the risks that are retained. Further, the revenue streams that are growing the fastest are increasingly related to transaction processing, servicing accounts, and selling sophisticated financial products. To be successful, organizations must have complex systems to execute these activities. Banks are also utilizing advanced models to estimate and manage credit-risk and market-risk exposures. Growing use of sophisticated models requires stronger risk-management practices since weaknesses in the models' operational design and data integrity can lead to significant losses. Thus, effective risk management requires financial institutions to have more-knowledgeable employees to identify system requirements, monitor their effectiveness, and interpret model results appropriately. We have learned quite a bit about operational risk from our examinations of banking organizations. For example, during routine examinations of activities that pose operational risk, we look at the adequacy of banks' procedures, processes, and internal controls. Such reviews include transaction testing of control routines in higher-risk activities. For example, a bank's wire transfer activities and loan administration functions are often targeted for review, and our experiences have identified some common weaknesses in operational control that are worthy of attention. With wire transfers and similar transactions, a banking organization could suffer a significant financial loss from unauthorized transfers and incur considerable damage to its reputation if operational risks are not properly mitigated. A few recurring recommendations from our reviews are to (1) establish reasonable approval and authorization requirements for wire transactions to ensure that an appropriate level of management is aware of the transaction and to establish better accountability; (2) establish call-back procedures, passwords, funds transfer agreements, and other authentication controls related to customers' wire transfer requests; and (3) pay increased attention to authentication controls, since this area may also be particularly susceptible to external fraud. Loan administration is another area where banking organizations could suffer significant financial losses from inappropriate segregation of duties or lack of dual controls. An institution could also incur considerable damage to its reputation if operational risk factors are not properly mitigated. A few recurring recommendations from these types of reviews that may be applied to corporations more generally are to (1) ensure that loan officers do not have the ability to book and maintain their own loans; (2) limit employee access to those loan system computer applications that are inconsistent with their responsibilities; and (3) provide line staff with consistent guidance, in the form of policies and procedures, on how to identify and handle unusual transactions. Operational Risk Arising In Recent Financial RestatementsRisks can sometimes quickly appear where they were not traditionally expected. For example, consider the changes we have seen in financial reporting quality of corporations in all industries. In 2005, there were approximately 1,200 restatements of previously filed financial statements by publicly traded companies--twice the rate for 2004. The complexity of GAAP accounting standards and a more stringent, literal interpretation of the application of those standards by auditors and regulatory bodies, primarily the Securities and Exchange Commission, are two major factors that have led to the restatements. Examples of prominent restatements include FAS 133 hedge accounting and lease accounting issues. In the area of hedge accounting, the restatements generally resulted from the misapplication of the "short-cut" method. The organizations in question did not satisfy all of the criteria for use of the short-cut method but, nonetheless, utilized hedge accounting treatment allowed by this method. In the area of lease accounting issues, most companies simply failed to apply longstanding accounting standards related to revenue recognition reserves, accruals and contingencies, and equity accounting. Most companies believed they were actually reporting correctly prior to the restatements. Virtually all of these companies were audited by auditing firms that are now registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). The PCAOB's inspection process, which involves close scrutiny of registered firms, may be a factor in the increased number of restatements. Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 requires each annual report of a public company to include a report by management on the company's internal control over financial reporting. Looking only at banking organizations, as a result of restatements, the number of material weaknesses in internal control for the 2004 reporting period has been revised up to 52 from the 37 originally reported. This increase implies a significant amount of operational risk associated with the accounting process. Generally, examiners review the Sarbanes-Oxley 404 process to determine whether the organization has a clear understanding of the roles of the audit committee, management, internal audit, and the external auditor and whether the organization has implemented an effective plan to achieve the objectives and requirements of Sarbanes-Oxley 404. Examiners also review the Sarbanes-Oxley 404 process to determine whether the organization has an effective follow-up strategy for the remediation of significant deficiencies and material weaknesses. Examiners are encouraged to utilize the results of the Sarbanes-Oxley 404 process, where possible, in their overall assessment of the organization's risk management and control process and in the risk scoping of safety-and-soundness examinations and inspections. Information SecurityCyber attacks and security breaches involving nonpublic customer information appear in the headlines almost every week. These events have cost the financial services industry millions of dollars in direct losses and have done considerable reputational damage. The cost of identity theft to affected consumers is also significant. With banking organizations increasingly using the Internet to interact with customers, business partners, and service providers, concerns about the use of the Internet as a communication and delivery channel have resulted in the need for and use of more-sophisticated control mechanisms, such as enterprise-wide firewall protections, multifactor authentication schemes, and virtual private-network connections. While many of the widely publicized information security breaches have involved parties outside the affected banking organization accessing the organization's customer information, organizations also remain at risk for breaches or misuses of information by an insider. During our examination activities, we have seen breakdowns in internal control, resulting in operating losses that were traced back to weak controls over insiders' access to information technology systems interfacing with electronic funds transfer networks. Further investigation into these situations suggests that the duration and magnitude of the fraud and resulting losses is a direct function of the internal party's access to accounting and related systems. Several lessons have emerged. First, institutions should tightly control logical access to funds transfer systems and ensure that access settings enforce separation of duties, dual controls, and management sign-offs. Second, an institution's senior management should be restricted from regular access to business-line functional systems, especially funds transfer systems. When such restriction is impractical, additional controls must be in place and functioning effectively. Finally, effective management of information security risk, even when focused on a specific function, requires an enterprise-wide approach to yield a true and complete evaluation of the associated risks. Mutual FundsWell-publicized instances of late trading and market timing at mutual fund firms, and the related investigations, have involved many businesses, including banking, securities, and insurance firms. These types of breakdowns in internal control result in sanctions or financial loss and adversely affect a firm's reputation and franchise value. I would like to highlight a few lessons learned from our experience in investigating control breaches in these mutual fund cases. One of the most obvious is the need to critically evaluate unusual client relationships that require variances from standard procedures. If a high percentage of compensation is derived from a single client, a red flag should immediately go up. Also, organizations should have a formal process for reviewing and approving unique products, customers, and services at the inception of the client relationship. Further, it is always a good idea to shine some light on areas historically labeled "low risk" to validate that assessment. The low occurrence of loss from an activity should not be the only factor considered when assessing risk. Finally, compensation systems that reward employees for sales without adequately monitoring their internal control breaches can create a conflict between the interest of employees and the interest of the enterprise. As companies move away from straight salaries to more incentive-based systems, it is important that personnel departments be included in an effective enterprise-wide risk-management program to consider how changes in compensation practices affect risks to the enterprise. Credit DerivativesFinally, I would now like to turn to one more issue that has relevance to ERM, and that is the importance of companies including an ERM perspective as they design and build new lines of business. As many of you might know, last year a dialogue between supervisors and credit derivatives dealers was initiated to support industry efforts to address weaknesses in the operations surrounding credit default swaps (CDS). While we view these new instruments as an effective way to diversify and mitigate risks related to credit exposures from corporations, an industry-led study, the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group II report, identified significant weaknesses in the infrastructure supporting sales and risk monitoring of these instruments. While the report identified 47 recommendations, regulators in the United States and other countries have focused on two major weaknesses. One weakness is related to the success of the product. Volume of trades has grown so quickly and reached such a significant volume that broker-dealers are not able to keep up with their paper-based systems to record the trades and document the transactions. As a result, significant backlogs of confirmations of these over-the-counter derivatives have built up. This creates concerns that information feeding risk-management systems--information about the volume, term, and counterparty to the trade--is not complete. This problem would be exacerbated in a stress situation, when positions need to be changed very quickly to mitigate risk. Another weakness relates to the lack of discipline in enforcing contract terms. Any time an instrument is traded over the counter, it is important to know who you are doing business with. Since an exchange does not stand between the two sides of the trade, parties make payments directly to each other to honor the terms of the contracts. The market practice is to use collateral or pricing to mitigate the risk that the other side of the trade cannot perform per the agreement. The recent industry study also found that competitive pressures were such that brokers did not enforce the standard CDS agreement and allowed counterparties to assign their side of the trade to another party without notifying the broker. Obviously, this can significantly change the risk profile of a transaction and also make it very difficult to settle payments in a timely manner. About six weeks ago, fourteen major market participants published a letter reiterating their commitment to improving the infrastructure that supports the credit derivatives markets. The market participants are committed to the development and implementation of a set of industrywide guidelines that include a targeted reduction in each market participant's confirmation backlogs and assurance that agreement terms will be enforced. Additionally, the fourteen participants will work to create a largely electronic marketplace where all trades will be processed through an industry-accepted platform, develop a new set of processing standards for those trades that cannot be confirmed electronically, and establish a new procedure for settlement following a credit event. We are generally pleased with both the industry's self-identification of the issues and its commitment to making improvements. But for purposes of our discussion of ERM today, the problems surrounding CDS sales highlight the challenges risk managers face when market pressures make the firm's line management reluctant to initiate appropriate controls on their own. It also illustrates that in new lines of business, sometimes ERM must go outside the enterprise and work with competitors to support the growth of shared systems and standards to mitigate risks. ConclusionAt the Federal Reserve, we believe that all banking organizations need good risk management. An enterprise-wide approach is appropriate for setting objectives across the organization, instilling an enterprise-wide culture, and ensuring that key activities and risks are being monitored regularly. Senior management must be involved in ERM, since they are the ones who decide the level and types of risk the organization is comfortable with accepting and what controls and risk mitigants will be employed to ensure that risk exposures stay within the agreed-upon levels. In addition, it is important for organizations to make sure they do not ignore or accidentally overlook lower-profile activities that still might bear substantial risks. As I noted, such activities can include financial statement reporting, information security, and back-office systems. And operational risk, more broadly, has the potential to create disruptions for the organization that could reduce the value of the organization. Often, the solutions to these problems are basics such as training, developing internal controls, and establishing the appropriate culture across the organization. Therefore, organizations should look at the discipline of enterprise risk management as a way to ensure that they effectively deal with uncertainty and the associated risk and opportunity. Thank you.
Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the Americas Community Bankers Risk Management and Finance Forum, Naples, Florida Thank you for the invitation to speak today. I always find these forums very informative and useful, in part because they keep me apprised of the issues currently on the minds of bankers. And I hope you agree that these conferences are beneficial to the broader dialogue between bankers and regulators. I plan to focus on several issues that I believe are of interest to this group, including commercial real estate, nontraditional residential mortgages, and proposed changes to regulatory capital rules. With these initiatives, supervisors are trying to emphasize our broader goal of improving risk management at banks, while not dictating in which businesses banks should engage or to what extent. If you look at their balance sheets and income statements, you will see that community banks are thriving. As Federal Reserve Chairman Bernanke noted recently, capital, earnings, and asset quality are improving for banks of all sizes, but particularly for community banks. Nonperforming assets, net charge-offs, and loan-loss provisions for community banks have been at low levels in recent years. And community banks remain profitable. The continuing strength of this part of the financial sector is also visible in supervisory ratings, with the number of problem community banks at historical lows. But of course all of you know that there are still potential risks on the horizon, and supervisors are paid to make sure that bankers manage those risks properly to maintain the safety and soundness of the banking system. So while the banking industry is doing well of late, we believe there are a few recent regulatory proposals to which bankers--including community bankers--should pay attention. Commercial Real EstateIt is perhaps an understatement to say that those gathered here today are aware of the proposed commercial real estate (CRE) guidance recently issued by the U.S. banking agencies. Indeed, we have received hundreds of comment letters on the proposed guidance so far: the comment period ends April 13. I will be honest and say that I have not had a chance to read all of the comments. Naturally, we welcome these comments, since we were looking for extensive feedback when we issued the proposed guidance in the first place. At this point, I would like to underscore that the proposed guidance is intended to encompass "true" CRE loans. It is not focused on commercial loans for which a bank looks to a borrower's cashflow as the source of repayment and accepts real estate collateral as a secondary source of repayment. That is, the proposed guidance addresses bank lending on commercial real estate projects where repayment is dependent on third party rental income, or the sale, refinancing or permanent financing of the property. These are "true" commercial real estate loans for which repayment depends upon the condition and performance of the real estate market. I would also like to mention up front that the proposed guidance is not intended to cap or restrict banks' participation in the CRE sector, but rather to remind institutions that proper risk management and appropriate capital are essential elements of a sound CRE lending strategy. In fact, many institutions already have both of these elements in place. Commercial real estate lending played a central role in the banking problems of the late 1980s and early 1990s and has historically been a highly volatile asset class. Past problems in CRE have generally come at times when the broader market encounters difficulties. Therefore, banks should not be surprised by the emphasis of the proposed CRE guidance on the importance of portfolio risk management and concentrations. One reason why supervisors are proposing CRE guidance at this point is that we are seeing high and rising concentrations of CRE loans relative to capital. For certain groups of banks, such as those with assets between $100 million and $1 billion, average CRE concentrations are about 300 percent of total capital. This compares to a concentration level of about 150 percent in the late 1980s and early 1990s for this same bank group. While banks' underwriting standards are now generally stronger than in the 1980s and 1990s, the agencies are proposing the guidance now to reinforce sound portfolio-management principles that a bank should have in place when pursuing a commercial real estate lending strategy. A bank should both be monitoring the performance on an individual loan basis as well as on a collective basis for loans collateralized by similar property types or in the same markets. When a bank targets commercial real estate lending as a primary business activity, it needs to consider that the risk exposure to the performance of its total CRE loan portfolio--the concentration risk--depends upon broader real estate market conditions. For example, if a bank has several borrowers with similar projects that encounter problems--such as longer absorption periods, higher marketing costs, or higher vacancy rates--weaknesses in the broader real estate market can have a cascading effect on the quality of a bank's CRE portfolio as real estate values erode. Some institutions' strategic- and capital-planning processes may not adequately acknowledge the risks from their CRE concentrations. This is particularly important, since CRE lending in recent years has occurred under fairly benign credit conditions and, naturally, those conditions are unlikely to continue indefinitely. The ability of banks with significant concentrations to weather difficult market conditions will depend heavily on their risk management processes and the level of capitalization. From a risk-management and capital perspective, institutions generally should focus on the emerging conditions in their real estate markets, the potential cumulative impact on their portfolios if conditions deteriorate, and significantly employ other exercises to help identify CRE vulnerabilities. Of course, such exercises should vary according to the size of the organization and the level of the concentration. All of these are key elements of a sound strategy to manage concentrations. In evaluating the impact of their CRE concentrations, bankers should also pay attention to geographic factors. Many banks conduct successful CRE lending within a certain geographic area, but problems can arise when banks begin to lend outside their market or "footprint" for which they normally have better market intelligence. In recent years, supervisors have observed banks lending outside their established footprint, to maintain a customer relationship, into real estate markets with which they have less experience. The challenge is heightened when the borrower is also venturing into a new market. These practices led to significant losses in prior CRE credit downturns. I noted that CRE underwriting appears substantially better compared to the late 1980s and early 1990s. However, we have noticed some recent slippage. Therefore, the proposed CRE guidance underscores the existing interagency guidance on real estate lending standards. That is, it offers some reminders about risk-management practices for individual exposures. In order to attract new business and sustain loan volume, banks may occasionally be inclined to make some compromises and concessions to borrowers. As supervisors, we want to ensure that loan-to-value standards and debt-service-coverage ratios are meeting the organization's policies--and that there is not an undue increase in the exceptions to those standards and ratios. We also continue to monitor whether lenders routinely adjust covenants, lengthen maturities, or reduce collateral requirements. To be clear, we have not yet seen underwriting standards fall to unsatisfactory levels on a broad scale, but we are concerned about some of the downward trend in these standards. Furthermore, no element of the proposed guidance is intended to act as a "trigger" or "hard limit" for immediate cutback or reversal of CRE lending; rather, it should be viewed as a reminder to institutions that certain risk management standards are vitally important for banks involved in the business. Additionally, if the agencies finalize the proposed guidance, they intend to use the proposed thresholds in the guidance only as a "first cut" or "screen" to identify institutions that may have heightened CRE concentration risk. The thresholds are intended to serve as benchmarks to identify cases for further review. In some cases, supervisors, after more careful review, may actually find that given the characteristics of its CRE portfolio, an institution has sound risk management and is holding appropriate capital. In general, the proposed guidance is intended to be applied quite flexibly and in a manner consistent with the size and complexity of each organization. Nontraditional Residential MortgagesYou are probably also aware that the U.S. banking agencies recently issued proposed supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages, for which the comment period ended March 29. We appreciate the extensive feedback from the industry and others. The agencies are now in the process of reviewing the comment letters and deciding on a way forward. While the main focus of the proposed guidance is on banks' ability to adequately identify, measure, monitor, and control the risk associated with these products, the proposed guidance also addresses consumer protection, which is what I would like to focus on today. As outlined in our proposed guidance, nontraditional mortgages contain aspects of complexity, which could make it difficult for consumers to understand all the possible consequences of borrowing. In general, bankers need to be especially alert to developing easily understood disclosures as they introduce more innovative and complex products, and as they market them to broader customer segments rather than the original niche customer. The elements relating to consumer protection in the proposed nontraditional mortgage guidance are included because we think addressing these issues is consistent with good risk management. Nontraditional mortgages typically allow borrowers to defer payment of principal and, sometimes, interest. These products include interest-only mortgages and payment option adjustable-rate mortgages (or ARMs), which have been available for many years. They have recently become increasingly popular, often combined with practices such as reduced documentation of income and assets in evaluating applicants' creditworthiness. Although these products can be beneficial for some borrowers, today these products are being offered to a wider spectrum of consumers. Some of these consumers may not understand the associated risks. For example, there could be a substantial increase in the monthly payment, or "payment shock" that could occur when the loan's interest rate increases after a low "teaser-rate" period and if the market interest rate index rises through the term of the loan. In addition, consumers may not be aware that payments can increase considerably when a loan begins to fully amortize after an interest-only period. They also may not understand the full impact of negative amortization, including the fact that they may be repaying more than they initially borrowed. The Board's Truth in Lending regulations require creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about the loan terms, including a schedule of payments. For interest-only and payment option ARMs, the payment schedule shows consumers how their payments will increase to include amortization of the principal. The proposed interagency guidance includes recommended practices that describe how institutions can use their promotional materials to provide information about the features and risks of these products, especially the risk of payment shock. For example, the guidance recommends that institutions inform consumers about the maximum monthly payment they could be required to pay once interest rate caps and negative-amortization caps have been reached. The proposed guidance also lists recommended practices to address other risks. When negative amortization is possible, the guidance suggests that institutions alert consumers about the consequences of increasing principal balances and decreasing home equity. If both reduced- and full-documentation loan programs are offered, the draft guidance advises institutions to inform consumers if they will pay a pricing premium for the reduced-documentation loan. When institutions provide monthly statements with payment options, they are urged to include information that enables borrowers to make well-informed choices--information that explains each payment option and the impact of each choice. The draft guidance also urges institutions to ensure that their advertisements, promotional materials, and oral communications are consistent with the product terms and that these communications provide clear, balanced, and timely information to consumers about the risks. This is important so that consumers have the information they need at critical decision times, such as when selecting a loan product or choosing a specific payment option each month. In general, bankers should ensure that borrowers are aware of the range of outcomes with a nontraditional mortgage. Proposed Revisions to Regulatory Capital RulesBy now you have probably heard the news that the Federal Reserve Board reviewed and, in an open Board meeting on March 30, approved a draft of the interagency notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) on the Basel II capital framework, seeking comment on that draft. Thedraft NPRand some statements made at the public meeting are now available on the Board's web site. The NPR is expected to be issued in the Federal Register once all of the U.S. banking agencies have completed their respective review and approval processes, at which time it will then be "officially" out for comment. That should all happen in the next few months. We are very pleased that the substantial time spent on the Basel II effort has culminated in this important achievement. We also recognize the significance of the NPR to the industry, Congress, and others who have waited for more detail on the proposed rulemaking. We look forward to receiving comments on the NPR; they will contribute to our assessment of Basel II objectives and help us determine whether the NPR in fact produces a prudent, risk-sensitive regulatory capital regime. In some areas, the agencies are still grappling with the correct approach. For this reason, the NPR contains a number of requests for feedback on specific topics. All of this will help us as we continue to develop the framework. But before commenting further on the NPR and the U.S. Basel II process, I would like to reiterate our rationale for pursuing Basel II. Basel II ProposalsThe current Basel I capital framework, adopted nearly twenty years ago, has served us well. For the vast majority of U.S. banks, Basel I continues to provide a useful measure of regulatory capital, while not being particularly burdensome. However, Basel I has become increasingly inadequate for large, internationally active banks that are offering ever more complex and sophisticated products and services. In other words, the current Basel I capital requirements have over the past decade begun to deviate substantially from the risk profiles of large, complex organizations. We need a better capital framework for these large, internationally active banks, and we believe that Basel II is such a framework. And from a financial stability perspective it is in everyone's interest to have regulatory capital measures at large, complex banks more accurately reflect their actual risks. One of the major improvements in Basel II is the closer linking of capital requirements and risk. The current Basel I measures are not very risk-sensitive and do not provide bankers, supervisors, or the marketplace with meaningful measures of risk at large, complex organizations. Under Basel I, it is possible for two banks, with dramatically different risk profiles in their commercial loan portfolios, to have the same regulatory capital requirement. And under Basel I, a bank's capital requirement does not reflect deterioration in asset quality. Moreover, the balance-sheet focus of Basel I does not adequately capture risks of certain off-balance-sheet transactions and fee-based activities--for example, the operational risk embedded in many of the services from which many large U.S. institutions generate a growing portion of their revenues. For large, complex banks, the costs of mismeasuring regulatory capital requirements are much higher and, therefore, there is a greater need to amend the rules for these institutions--this need is the impetus for Basel II. In addition to making regulatory capital measures more meaningful, Basel II should make the financial system safer by substantially improving risk management at banks. Basel II builds on the existing risk-management approaches of well-managed banks and creates incentives for banks to move toward leading-edge risk-measurement and risk-management practices. By providing a consistent framework for all banks to use, supervisors will be better able to identify banks whose risk management and risk levels differ significantly from other banks. By communicating these differences to banks, management will be able to benchmark their risk assessments, models, and processes in a more detailed and regular manner. We have already seen some progress in risk management at many institutions in the United States and around the globe as a result of preparations for Basel II. The new framework is also much more consistent with the internal capital measures that institutions use to manage their business. I hope it is clear from the NPR and other statements made by the agencies that we are committed to ongoing, detailed analysis to ensure that U.S. implementation of Basel II achieves its goal: establishing a strong and risk-sensitive base of minimum regulatory capital. First of all, the U.S. agencies included in the NPR a proposed timetable and set of transition safeguards that are more rigorous than those set forth in the 2004 Basel II framework. For instance, the U.S. agencies are proposing three transition periods, during which an individual institution's Basel II minimum required capital will not be permitted to fall below certain percentages of its capital requirement under the general risk-based capital rules. At several points during the transition to Basel II, the agencies intend to conduct thorough analyses of each institution's Basel II capital results and Basel II's impact on aggregate minimum required capital in the U.S. banking system. The U.S. regulators are united in their belief that no bank should be permitted to operate under Basel II until it has proven itself ready to do so. In other words, we plan to have very high standards for Basel II qualification. For instance, a bank will be able to move from the parallel run to the first transitional floor period only after its primary supervisor has given it permission to do so--and only after that supervisor has thoroughly evaluated the bank's risk-management methodologies and its ability to calculate minimum regulatory capital using the new framework. Similarly, a bank will only be allowed to move to each successive floor, as well as to the full Basel II minimum capital calculation without floors, upon a finding by the primary supervisor that it is ready, following a rigorous qualification process. To reiterate, duringandafter the transition to Basel II, supervisors plan to rely on ongoing, detailed analyses to continuously evaluate the results of the new framework and ensure prudent levels of capital. And to be quite clear, the Federal Reserve believes that strong capital is critical to the health of our banking system. We also believe that Basel II will help us continue to ensure that U.S. banks maintain capital levels that serve as an appropriate cushion against unexpected losses. As we have mentioned before, we will continue to use existing prudential measures to complement Basel II. For example, the current leverage ratio requirement--a ratio of capital to total assets--will remain unchanged for all banks, whether or not they are subject to the Basel II framework. Also, supervisors will continue to enforce existing prompt-corrective-action rules in response to declines in capital. Both the leverage ratio and prompt-corrective-action rules are fully consistent with Basel II. Proposals to Amend Basel IOf course, those of you here today have also been following discussions about possible changes--beyond Basel II--to the existing regulatory capital rules. First of all, we expect only one or two dozen banks to move to Basel II in the near term. The vast majority of U.S. banks would be able to continue operating safely under Basel I as amended through the rulemaking process. The Basel I framework has already been amended more than twenty-five times in response to changes in the banking environment and a better understanding of the risks of individual products and services. The agencies believe that now is another appropriate time to amend the Basel I rules. These proposals to amend Basel I, also known as "Basel IA," are still at an early stage. Last fall, the U.S. banking agencies issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) that outlined suggested Basel I changes. In part, these proposed changes are meant to address concerns about the potential adverse competitive effects of Basel II. We take concerns about competitive effects seriously. During the Basel I ANPR process, we sought input from the industry and other interested parties. The Federal Reserve has conducted substantial research about thepotential effects of Basel II--published on our web site--and plans to continue those efforts. In an effort to mitigate those concerns, regulators have proposed changes to enhance the risk sensitivity of U.S. Basel I rules; we also remain vigilant about identifying potential competitive distortions that might be created with the introduction of Basel II. We are also mindful that amendments to Basel I should not be too complex or too burdensome for the multitude of smaller banks to which the revised rules will apply. That is, in Basel I amendments we are trying to find the right balance between added risk sensitivity and low burden. As you are aware, this is not necessarily the easiest balance to find. For example, there may be a desire to tie regulatory capital measures more closely to risk, but only by expanding the use of factors that determine regulatory risk weights. However, if we expand the number of factors that are used--for example, loan-to-value measures, credit scores, and external credit ratings--that will likely increase the burden for calculating regulatory capital. In short, we are faced with a tradeoff. And some of the comment letters received so far address this very point. Naturally, institutions differ with respect to this tradeoff, with some wanting greater risk sensitivity at the cost of greater burden, and some wanting just a little more risk sensitivity with little or no additional burden. Of course, there are also those that would like much more risk sensitivity with no additional burden, but that just does not seem possible in this case. As we develop the NPR for Basel I amendments, the agencies will have to analyze very carefully where we want to end up on the risk-sensitivity-versus-burden tradeoff. And of course we expect to solicit comments on that tradeoff. Additionally, we recognize the need for full transparency about the Basel II proposal and proposed Basel I amendments. For that reason, we intend to have overlapping comment periods for the NPRs of both proposed Basel II and the proposed Basel I amendments, so that banks and others can review and comment on both NPRs at approximately the same time. In particular, bankers from potential opt-in institutions and those not planning to move to Basel II can evaluate the potential impact of Basel II in light of the proposed Basel I amendments. In fact, we want all interested parties to compare, contrast, and comment on the two proposals in overlapping timeframes. At this point, we are still reviewing the comments received on the ANPR for amendments to Basel I. The comment period ended in mid-January. The agencies are developing their proposals for Basel I amendments, based on comments received, and hope to have a Basel I NPR by summer. Finally, I would like to underscore that the U.S. agencies welcome any and all comments on these documents. Accordingly, our proposals could change on the basis of comments we receive or new information we gather. We know that this can be frustrating to some. Still given the breadth and depth of these proposals, it is critical that we consider all viewpoints. To date, comments from bankers--at all sizes of institutions--have been quite helpful. We request that you continue providing feedback on all the regulatory capital proposals we are contemplating. ConclusionI hope you found my remarks about recent regulatory initiatives informative. Naturally, bankers may be somewhat concerned about the impact these initiatives--even proposed guidance--could have on their business. We hear your concerns about "piling on," but I think it is helpful to remember that our job as regulators is to ensure that the United States has a safe and sound banking system. In other words, we are in the business of monitoring "downside risk" to the financial system, so we must act appropriately when we see possibly excessive risk-taking or inappropriate risk management, controls, or capital. While most U.S. banks today operate in a safe and sound manner, we must always be vigilant of future problems. I hope it is clear that we are sensitive to the regulatory burden that bankers face; that is one reason why we often issue guidance first as proposals, requesting comments. Indeed, the Federal Reserve is quite responsive to regulatory burden, as evidenced by the recent Senate testimony of Governor Kohn on the subject. Overall, we believe that banks can remain profitable while still adhering to the standards set by banking regulators. And when we propose changes in our policies or guidance, we continue to listen carefully to industry comments and concerns. Thank you.
The federal bank, credit union, and thrift supervisory agencies, along with the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), today released updated "Answers to Frequently Asked Questions" (FAQs) to aid interpretation of the 2005 home loan data to be disclosed this year under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). For the second year in a row, the data will include price information on loans priced above reporting thresholds set by the Federal Reserve Board regulation that implements HMDA, Regulation C. As of March 31, lenders started making these data available to the public upon request in the form of a Loan Application Register, after removing certain information to protect the privacy of applicants and borrowers. Summary statistical reports for each lender and an aggregate report for each Metropolitan Statistical Area will be released in September by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC). Preliminary indications are that the data will show that the proportion of mortgage loans with prices above the HMDA price reporting thresholds increased from 2004 to 2005. The updated FAQs, in newly added Question 27, explain that an increase is expected because of changes in the interest rate environment from 2004 to 2005--specifically, the narrowing of the difference between short-term interest rates and long-term interest rates (sometimes referred to as a "flattening of the yield curve"). Changes in other factors, such as the business practices of lenders or the risk profiles or borrowing practices of borrowers, also could have affected the proportion of loans reported as higher-priced loans. The updated FAQs will be posted on each of the agencies' web sites and on the web site of theFFIEC. HMDA, which was enacted by Congress in 1975, requires most mortgage lenders located in metropolitan areas to collect data about their housing-related lending activity, report the data annually to the government, and make the data publicly available in a modified Loan Application Register. Initially, HMDA required reporting of the geographic location of originated and purchased home loans. In 1989, Congress expanded HMDA data to include information about denied home loan applications and the race, sex, and income of applicants and borrowers. In 2002, the Federal Reserve Board amended the HMDA regulations to require lenders to report price data for certain higher-priced home mortgage loans, and other new data. Attachment (73 KB PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its new Data Download application, which provides interactive access to Federal Reserve statistical data in a variety of electronic formats. Data Download is the first application to allow custom data packages to be created in SDMX-ML, a technical statistical data standard that is gaining support among central banks and statistical agencies. "Accurate and timely data are crucial for decision making in the private and public sector. Markets work best when people are well-informed. The Federal Reserve is using the latest technology to make data more accessible and easier to understand--key elements of our mission in promoting financial education," said Federal Reserve Governor Randall S. Kroszner. Data from the following four releases are now available: Industrial Production and Capacity Utilization (G.17), Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States (Z.1), Commercial Paper, and Selected Interest Rates (H.15). More releases will be added in the future. The application delivers customized data sets in machine-readable electronic formats (Excel, CSV, XML) or allows for quick downloading of formatted data packages. The SDMX-ML technical standard was developed by the Statistical Data and Metadata Exchange (SDMX) initiative under the governance of the Bank for International Settlements, the European Central Bank, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Eurostat, the United Nations, and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Data Download is available on the Board's web site athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/datadownload.
Governor Donald L. Kohn At the Forecasters Club of New York Luncheon, New York, New York The members of any group calling itself the Forecasters Club don't need an elaborate justification for my focus today on business fixed investment. The outlook for business investment is always a key element in any economic forecast. It can be a highly volatile component of aggregate demand, with variations in investment often accounting for a good share of the fluctuations in economic activity. That lesson was demonstrated again in the past decade when strength in business investment contributed to the vigorous expansion of the second half of the 1990s, and then a marked and prolonged weakening in capital spending contributed to recession and sluggish growth in 2001 and 2002. Business investment also has important implications for the supply side of the economy through its influence on the rate of increase in labor productivity and thus the economy's sustainable level of potential output. Just three years ago, Chairman Bernanke talked to you about investment, laying out a structure for forecasting and using it to comment on the economic outlook. I thought that now would be a propitious moment to revisit the subject. What I would characterize as the standard forecast for this year and next has the economy slowing a bit to trend. That slowing arises in substantial part from the effects that a cooling in housing markets has on residential construction and on consumption. But, at the same time, the standard forecast sees growth as being supported by a continued robust expansion of business investment. However, the range of views on investment seems a little wider than usual; the variation in large part reflects whether forecasters foresee a resolution of some apparent anomalies in investment behavior observed over the past several years. In particular, the weakening in investment in 2001 and 2002 was larger and lasted longer than many had anticipated, and although investment growth has picked up in recent years, the level of investment has not fully recovered from the earlier weakness. My remarks today examine what we have--and have not--learned about this shortfall and what we might expect for business fixed investment over the next few years. I must emphasize that these views are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.1 Business fixed investment has risen at a robust annual rate of nearly 9 percent on average over the past two years, and the real level of investment at the end of last year, $1.3 trillion, was nearly 6 percent higher than the peak reached five years earlier. However, real gross domestic product (GDP) expanded nearly 14 percent over the same period. To be sure, the investment peak in 2000 was unusually high; still, the nominal share of business fixed investment in GDP, at 10-3/4 percent at the end of 2005, was well below its forty-year average. Of course, comparisons of these simple ratios and growth rates do not account for other influences on investment in the macroeconomic environment, such as interest rates, the prices of capital goods, or the rate of increase in final spending. However, a more rigorous exercise using a standard model favored by many forecasters yields a similar conclusion. Using lagged net investment, changes in business output, and changes in the user cost of capital to predict the level of current net investment, we find that the model did not forecast the plunge in investment in 2001. And, despite its ability to predict recentgrowth ratesreasonably well, a dynamic simulation of such a model starting in 2000 indicates that the currentlevelof investment is still considerably lower than expected. To be sure, we would not have expected investment to snap back right away, judging from experience. Still, investment over the past few years is showing no signs of returning to the path that we would have expected from historical relationships through 1999. Business financial statements also reflect evidence of restrained business spending behavior. Normally, businesses are heavy net users of savings generated by the rest of the economy. The financing gap--the level of capital spending over the level of internal funds--is a measure of that reliance. But it was close to zero in 2002 and 2003 and remained unusually low last year (after adjustment for tax-induced flows of repatriated foreign earnings), which suggests that businesses didn't see enough profitable investment projects to warrant tapping the markets for external financing, even at low long-term interest rates. To be sure, profit margins and cash flow have been high, but that would also seem to be an environment that should encourage expansion. In fact, businesses appear to be using some of their very large holdings of cash for other purposes. Corporations have increased their share repurchases, which hit a record level last year. They have also increased share retirements through cash-financed mergers and acquisitions, which have been boosted by a surge in buyouts. Evidently, corporate managers view prospective returns from these uses of cash flow as comparing favorably with those from new capital spending projects. The low level of investment has not been unique to the United States. Gross investment in other member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development was sluggish in the early years of this recovery, and the nominal share of nonresidential fixed investment in GDP in these countries is still barely higher than its twenty-five-year trough in 2003. This pattern persists despite a low cost of capital and ample cash flows in many countries as well as business sentiment that improved markedly last year. Although real investment in Japan has moved up fairly steadily for nearly three years, capital spending was weak for nearly a decade as profits were channeled to clean up balance sheets rather than expand productive capacity. Euro-area investment has also languished, in part because of relatively slow growth prospects. In both Japan and the euro area, investment likely also is being curtailed to some extent because of a demographic shift toward a more elderly population: As the share of the population that is of working age declines, the rise in the capital stock needed to equip the labor force decreases. Investment in the East Asian countries is still lower than before the crises of the late 1990s, although investment rates in the region are generally higher than those in advanced economies. Also, lower rates of investment in some of these countries may reflect some shifting of production to China (where investment rates have been quite high in recent years). Ratios and equations are at best only rough guides to the investment that we might expect on the basis of past behavior in similar circumstances. Still, looking across a variety of indicators and a variety of countries, it does appear that the level of investment is unusually low for this stage of the business cycle. A more difficult task is determining why. As we shall see, there are a number of possible explanations, but no single one seems to hold the entire answer. An explanation that has received a great deal of attention is that a capital overhang, usually thought of as concentrated in high-tech equipment, developed in the late 1990s and subsequently has been dragging down investment spending. In the late 1990s, firms invested in high-tech goods at a very rapid pace, spurred at first by plunging prices and robust business output growth and eventually by an apparently overly optimistic view about the returns on those investments. Subsequently, high-tech investment dropped at a double-digit rate in 2001 and fell further in 2002. This sharp decline, combined with the high depreciation rates on these types of goods, severely curtailed growth of the capital stock, and any overhang seems likely to have been eliminated relatively quickly. However, desired or optimal capital stocks are notoriously difficult to specify and measure, and hence so are overhangs, even several years after the episode. Consequently, we cannot definitively rule out the possibility that the excess capital built up during the late 1990s is restraining investment to some extent today. Another possibility is that business investment has been held down in recent years because relative prices of capital goods are no longer falling at the same pace at which they declined in the late 1990s. At least some of the deceleration may reflect a slowing pace of technological improvement--that is, less-rapid downward shifts in the supply curve of capital goods. However, to the extent that these price changes are well measured and our econometric models are well specified, the implications of slower price declines should already be captured by our models. In addition, the effects of less rapidly falling prices on the growth rate of the user cost of capital appears to have been substantially offset over much of this period by declines in real interest rates. Another explanation that received attention in the early years of this decade is that businesses were unusually cautious after the most recent recession in expanding their productive capacity. Both hiring and capital investment lagged the usual recovery pace. One possible source of this caution was said to be questions about the strength and sustainability of the recovery, accentuated by concerns about terrorism and other geopolitical uncertainties. Many periods of recovery have been accompanied by concerns about economic growth and political turmoil. But surveys suggest that managers did experience a prolonged sense of gloom, with measures of sentiment dropping to low levels and staying that way for a year or two beyond the business cycle trough. However, the economy has been expanding at an above-trend pace for about two years now, and the durability of the recovery should no longer be an issue. Indeed, most surveys of business confidence and capital spending plans have reached, and in some cases exceeded, the levels of the late 1990s. Still another possibility is that conditions created by corporate governance scandals and the regulatory response to those events led firms to hold back on capital spending. The scandals and the market's reaction were said to have contributed to a more conservative attitude toward risk taking. Moreover, complying with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 may have affected capital spending as firms scrambled to meet the 2004 and 2005 deadlines. Clearly, compliance costs have been substantial, perhaps diverting funds and attention away from capital spending plans. However, capital spending to update information systems to address the enhanced auditing needs may be offsetting at least a portion of any damping effect the legislation may have had. In any event, the market effects of corporate governance scandals appear to have faded some time ago. And, at larger companies, where systems have been adapted to the new requirements, compliance now should be more routine, freeing time and attention to concentrate on business strategy and expansion. If these types of influences have had any restraining effects, they should be receding. Changing replacement cycles are another potential downward influence on the pace of investment. Before 2000, many firms invested in new technologies to replace those not compatible with the century date change. This effort tended to speed up replacement cycles (and thus depreciation), boosting gross investment at that time. The resulting bunching of purchases may have contributed to the drop-off in investment in 2001 as firms with relatively new, efficient capital goods saw less reason to upgrade. Also, during 2001 and 2002, anecdotal reports suggested that many firms saw no need to upgrade equipment because no compelling new technology or application had been released, which would have tended to lengthen the replacement cycle. If replacement cycles since then have remained longer than in previous decades, firms would respond with a lower level of gross investment. And, anecdotes and surveys suggest that replacement cycles have in fact lengthened in this century compared with the late 1990s. But the implied drop in the rate of depreciation is much too small to explain the low-investment puzzle. Some have posited that low investment in the United States reflects firms' decisions to meet expanding demand by investing overseas rather than at home. Economic theory suggests that in countries where labor is cheap and abundant, all else equal, we would expect the marginal product of capital to be relatively high, making these economies attractive places in which to invest. Thus, countries such as China ought to be seeing an influx of direct investment. However, the dollar value of U.S. direct investment into China averaged about $2 billion per year in the first five years of this decade, much less than 1 percent of domestic investment spending and not enough to be a major influence on investment spending trends. Looking at flows to all developing economies, the share of outward direct investment going to these destinations has been about flat over the past decade. Foreign direct investment, as a whole, has been rising relative to domestic investment, but gradually over several decades--a trend that was not picked up in recent years. Clearly, none of these explanations is the sole cause of the relatively restrained level of investment. Most likely, some combination of these factors along with others we have not identified accounted for the sharp decline in investment in 2001 and 2002 and has contributed to keeping investment spending rising along a lower track subsequently, both domestically and abroad. However, as I noted, several of those factors are of questionable quantitative import, and others no longer seem to provide a rationale for the failure of investment spending to rebound more vigorously. Yet, most indicators in hand do not point to a surge in business fixed investment that will restore the trend derived from earlier relationships. Instead, the latest reads on business spending and intentions point to continued solid growth in capital spending, supported by favorable fundamentals of steady increases in final demand and a relatively damped cost of capital. Over the past three quarters, both orders and shipments of capital equipment (excluding the volatile aircraft category) have continued to move up at roughly the steady pace seen since 2003. Moreover, orders remained above shipments in the first quarter of this year, leading to another increase in the backlog of orders. In addition, surveys indicate that businesses' capital spending plans and their outlook for sales remain, on balance, in the elevated range that they have occupied for several quarters. A slowing in the growth of consumption and residential investment associated with a cooling in the housing market will exert some restraint on capital investment, but business sales should receive some support from improved markets for our exports. Moreover, business spending on structures finally seems to be picking up momentum. The construction data that we have in hand for the first two months of the year suggest a bounceback from the anemic growth in spending on nonresidential buildings that has prevailed over the past few years. This pickup should persist, responding to the recent declines in office and industrial vacancy rates. And expenditures on drilling and mining structures are likely to remain strong, given the current market expectations for elevated energy prices. Spending on structures should also get a boost this year from rebuilding in the areas hard hit by last year's hurricanes. The outlook for solid increases in investment spending has both upside and downside risks associated with it. On the downside, the cooling off that we are currently observing in housing markets could become more severe, and both residential construction and consumer spending could take a larger hit than expected. A substantial slowing in these two categories of final demand would likely induce some businesses to curtail or delay investment projects. On the upside, we cannot say exactly why the level of investment has remained low for the past few years, so we certainly cannot rule out a return to previous higher trends. In that regard, we do seem to be seeing a strengthening in global demand, which could signal a more pervasive change in attitudes and expectations. Because capital spending influences not only aggregate demand today but also influences aggregate supply and productivity over the medium term, it is a key element of any forecast. The focus in current commentary is mostly on the outlook for housing and consumption, but I suspect that business fixed investment will again play a central role in shaping the path of the economy. The experience of the past several years does not seem to have greatly clarified the reasons for the extent of the fall in investment in 2001 and 2002 and its subsequent failure to return to previous trends. The persisting puzzle has the effect of increasing uncertainty around any projection. But it also suggests the potential for substantial returns to further analysis and research for forecasters, like those in this club and us in the Federal Reserve. Footnotes 1.Stacey Tevlinand Charles S. Struckmeyer, of the Board's staff, contributed to these remarks.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Greenlining Institute's Thirteenth Annual Economic Development Summit, Los Angeles, California(via satellite) I would like to thank Greenlining for the opportunity to participate in today's conference. In my time at the Federal Reserve, I have had a number of opportunities to meet with community economic development leaders to discuss issues of mutual concern and learn about the valuable role that community development organizations play in economically distressed areas across the country. I have been particularly impressed, and heartened, by the increasingly high degree of professionalism in the field. In this area, as in social policy generally, good intentions are not enough. Successful community development requires knowledge--knowledge about the particular community in question and about what has worked in similar communities in the past--and community development organizations are working assiduously and with sophisticated tools to help develop that knowledge. Of course, knowledge bearing on community economic development has both qualitative and quantitative aspects, and it can be gained through diverse channels, from talking to people in a neighborhood to performing a regression analysis. Today, I will focus on the progress that is being made on the quantitative side--in particular, the remarkable strides that have been made in developing and analyzing social and economic data at the community level. The information that can be extracted from detailed data profiles of individual communities supports economic development in several distinct ways. First, by making companies, entrepreneurs, and investors aware of new opportunities and by promoting competition in underserved areas, such information helps put market forces in the service of community development. Second, both government policymakers and community development organizations need the reality check that only hard data can provide. To know whether our policies and programs are delivering the desired results, we need to be able to measure inputs and outcomes, program by program and community by community. Better information increases accountability and promotes good governance in both the public and the nonprofit sectors. Third, the increased availability of community-level data facilitates independent research, which is vital to informing the public policy debate and to developing further community development efforts, both public and private. Historically, government agencies have been the source of the most-comprehensive social and economic data bearing on community development. An important example is the data collected by the Federal Reserve under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). The HMDA data set provides extensive information on home mortgage applications to virtually all U.S. lenders, including approval rates, the socioeconomic characteristics of applicants, and most recently, mortgage pricing information. As all good social scientists know, the data never "speak for themselves," and the HMDA information, like any data set, must be interpreted with care and insight. Still, for nearly three decades, the HMDA data have provided valuable information about mortgage lending patterns, contributed to significant changes in mortgage credit practices, informed regulatory policies, and supported fair-lending enforcement. Although government agencies continue to be an important source of data on community development, data collection and data analysis in this area is increasingly becoming the province of the private and nonprofit sectors, notably including community development organizations themselves. In recent years, we have seen a series of data-collection initiatives outside the public sector, with objectives that include the improvement of development strategies, the identification of new opportunities, the quantification of risk, and the exertion of influence on the direction of public policy. Many of these efforts have already had significant payoffs. In the rest of my remarks, I will discuss some specific ways data and quantitative measurement have been used in community development. To be clear, I do not believe that all aspects of economic development can or should be quantified; and, as I have already noted, the data never speak for themselves but must be interpreted with care. Still, improving the measurement of inputs and outcomes is critical to better development policy. In this regard, it is interesting to observe that we have seen some convergence between best practices in community economic development and in economic development policy at the international level. I will conclude by noting a few of those parallels and their implications. Discovering Market PotentialGood data support community growth and development by helping to identify previously unrecognized market opportunities. Free markets can be a powerful source of economic development, but markets work less effectively when information about potential opportunities is absent or costly for private actors to obtain. Several noteworthy initiatives have helped to provide better information about the economic potential of lower-income and underserved communities. For example, the Local Initiative Support Corporation's (LISC) MetroEdge initiative seeks to demonstrate the market potential of diverse communities through customized data analyses of each community's demographics and buying power. Such analysis can provide investors with a different perspective when they assess a neighborhood's viability for investment. In one instance, a national home-improvement retailer used MetroEdge data as the basis for its decision to establish a store in inner-city Chicago, even though the retailer's own site-selection model presented discouraging indications of profit potential for that neighborhood. With access to new market data, the company could justify its investment in the community, and sales performance was triple what was expected within the first six months of operation.1 Similarly, Social Compact's Neighborhood Market DrillDown methodology uses a multilayered research process to provide profiles of the market potential of high-density, lower-income communities. This approach focuses on business indicators--buying power, market size, unmet needs, and market risks--rather than on the deficiency statistics typically used to describe inner-city neighborhoods, such as rates of poverty, crime, and overcrowding. Social Compact, a coalition of business leaders, has applied its DrillDown approach to 101 neighborhoods over the past five years, beginning with Chicago neighborhoods and, most recently, in Santa Ana, California. By tapping existing public records and conducting intensive economic and demographic surveys, the DrillDown analyses of these 101 neighborhoods in eight cities have, in the aggregate, revealed additional income and buying power averaging nearly $6,000 per household, which is not captured by traditional sources of community-level data.2Such information may attract private-sector investors to areas that had once been deemed untenable for investment. For example, following Social Compact's study of neighborhoods in Jacksonville, Florida, a developer announced plans to invest $45 million in a multi-use entertainment complex there. A DrillDown study in inner-city Houston revealed a population that was 25 percent larger than Census estimates, resulting in the redevelopment of a 750,000 square foot retail center that brought 2,000 jobs to a neighborhood that had not had new construction in fifty years. This shopping center is now one of the busiest retail centers in the city.3 Work to improve the measurement of market potential in inner-city communities is continuing. In one such project, Social Compact and the Brookings Institution's Urban Markets Initiative group are collaborating in reviewing methods for measuring the size and composition of economies in urban areas around the world. The objectives of the review are to develop new tools for measuring economic activity at the local level and to identify areas for future research. Informing Investors in Community DevelopmentThe growth and maturation of community development financial institutions (CDFIs) provide another impetus for data development and analysis at the community level. CDFIs are private-sector financial intermediaries with community development as their primary mission. Like banks and other more-conventional financial intermediaries, CDFIs are in the business of attracting funds and putting those funds to work in productive ways. Also like conventional intermediaries, CDFIs depend heavily on the production of accurate information both to guide investment decisions and to provide a basis for attracting new funding. It is difficult to overstate the importance of adequate and accurate information for attracting capital. Managers of pools of capital have many choices, and they tend to be extremely wary when they cannot fully assess the level of risk presented. With an appreciation for the need for such information, managers and others with an interest in the CDFI industry have invested substantial effort in designing tools for data collection and analysis that focus on measuring the financial performance--the risks and returns--of CDFI portfolios. An important motivation for these efforts is the need to diversify funding sources for community development, which has relied heretofore largely on grants from government and foundations. To attract more return-oriented investors, including both conventional investors and those with social as well as financial goals, CDFIs must demonstrate financial viability as well as the ability to fulfill the broader development mission. For example, the Opportunity Finance Network's CDFI Assessment and Rating System (CARS) gathers data to evaluate a CDFI's overall creditworthiness and its effectiveness in using its financial resources to achieve its development objectives. A CDFI is rated for its financial strength and performance in the areas of capital, assets, management, earnings, and liquidity, in a manner broadly analogous to the way a supervisory agency would rate a commercial bank. The financial analysis is supplemented by an evaluation of how well the CDFI is fulfilling its mission, including an assessment of its procedures for tracking the outcomes of its work. To date, more than forty CDFIs have chosen to be evaluated under the CARS, and thirty-one analyses have been completed. Thus far, fifteen potential investors have subscribed to the CARS database, including socially responsible investment funds, brokerage houses, large financial institutions, and national foundations.4Although still in its early stages, this initiative, if successful, will have the double benefit of attracting more funds into community development and helping to ensure that those funds are effectively used. More generally, the movement toward quantifying the performance, risk, and community impact of CDFIs is essential to the growth and sustainability of the field, in my view. By demonstrating both financial viability and social impact through hard data, CDFIs are better positioned to obtain the funding necessary to maintain their operations and to respond to emerging needs and opportunities. Indeed, progress has been made in recent years in the rating and securitization of community development portfolios, a development that should provide CDFIs with increased access to the capital markets and to new sources of liquidity. If the new data and evaluation methods of CDFI performance bear scrutiny, investors will gain confidence in using this information for matching their investment choices with their priorities and risk tolerances. In the community development field, to be sure, financial returns and social returns are not necessarily the same, which is why measurement should include both financial and social indicators. Potential investors, including public-sector and foundation sources of funds, will naturally differ on the weights they put on financial and social returns. To attract the widest range of funding, both types of information should be provided. Evaluating Policy and PracticeQuantitative information plays yet another important role: increasing the effectiveness of policies and programs. The systematic collection and analysis of data on program inputs and outputs is an increasingly important part of learning about what works. For policymakers, data on program results help guide policy development and improve the allocation of scarce public funds. For community development organizations, participation in broad-based data-gathering serves at least two goals. First, in the long run, their analyses of the activities and the associated outcomes in diverse communities will help them achieve the greatest impact for resources expended. Second, such analyses help community development organizations demonstrate their effectiveness to public and private funders. A number of methods for evaluating community development projects are currently in use, with more in development. The NeighborWorks America's Success Measures Data System documents the effect of community development programs throughout the country. Using forty-four indicators and a range of data-collection tools, the system quantifies the effects of housing, economic development, and community building programs at the individual, organization, and community levels. By sharing this knowledge, practitioners, funders, and policymakers can identify programs that achieve the best outcomes and gain insights into the reasons they work. Broad access to this information promotes replication of the most effective programs and may diminish the costs associated with trial-and-error learning.5 Another tool available to CDFIs is the Community Investment Impact System developed by the Department of Treasury's CDFI Fund. This system collects detailed information on institutions and transactions, allowing the CDFI Fund to measure community effects and to associate those effects with institutions working in that area. These results can help inform funding decisions, develop programs, establish performance benchmarks, and communicate societal benefits attributable to specific policy. For example, using data from the system, the CDFI Fund found that in a recent year, CDFIs leveraged financial program awards by the fund at a ratio of 20 to 1, using multiple sources of debt and equity financing from banks, local and state governments, private investors, and borrower equity to structure project financing.6 Each of these data-driven initiatives share the goal of increasing understanding of opaque markets to support investment, policy, and research. The need for data and tools is the driving force behind the Brookings Institution's Urban Markets Initiative. In establishing this policy center, Brookings acknowledged that limited access to data that captures the viability of urban communities constrains investment in these markets. The think tank is focusing on initiatives that can demonstrate untapped market potential.7One such effort is the National Infrastructure for Community Statistics. It will include a central web-based repository that integrates data from federal, state, and local governments and from commercial sources. The ultimate goal of this project, which is under development in collaboration with more than 100 participants from government, nonprofits, and private-sector industries, is to aggregate and to make accessible the data needed to inform decisions about economic development activities.8 Parallels to International Economic DevelopmentThe usefulness of microeconomic data in community development raises an interesting parallel to recent analyses of international economic development. Although the U.S. context is obviously different in important respects from that of developing countries, domestic community organizations and providers of international aid both face the challenge of fostering economic development in low-income areas. In the United States, our experience in community development over the past thirty years has resulted in an evolution from a centralized, federal-government-driven approach to a heavy reliance on the involvement of community-based organizations and agencies for project development and implementation. In light of this experience, it is quite interesting that some new thinking on international development has rejected the traditional approach to aid, with its emphasis on large-scale projects and top-down planning, in favor of micro-level, bottom-up approaches that use local information and systematic analyses of inputs and outcomes. Critics of traditional development aid programs, such as New York University economist William Easterly, argue that such programs have not succeeded because those implementing the programs do not have the information necessary to make effective use of resources.9For example, a World Bank report describes an irrigation project that was being designed by technical staff for an area of Nepal that was thought to be unirrigated. A delay in the project led to the discovery that, in fact, eighty-five fully functioning farmer-managed irrigation systems existed in the "unirrigated" area. Further, another irrigation program actually reduced productivity because it undermined pre-existing arrangements among farmers.10Quite obviously, those planning these projects needed local input to make better use of the project resources. Easterly advocates a more decentralized, grass-roots approach that involves local groups and emphasizes feedback and accountability. Illustrative of this point, a World Bank study of rural water supply projects found that, of those projects with a high level of participation by local beneficiaries, more than two-thirds were successful whereas, among those projects with little local beneficiary participation, only 12 percent were successful.11Both feedback and accountability depend, of course, on accurate measurement of results. In practice, measuring results is easier at the local level, in part because comparisons can be drawn to other localities that have not received aid. Incentives also matter; and smaller, more-tailored projects for which responsibilities are well defined are likely to provide better incentives to the people who carry them out than those that large, diffuse projects will provide. Follow-up is important as well. Easterly criticizes, for instance, situations in which foreign aid has been used to build highly visible projects, such as new roads, without providing resources or incentives to do the less-glamorous work of maintaining them. The themes emphasized by Easterly and other analysts of international aid programs are useful, I think, in the context of domestic community development. Although national initiatives have their place, often the most effective programs take place at the level of the individual community, using local information and local participation. Accountability and feedback, facilitated by data development and quantitative analysis as well as by more-qualitative information, are critical for success. Goals should be modest at first; but knowledge is cumulative, and sometimes good results can be replicated at larger scales. Research, both quantitative and qualitative, furthers learning. None of this is easy, particularly since the data have a way of challenging our views about what works and what doesn't. But a great deal is at stake both internationally and domestically and serious empirical analysis has no substitute. The development of more and better data on economically distressed communities, together with sophisticated tools for analyzing those data, is essential for continued progress in community economic development. Footnotes 1.Local Initiatives Support Corporation, "LISC Adds Market Research Initiative to Arsenal of Community Development Tools." MetroEdge, Case Studies, "World's Largest Home Improvement Retailer."Return to text 2.Social Compact. "Social Compact Completes DRILLDOWN in One Hundredth Underserved Neighborhood," DrillDown aggregate statistics provided by Social Compact.Return to text 3.Social Compact, News and Events, "Image Upgrade for Santa Ana's Core,"The Orange County Register, February 7, 2006. Social Compact, News and Events, "The Immigrant Dollar: A Driving Force at Gulfgate," The Houston Chronicle, April 9, 2006.Return to text 4.Opportunity Finance Network; National Community Capital Association,CARS, the CDFI Assessment and Rating System.Return to text 5.NeighborWorks America,Success Measures Data System.Return to text 6.United States Department of the Treasury (2005), Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, Impact Data and Reports, "CDFIs Leverage CDFI Program Awards Nearly $20 to $1!" (May).Return to text 7.Brookings Institution,Urban Markets Initiative.Return to text 8.Brookings Institution,National Infrastructure for Community Statistics.Return to text 9.William Easterly (2001),The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists' Adventures and Misadventures in the Tropics, (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).Return to text 10.World Bank (1998), "Assessing Aid--What Works, What Doesn't, and Why," Policy Research Reports (November).Return to text 11.World Bank (1998), "Assessing Aid."Return to text
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the European Central Bank and Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Joint Conference on Issues Related to Central Counterparty Clearing, Frankfurt, Germany As many of you know, I became a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System only a month ago. I am delighted to be giving my first speech as a governor at a conference that has resulted from the kind of international cooperation that I see as essential in today's world. The joint sponsorship of this conference by the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago represents an extremely fruitful collaboration of researchers, market participants, and policymakers from both sides of the Atlantic. Having been a research consultant at the Chicago Fed for many years and having visited the ECB numerous times since its founding less than eight years ago, I have many friends at both institutions and am pleased to see so many of those friends here today. In addition, I am delighted that the topic of this cooperative venture and my maiden speech is central counterparty (CCP) clearing. As an academic, I wrote several papers on clearing arrangements and participated in many conferences such as this one. I am very pleased to be in a room filled with others who share that interest. In recent years, public policymakers have demonstrated growing interest and concern about the effectiveness of CCP risk management. In particular, in November 2004 the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) of the Group of Ten central banks and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) jointly issued comprehensive international standards for CCP risk management.1I have often cited CCPs for exchange-traded derivatives as a prime example of how market forces can privately regulate financial risk very effectively.2Indeed, it is hard to find fault with the track record of derivatives CCPs, many of which have managed counterparty risk so effectively that they have never suffered a counterparty default. But perhaps it is not unreasonable to ask whether that track record will be maintained. I see that good track record as a result of innovations that over time produced organizational arrangements that have provided market participants with the incentives and capabilities to ensure effective CCP risk management, thereby serving the public interest as well as the interests of market participants. Significant changes to those arrangements could result in less-effective risk management. Furthermore, some CCPs have begun to clear new products, some of which may be less liquid or more complex than exchange-traded derivatives, and thus may pose challenges to traditional risk-management procedures. Finally, more-intense government regulation of CCPs may prove counterproductive if it creates moral hazard or impedes the ability of CCPs to develop new approaches to risk management. As cross-border activity becomes ever more important, regulatory differences across countries may become an increasingly serious impediment to innovation by CCPs. In my remarks today, I will begin by reviewing the historical development of CCPs. I do this not for antiquarian interest but because this history illustrates how market forces led to the evolution of organizational and contractual features that have created strong incentives for effective private regulation that addressed both market participants' and public policymakers' concerns about risk control. I will then discuss the possible implications of recent variations on traditional arrangements. Next I will discuss the challenges involved in clearing certain new products, particularly over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives. I will conclude with some views on how government regulation can provide an environment in which private regulation of CCP risk management continues to be effective. Historical Development of Futures ClearinghousesMy review of the historical development of central counterparties will focus on the CCP for grain futures traded on the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT). I make no claim that a CCP first arose in the United States. Indeed, a number of coffee and grain exchanges in Europe had some form of CCP in the late nineteenth century, well before any U.S. exchange.3Rather, I simply am more familiar with developments in Chicago, in large measure because of the time that Jim Moser spent digging through the CBOT's archives while on the staff of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.4Furthermore, the market forces that drove the evolution of risk controls at the CBOT likely produced a broadly similar evolution on other exchanges. An important lesson from the CBOT's experience is that a CCP emerged gradually and slowly as a result of experience and experimentation. Early on, the CBOT recognized the importance of creating incentives for adherence to its rules, including the contractual obligations of counterparties to contracts traded on the exchange. Initially, the primary incentive was the threat that a member that defaulted on its obligations could be barred from the trading floor. No doubt this consequence was a powerful incentive for solvent members to meet their obligations, but an insolvent member might not have assigned significant value to the loss of trading privileges. By 1873, the CBOT recognized the importance of evaluating the solvency of its members and adopted a resolution stipulating that any member whose solvency was questioned must open its financial accounts to inspection and could be expelled if it refused to do so. Around the same time, the exchange introduced initial and variation margin requirements for contracts traded on the exchange and set strict time limits for the posting of margin deposits. Failure to post margin deposits would be considered a default on the member's contracts. The next step along the road to addressing private and public concerns about effective risk control was the CBOT's creation of a clearinghouse in 1883. For many years, the clearinghouse was not a true CCP. Rather, as created, it was merely a mechanism to reduce transactions costs by calculating members' net obligations to post margin and to settle contracts. In the event of a member's default, the clearinghouse assumed no responsibility for settling the defaulting member's trades or for covering the losses to other members that exceeded the amount of margin that the defaulting member had posted. Only in 1925 did the CBOT form the Board of Trade Clearing Corporation (BOTCC), a true CCP that became the counterparty to all transactions on the exchange. With the creation of BOTCC, members of the exchange were required to purchase shares in the clearinghouse, and only the member-shareholders were permitted to use the facility.5Members were also required to post their margin deposits with the clearinghouse. In the event of a member's default, the clearinghouse would take responsibility for settling the defaulting member's trades. The clearinghouse would seek to cover any losses incurred in settling the defaulter's obligations by liquidating its margin deposit. But if the losses exceeded the value of the margin, the deficiency would be charged against the clearinghouse's capital, including the capital owned by the non-defaulting members. If the losses were so severe as to deplete the clearinghouse's capital, the members could be required to purchase additional shares. This organizational arrangement has been adopted by many other CCPs, both for exchange-traded derivatives and for cash securities transactions. I characterize this structure as a partial integration of the members of the exchange into a single unit because each member is now at least in part financially responsible for the performance of the others' obligations arising from contracts traded on the exchange.6The mutualization of risk creates incentives for all the exchange's members to support the imposition of risk controls that limit the extent to which the trading activities of any individual member expose all other members to losses from defaults. Moreover, because the members own the clearinghouse, they have the capability to act on their incentives for effective CCP risk management. I see this alignment of incentives for effective risk management with the ability to act on those incentives as the key to the strong historical track record of derivatives CCPs. What is interesting and instructive about the history of these arrangements is that it illustrates how market forces can produce private regulations that address the concerns about safety, soundness, and broader financial stability. Potential Challenges Raised by Recent Changes to CCP OrganizationDuring the twentieth century, various changes occurred in the historical organizational arrangements that I have characterized as a partial integration of the members of the exchange. And in the twenty-first century, the pace of change seems to be accelerating. Some derivatives exchanges have remained integrated with their CCP, but even in those cases, there now tends to be less integration. Members of the exchange are seldom required to be members of the clearinghouse. Instead, members of the exchange may arrange to clear through other members, which are referred to as "clearing members." When a clearing member agrees to clear for a nonclearing member, it becomes responsible to the clearinghouse for the obligations of the nonclearing member. Only the clearing members are required to buy stock in the clearinghouse or to contribute to a clearing fund that would be used to cover losses from defaults by other clearing members, including defaults on their obligations to perform on positions held by nonclearing members. In recent years, an increasing number of exchanges have engaged unaffiliated CCPs to clear their trades. A "horizontal" integration of CCPs has replaced the "vertical" integration of an exchange and its CCP. Both horizontally integrated CCPs and vertically integrated CCPs have often arranged for insurance policies that limit the potential losses to their clearing members from defaults. Finally, many exchanges have converted from mutual associations of exchange members to for-profit corporations. Clearly some of these changes have important implications for competition among exchanges. But they may also have implications for the effectiveness of risk management, which is the focus of my remarks today. As I have discussed, historically the key to effective risk management has been that the members of the exchange have borne the risk of losses from defaults and have had the capacity to institute risk controls (principally membership standards and margin requirements) that have limited those risks. The question then is whether any of these changes to the organization of CCPs has left those bearing the risks without the capacity to manage those risks. I would caution against assuming that change is inherently risky. After all, as we have seen, the partial integration model that worked so well for so many years emerged only gradually as a result of experimentation. Moreover, thinking that "one size fits all" regarding the organization of financial markets is a mistake. That said, it seems critical that the organization of any CCP, including a CCP that follows the traditional partial-integration model, should conform to a pair of broad principles. First, a CCP's default rules need to be transparent: The party that bears the risk of default (who has "skin in the game") must be clear to all. Second, a CCP's governance arrangements must provide those with "skin in the game" with substantial influence over the CCP's risk controls. New ProductsIn recent years, appreciation of the possible benefits of a well-organized CCP has been growing. CCP arrangements have been introduced in a wide variety of markets that had not previously been served by CCPs. In the United States, the New York Stock Exchange established a clearinghouse in 1892 and transformed it into a true CCP in 1920. But, outside the United States, few securities exchanges established CCPs until late in the twentieth century. Today, a CCP is in place and functioning in nearly all major securities markets. Increasingly often, CCPs for securities clear trades, including trades and repurchase agreements involving government bonds, in the over-the-counter securities markets. Since 1999 the London Clearing House (now LCH.Clearnet) has been clearing growing volumes of some types of OTC derivatives through its SwapClear service. The clearing of OTC derivatives is an especially interesting development. Although SwapClear has been gaining traction, it has been met with resistance from some OTC derivatives dealers. Some of them have argued that bilateral credit risk management, which uses many of the same techniques that CCPs use (netting and margin requirements), is highly effective. Moreover, not all OTC derivatives are sufficiently standardized to be cleared. Consequently, some have expressed concerns that CCP clearing of "vanilla" products could increase the risks on non-cleared "exotic" products by limiting the scope for bilateral netting of vanilla products against exotic products outside the CCP. Another consideration for the most creditworthy dealers may be the potential effect of CCP clearing on mitigating the competitive advantage of their creditworthiness.7 With regard to systemic risk, the key question about the clearing of OTC derivatives is whether the risk-management techniques that have proved so effective in clearing exchange-traded products will prove equally effective in clearing products that are not as standardized. In particular, the clearing of OTC derivatives tends to entail much less scope for offsetting transactions. As a consequence, if a default occurred, a huge volume of transactions would need to be closed out. The feasibility of a CCP's achieving close-out promptly is clearly a critical issue that deserves careful examination. In that regard, a recent report by leading participants in the OTC derivatives markets expressed concern about the feasibility of close-out procedures in the event of default of a large market participant in stressed market conditions.8Further experimentation with close-out procedures may be necessary to address that concern. The Role of GovernmentIn recent years, policymakers have devoted much attention to oversight and regulation of CCPs, with the objective of promoting their soundness and stability. I certainly share that objective, but I would like to call attention to some possible unintended and undesirable consequences of CCP regulation. The first is moral hazard. Policymakers must be very careful to avoid any impression that government oversight comes with a promise of government financial support in the event of a risk-management failure; otherwise, private-market discipline, which has served private and public interests in the stability of CCP arrangements so well for so long, may well be eviscerated. Instead, government regulation should focus on improving the effectiveness of private-market regulation. In particular, it should enforce the observance of the two critical principles I identified earlier. First, it should ensure that a CCP's risk-management policies and procedures, especially its policies for handling defaults and allocating the burden of losses from defaults, are transparent to market participants. Second, it should ensure that CCP governance arrangements provide the parties who would bear the losses with substantial influence over the CCP's risk-management policies. My sense is that policymakers are well aware of the risks that moral hazard poses for financial stability. But I am concerned that a second unintended consequence of regulation has too often gone unrecognized. That is the potential for conflicting regulation (and laws) to impede the evolution of CCP arrangements, especially the potential for economies of scale and scope to be achieved through consolidation. I am always puzzled when I hear the United States held up as the model for the benefits of consolidation of the clearing and settlement infrastructure. We have achieved significant consolidation within the securities markets and within the futures markets. But I am struck by the lack of consolidation of securities and futures CCPs. Perhaps there is no business case for such consolidation. Even if a business case exists, however, I believe consolidation would be difficult to achieve due to the legal and regulatory distinctions in the United States between securities and futures. Law and regulation seem also to be placing significant barriers in the way of consolidation of the securities and derivatives clearing and settlement infrastructure in Europe. Most of the fifteen barriers to efficient cross-border clearing and settlement that were identified by the Giovannini Report in 2001, seem to be grounded in law and regulation rather than in the practices of private-market participants.9 Policymakers in all countries need to examine whether legal and regulatory distinctions are impeding innovation and, if so, whether the distinctions are meaningful and essential for the achievement of public policy objectives. Policymakers must also resist the temptation to place regulation in the service of protectionism. I read with interest and appreciation European Union Commissioner McCreevy's recent speech at the London School of Economics on the development of the European capital markets, in which he decried the signs of a new wave of protectionism in Europe.10As he noted, "Protectionism is a proven route to economic stagnation and decline."11This is an important message, indeed. ConclusionsI find the history of financial markets to be enormously instructive. My reading of the history of CCP clearing is that it teaches us that private-market regulation can be effective for achieving the public policy goal of safety and soundness and broader financial stability. Government regulation and oversight should seek to provide an environment in which private regulation can be most effective. Government regulation should not place unnecessary barriers--domestically or internationally--in the path of the future evolution of private-market regulation. Innovation should be fostered, and regulatory protectionism should be rejected. Footnotes 1.Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2004),Recommendations for Central Counterparties(Basel: Bank for International Settlements, November).Return to text 2.Randall S. Kroszner (1999), "Can the Financial Markets Privately Regulate Risk? The Development of Derivatives Clearinghouses and Recent Over-the-Counter Innovations,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,vol. 31 (August), pp. 596-618. See also Randall S. Kroszner (2000), "Lessons from Financial Crises: The Role of Clearinghouses,"Journal of Financial Services Research, vol. 18 (December), pp. 157-71.Return to text 3.See the discussion on pp. 71-72 of Henry Crosby Emery (1896),Speculation on the Stock and Produce Exchanges of the United States(New York: Columbia University).Return to text 4.James T. Moser (1998), "Contracting Innovations and the Evolution of Clearing and Settlement Methods of Futures Exchanges," Working Paper (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago).Return to text 5.Later, a member of the exchange was not required to be a member of the clearinghouse if it could arrange for a clearinghouse member to assume responsibility for the nonmember's obligations to the clearinghouse.Return to text 6.See Kroszner (1999), p. 603.Return to text 7.For one account that argues that the introduction of CCP clearing in U.S. futures markets was delayed by financially strong members who were resistant to giving up the advantage of their high credit quality and to implicitly subsidizing weaker, see Craig Pirrong (1997), "A Positive Theory of Financial Exchange Organization with Normative Implications for Financial Market Regulation," Working Paper (St. Louis: Olin School of Business, Washington University).Return to text 8.Counterpart Risk Management Policy Group II (2005),Toward Greater Financial Stability: A Private Sector Perspective(New York: CRMPG II, July).Return to text 9.The Giovannini Group (2001),Cross-Border Clearing and Settlement Arrangements in the European Union(Brussels: The European Commission, November).Return to text 10.Charlie McCreevy (2006),The Development of the European Capital Market(London: London School of Economics, March 9).Return to text 11.See McCreevy (2006), p. 3.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board announced Wednesday the consolidation of two internal advisory committees on payments system matters. The duties of the Payments System Policy Advisory Committee will be expanded to encompass the responsibilities and activities of the Payments System Development Committee, including its public outreach efforts. The Payments System Development Committee will be discontinued. The Payments System Policy Advisory Committee was formed in July 1986 to advise the Board on a range of issues, including risk-management issues, primarily in wholesale payment and settlement systems, and the relationship between wholesale payment systems and financial markets. The Payments System Development Committee was formed in July 1999 to advise on medium- and long-term public policy issues surrounding innovation in the retail payments system. The expanded Payments System Policy Advisory Committee will provide the Board with a coordinated view of developments in both wholesale and retail payments at a time of significant overall change in the U.S. payments system and help coordinate Federal Reserve work involving domestic and international payments and settlement systems. In particular, the committee will advise the Board on:The Federal Reserve's Policy on Payments System Risk, which sets forth risk- management expectations that public and private-sector systems should meet and governs the provision of Federal Reserve intraday creditThe Federal Reserve's oversight of payment and settlement systems under its Policy on Payments System Risk, with a focus on these systems' risk management policies and processesThe relationship between payment and settlement systems and financial markets, including financial stability issuesDevelopments in retail and wholesale payments systems and instruments as well as technological and market trends affecting these developmentsStrategies to foster the safety, efficiency, and accessibility of the U.S. dollar payments system over the long termThe Payments System Policy Advisory Committee will also continue the public outreach activities of the Payments System Development Committee by consulting with payments system providers, participants, and users to identify barriers to greater efficiency and risk reduction in retail and wholesale payments and settlement systems.The Payments System Policy Advisory Committee will be chaired by Governor Donald L. Kohn. The other members of the committee will be President Timothy F. Geithner of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Governor Randall S. Kroszner, President Cathy E. Minehan of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, President Michael H. Moskow of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, President Gary H. Stern of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, and Governor Kevin M. Warsh. First Vice President Patrick K. Barron of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta will be a liaison member of the committee. The Payments System Policy Advisory Committee will also continue the public outreach activities of the Payments System Development Committee by consulting with payments system providers, participants, and users to identify barriers to greater efficiency and risk reduction in retail and wholesale payments and settlement systems. The Payments System Policy Advisory Committee will be chaired by Governor Donald L. Kohn. The other members of the committee will be President Timothy F. Geithner of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Governor Randall S. Kroszner, President Cathy E. Minehan of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, President Michael H. Moskow of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, President Gary H. Stern of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, and Governor Kevin M. Warsh. First Vice President Patrick K. Barron of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta will be a liaison member of the committee.
Governor Donald L. Kohn At the Bankers and Business Leaders Luncheon, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Oklahoma City Branch, Oklahoma I am pleased to have this opportunity to talk with the business leaders of Oklahoma City. The Federal Reserve has deep roots in this community: The Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City has had a Branch here since 1920. Consistent with the experience of most other enterprises these days, the Federal Reserve is having to change the way we do business in response to rapid changes in technology. We can see the effects of these changes on the payment system every day and all around us as we make and receive payments that depend less and less on the use of checks. To hold down costs, we have been required to reduce the number of our offices delivering payments services to banks, including check and cash operations at Oklahoma City. But closing those operations by no means implies that we are reducing our commitment to the community. Indeed, Tom Hoenig and his colleagues at the Federal Reserve Bank in Kansas City are taking steps to strengthen our roots here. Our most important ties to local communities have never been primarily through the services we deliver to their banks. Rather they are established through the exchange of information between those communities and the Federal Reserve, and the Oklahoma City Branch will remain our eyes and ears in this region. Tom will continue to bring to our policy deliberations the information he gathers from Tyree Minner and his colleagues on the board of directors of the Oklahoma City Branch, from Bob Funk and his colleagues on the head office board, and from many other contacts in the region. The Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and the Oklahoma City Branch are increasing their efforts to reach out to this community to make sure that we are listening as effectively as possible to your impressions of the current economic circumstances, to explain our policies, to help educate the public in the use of the increasingly complex financial instruments available to them, and to work with community leaders to identify strategies that will help sustain a vibrant economy. The Board of Governors in Washington strongly supports these efforts by Kansas City and other Reserve Banks to deepen their ties to their communities, and I am pleased to be here as tangible evidence of that support. I thought I would take advantage of this opportunity to discuss the U.S. economy and the conduct of monetary policy. We are at an especially interesting juncture, so this is a good time to take stock of where we are and to peer ahead through the prognosticator's always murky lens. I must emphasize that these views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.1 On balance, the economy has been performing quite well in recent quarters, with growth strong and underlying inflation stable despite the considerable rise in energy prices over the past few years. I say "on balance" because a number of unusual factors have been influencing the pattern of economic activity lately, adding to the normal difficulty of discerning underlying trends from inherently volatile data and other information. These factors include not only last year's devastating hurricanes but also the unusually warm weather in the early part of this year, which very likely provided a fillip to housing construction and consumer spending. Smoothing through these events, however, the economy has been expanding at a pretty good clip by historical standards--probably an annual rate of about 3-1/2 percent since midyear 2005. Several factors have propelled reasonably strong economic growth. A critical element has been supportive financial conditions. Despite the tightening of monetary policy that began in mid-2004, short-term interest rates were at fairly low levels until recently, and the effects of those low rates have continued to spur household and business spending. In addition, although longer-term yields have moved up notably in recent weeks, they too have been low by historical standards. Moreover, credit to businesses and households has remained readily available at narrow spreads in markets and on favorable terms and conditions at banks, reflecting, in part, robust earnings and strong balance sheets at businesses along with good performance on outstanding household and business loans. The pace of economic growth in the United States has also been supported by a firming of activity abroad and the associated increases in demand for our exports. Among industrial countries, expansion of output has become more firmly established in both Japan and the euro area, while growth continues at a solid pace in the United Kingdom and Canada. Furthermore, economic growth in most of the emerging economies of Asia has been robust. U.S. exports were disrupted by last summer's hurricanes in the Gulf, but smoothing through this volatility, exports appear to have been contributing substantially to the growth of gross domestic product (GDP). Our economy has been able to register this good performance despite rising energy prices. This audience knows well that since late 2003 the price of West Texas intermediate crude oil, for delivery at Cushing, has soared from about $30 per barrel to nearly $70 recently. Nonetheless, the rise in energy prices has apparently had only a limited negative effect on the national economy. Energy costs are not nearly as important today as they once were. Since the 1970s, the energy intensity of production in the United States has fallen dramatically; indeed, on an inflation-adjusted basis, it takes roughly half as many Btu of energy to produce a dollar of GDP today than it did at the time of the 1973 oil crisis. This sharply reduced share of energy costs in total business expenses has likely limited the influence of these costs on profits, on overall consumer prices and real income, and on the economy more generally. A rough estimate puts the reduction in real GDP growth from the increases in energy prices since late 2003 at between 1/2 percent and 1 percent per year. Of course, reactions to higher energy prices are hard to predict, but the measured response of activity over the past couple of years suggests that the most recent price increases will have, at most, only a small effect on economic growth during this year. The good performance of the economy has led to a further narrowing in the margin of unutilized resources. For example, the Federal Reserve's measure of capacity utilization in manufacturing has moved up 2 percentage points during the past nine months, to around 80-1/2 percent, a touch above its longer-run average. Similarly, the unemployment rate has fallen almost 1/2 percentage point from early 2005 to around 4-3/4 percent last month. Nevertheless, the underlying rate of inflation has remained moderate. Headline inflation, of course, has been boosted by the jump in energy prices. However, the run-up in the prices of energy and other commodities appears to have had only a modest effect on prices for non-energy goods and services. The inflation rate for prices of consumer goods and services excluding food and energy, as measured by the core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index, has been running a bit under 2 percent, only about 1/2 percentage point above its rate two years ago before the spurt in energy prices began. Inflation has been restrained, in part, by the margin of slack in labor and product markets that has persisted through much of this period. Another reason for this favorable outcome is that longer-term inflation expectations remain well contained. For example, the median expected inflation rate during the next five to ten years, as reported in the University of Michigan's survey of consumers, has barely edged up in recent years, even as short-term inflation has been boosted by rising energy prices. Meanwhile, inflation compensation for investors implied by the spreads between the rates on nominal and CPI-indexed Treasury notes at both five- and ten-year maturities also has not shown any tendency to move higher on balance. In recent years, declining prices of imports and the threat of import competition have also probably held down costs and prices to a degree. Moreover, increases in compensation costs have generally been modest. To be sure, average hourly earnings of production and nonsupervisory workers have been accelerating in recent quarters. However, the broadest measures of compensation have not picked up, suggesting that competition in labor markets has been intense. Nonetheless, with labor markets tightening, some pickup in compensation increases for the broad measures would not be surprising. Nor would a pickup necessarily be inflationary, given the very good growth in labor productivity that we have experienced in recent years. Despite the relatively moderate increases in prices and costs that we have observed lately, the capacity utilization rate and the unemployment rate have recently reached zones that on occasion in the past have been associated with the beginnings of upward pressure on inflation. Of course, the past is not always a good guide to the future, in part because a great deal of uncertainty surrounds the relationship of resource utilization and inflation. For instance, we cannot directly observe full capacity of either labor or production resources; consequently, we can never be certain what level of activity represents the full utilization of capacity. In addition, measurement issues aside, the empirical evidence of the past half-century suggests that the relationship between utilization and inflation can shift over time. Unfortunately, we typically are only imperfectly aware of the changes and their magnitudes in real time. In the 1990s, that relationship was affected by, among other things, changing trends in the growth rate of productivity and innovations in the structure of labor markets, such as increased use of temporary help supply. These uncertainties mean that we, as policymakers, need to keep not only an open mind about estimates of the economy's potential but also a close eye on the various indicators of costs and prices so that we can recognize incipient price developments and react to them as early as possible. But we also must recognize that, by the time evidence of accelerating prices becomes definitive, containing inflation pressures could entail disruptive economic adjustments. So despite the uncertainties, we must evaluate all the evidence and make our best judgments about the oncoming risks to sustained good economic performance. In the current circumstances, as the Federal Open Market Committee has said, the economic climate appears to be one in which further increases in resource utilization, in combination with the elevated prices of energy and other commodities, have the potential to add to inflation pressures. The available evidence suggests that the pace of economic expansion may moderate a little from its average over recent quarters, keeping resource utilization in line with recent levels. Maintaining economic growth around this pace will likely reflect a balancing of opposing forces. The rise in interest rates we have experienced will tend to restrain demand, offsetting the effects of sustained economic expansion in our trading partners and the reduced drag on U.S. growth from oil prices, assuming that those prices roughly flatten out as participants in futures markets seem to expect. If the past is any guide, the effect of rising interest rates is likely to be felt most visibly in housing markets. The rate for a thirty-year, fixed-rate mortgage is up 70 basis points from its level in the middle of last year, and one-year adjustable-rate mortgages have risen more than 100 basis points over the same period. In addition, house prices have increased considerably relative to rents, incomes, and returns on alternative assets. Already there have been signs that housing demand has begun to moderate. Sales of both new and existing homes are down substantially from their levels last summer, and information on mortgage applications and pending home sales point to further softening in the next few months. With demand slowing, house prices also seem likely to decelerate. Indeed, we are beginning to see hints of moderation in some of the data on housing prices. As a consequence, spending for new housing construction, after contributing nearly 1/2 percentage point to overall GDP growth last year, may not increase much this year. Moreover, the slowdown in house price increases could well hold back growth in consumption spending on a wide variety of goods and services. The rapid run-up in prices over the past few years and hence in household wealth, perhaps combined with the increasing ease of tapping that wealth, probably has been a major reason that households have been saving so little of their current flow of income. As house-price appreciation slows, the personal saving rate likely should begin a gradual ascent. To be candid, however, the behavior of the housing market and the response of spending are among the great uncertainties about the economic outlook. I have sketched a benign scenario of gradual adjustment that lines up very nicely with the Federal Reserve's assessment that overall growth should slow to a sustainable pace. But our ability to predict asset prices is very limited, especially when the trajectory of those prices is shifting, as that of house prices appears to be doing right now. Moreover, we have particular difficulty in assessing how consumers will respond to changes in their perceptions of future capital gains and actual home prices. The housing market and its effects on spending will be among the areas that Tom and I and our colleagues on the FOMC will be monitoring most closely as we try to discern the emerging pattern of economic activity and inflation. At this time, even with housing markets cooling, the fundamentals remain favorable for solid gains over the coming months and quarters in both consumer spending and business investment. In part, that assessment reflects the sizable increases in employment that we have been seeing over the past year or so. Just last week, the Labor Department reported that payroll employment rose 211,000 in March. If the growth of aggregate demand moderates as we expect, increases in employment should also slow but still be sufficient to absorb new entrants into the labor market. Moreover, the gains in wage and salary income associated with those employment increases should provide ongoing support to household spending. The purchasing power of those gains will go further than it has in recent years if, as anticipated in futures markets, energy prices level out. Meanwhile, in the business sector, order books for nondefense capital goods are full, sales prospects appear good, profits have been strong, balance sheets are in healthy shape, and companies are flush with cash. As the growth of consumption eases back a little, so too should the increase in capital spending as firms come to anticipate slower growth in sales. But judging from rising global commodity prices and equity valuations abroad, foreign demand looks to be increasing, and rising exports should offset some of the scaling back of domestic sales prospects. In addition, technological advances will continue to boost demand for capital equipment by reducing its costs and increasing its usefulness in improving efficiency. If, as I anticipate, economic growth moderates a touch and pressures on labor and product markets do not intensify substantially further, I believe that underlying inflation should remain roughly stable. That sanguine picture is reinforced if crude oil prices do, in fact, turn out to be relatively flat over the remainder of this year. Such a flattening of oil prices would reduce headline inflation directly and would diminish the threat of higher energy prices becoming more deeply embedded in the inflation process by raising inflation expectations. And, to date, inflation expectations have been well anchored. As I have already mentioned, it would not be surprising to see some pickup in hourly compensation, but such an acceleration may not add to price pressures. In today's competitive environment, and with profits generally robust, some of the cost increases might well be absorbed in margins. Moreover, further productivity gains should act to damp the effects on overall unit costs. Like all forecasts, this expectation of stable inflation is only the middle of a wide range of possible outcomes. For example, a further spurt in energy and commodity prices could be passed through into core inflation to a greater extent than seems to have been occurring recently; the threat of that outcome probably is especially great when the economy is already operating at a high level. If the economy does not moderate somewhat, pressures on resources will increase, further raising the odds of higher inflation. And as I discussed earlier, historical patterns suggest that resource utilization is already in a zone that at times has been associated with the emergence of inflation pressures. But the risks are not all one-sided. Price and compensation inflation have, in fact, remained moderate at high levels of resource utilization, despite rapid increases in energy and commodity prices, suggesting that some forces not yet fully identified may be helping to keep them contained. Those forces might include robust underlying productivity growth here at home or competition from abroad. It is also possible that the economy could cool more than expected if housing markets weaken quite substantially, consumption is cut back significantly, and as a consequence businesses pare capital spending plans. My job as a policymaker is to work with my colleagues to identify the path of short-term interest rates that has the best chance of realizing that favorable central-tendency forecast of solid growth and continued low inflation. I do not know how much policy firming will be needed to accomplish this objective. My forecast is that the economy is in transition to a sustainable pace of growth, in which case policy likely will be in transition as well. At this juncture, given the apparent strength in demand and the narrowing margin of unused resources, I am focused on making sure that inflation and inflation expectations remain well anchored. A tendency for inflation to move higher would put economic stability and the long-term performance of the economy at risk. Accordingly, for me, the critical indicators in the time ahead will be the ones that signal whether growth is indeed likely to proceed at a sustainable pace and whether inflation remains on a favorable track. This is a judgment my colleagues and I will need to make meeting by meeting as the incoming information--both the data and, critically, the timely feel for developments that we get from the Reserve Banks' contacts in the community--help us assess the paths for the economy and price pressures. Footnotes 1.Wendy DunnandLawrence Slifman, of the Board's staff, provided valuable assistance in the preparation of these remarks.Return to text
Governor Mark W. Olson At the Fiduciary and Investment Risk Management Associations Twentieth Anniversary Training Conference, Washington, D.C. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak to you about one of the broad issues that you will be discussing during the next several days--the nature of risk and risk management. Today, I will offer my perspectives about risk management in general and then focus on enterprise-wide compliance-risk management, an area of risk management that has been receiving a good deal of attention lately. Risk, to state the obvious, is inherent in all activities in your industry. With the benefit of hindsight, the financial services regulators and the industry have been trying to distill the lessons learned from recent internal control breakdowns in the financial services sector. My remarks today will delve into some of the implications those breakdowns have for compliance-risk management. Over the past two decades, we have seen remarkable changes in the global financial system. Among these changes are (1) the financial sector's increasing reliance on risk-transfer strategies and (2) the dizzying array of new products being offered to customers. Investment options continue to proliferate, as new investment products are developed and alternative investments such as hedge funds, which now total $1 trillion by some estimates, continue to grow. Risk Management in GeneralOne of the biggest risks facing businesses and governments today is the risk of not preparing for how the world will change over the next five years. Note that I said "preparing" for change and not "predicting" change. Predicting change in a specific way is highly speculative, but planning for the inevitability of change is prudent management. A key question to ask is whether your organizations have the tools and risk-management processes that will allow them to cope with inevitable changes. As fiduciary and investment risk managers, you pay considerable attention to measuring and monitoring the risks your institutions face, and to managing and controlling those risks. You probably also devote considerable time and resources to keeping abreast of the latest advances in finance and risk management. And if you are like most risk managers, you are finding it increasingly difficult to keep up with your colleagues and competitors, because our world--especially those aspects of our lives influenced by science and technology--is changing at an exponential rate. In this regard, one of the biggest risks faced by risk managers is not being sufficiently prepared for the future. As Yogi Berra once said, "The future ain't what it used to be." Yet risk managers face the challenge of ensuring their organizations are sufficiently prepared for whatever events the future holds. It's true that we cannot predict the future in a specific way. But if the past is any guide, we can comfortably expect that new technologies will enable us to overcome problems and challenges that today appear to be insurmountable. At the same time, however, innovation will bring new problems and challenges. As risk managers, the key question for us to answer is "How can we best cope with the dramatic changes and challenges that will inevitably occur?" Preparation is the easy answer, but foresight and discipline are also needed. At a fundamental level, managers need to make sure that their organizations have in place the risk-management policies, processes, and technologies to properly measure, monitor, and control their risk exposures. Beyond the basics, the next imperative is to do some hard thinking about the future. More specifically, managers need to conduct scenario analysis and scenario planning--and this is one area of risk management that is sometimes overlooked or not taken seriously. Scenario analysis and scenario planning are difficult; they cannot be done on the fly. For many financial organizations, scenario analysis starts and ends with quantitative exercises that measure exposures to specific risk factors, such as changes in interest rates or credit spreads. To realize the full benefits of scenario analysis, however, the analysis must move beyond quantitative exercises. A comprehensive scenario analysis should encompass a thoughtful and thorough analysis of potential, but plausible, major changes in the economic, political, and social landscape. What are these changes? How will they affect your business? How will you respond to them if they occur? This analysis is the primary responsibility of risk management. But scenario analysis is not the end goal. Something must be done with the results of the analysis. Management must ask itself whether the organization needs to restructure its balance sheet or modify its current risk-management strategy in order to be prepared for scenarios that may unfold in the near future. This strategizing is at the core of effective scenario planning. Some key scenarios you should consider as part of your scenario planning include how forces such as continued globalization, technological advances, and competition from product innovation will affect your particular line of business. For example, globalization makes group management and risk aggregation more challenging, and the increasing power of information technology creates both new opportunities and new risks. Furthermore, new products and new distribution channels are likely to affect your business and risk profile. The fiduciary and investment world has not been immune to problems caused by ineffective controls. Well-publicized accounts of late trading and market timing at mutual fund firms, and the related investigations, have touched many businesses including banking, securities, and insurance firms. These types of compliance failures result in sanctions or financial loss and adversely affect the reputation and franchise value of a firm. As a result, we are seeing an increasing focus on enterprise-wide compliance-risk management systems. The business lines and activities of financial services firms can cross many legal entities, making it more difficult for a supervisory agency acting alone to determine what went wrong and what processes may need to be improved. In some of the mutual fund cases, the Federal Reserve, as the consolidated supervisor of the relevant banking organization, worked closely with the primary bank regulator and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to investigate control breakdowns. The agencies exchanged information in order to compare their findings. Findings from SEC examinations of the broker-dealers, investment advisers, and mutual fund distributors were analyzed together with findings from targeted joint reviews of the bank holding companies and the banks conducted by the Federal Reserve and the primary bank regulators. The banking agency reviews were focused on corporate-wide compliance practices and bank lending practices. My observation is that the significant deficiencies in mutual fund practices resulted from a combination of factors and a breakdown in controls. First, mutual fund activities were not being effectively overseen by their mutual fund boards. Second, there were strong financial incentives at certain firms to increase the profitability of mutual fund activities, but the legal and reputational risks of these incentives were not appropriately addressed. Third, a lack of adequate employee training resulted in employees deviating from standard procedures, in order to accommodate certain large customers. For example, in some cases, employees granted key customers a routine waiver of redemption fees, which allowed them to engage in market timing at the expense of other fund shareholders. A stronger corporate compliance program would have enabled a local compliance officer to identify these problems and bring them to the attention of higher-level managers within the corporation. Based on our experience in investigating control breaches in these mutual fund cases, I would like to highlight a few lessons learned. One of the most obvious to me is the need to critically evaluate unusual client relationships that require variances from standard procedures. There is an additional red flag if a high percentage of compensation is derived from a single client. Additionally, organizations should have a formal process for reviewing and approving unique products, customers, and services at the inception of the client relationship. And, finally, it is always a good idea to shine some light on areas historically labeled "low risk" to validate that assessment. The low occurrence of loss from an activity should not be the only factor considered when assessing risk. Compliance-Risk Management FrameworksAs these lessons suggest, compliance risk can arise when the organization fails to comply with laws, regulations, or standards of conduct. Fortunately, various models are available to help organizations manage compliance risk more effectively. A number of banking institutions have installed, or are in the process of enhancing, comprehensive, corporate-level compliance-risk management functions. Many organizations are also bolstering their compliance-risk management programs by upgrading their compliance management information systems, which allows for more-integrated and transparent analysis and monitoring. An enterprise-wide approach to compliance-risk management has proven valuable in areas such as Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) and anti-money-laundering (AML) compliance, information security, privacy, transactions with affiliates, and conflicts of interest. A common trend for both large and small organizations is the transition away fromtask-orientedcompliance programs toprocess-orientedcompliance programs. Process-oriented programs require compliance to be tested and validated on an ongoing basis. In addition, fragmented and duplicative compliance activities are being scrapped for those that enable an understanding of compliance across the organization. This is not to say, however, that local compliance activities in business units are obsolete but rather they should be part of an integrated, global program. This promotes consistency in expectations, documentation, assessments, and reporting. An effective enterprise-wide compliance-risk management program is flexible to respond to change, and it is tailored to an organization's corporate strategies, business activities, and external environment. In addition, an effective enterprise-wide compliance-risk management program requires strong board and senior management oversight. The board of directors and senior management have different but complementary roles in ensuring the success of an organization's enterprise-wide compliance-risk management program. The board of directors is responsible for establishing a strong compliance culture that makes compliance an integral part of day-to-day operations; the board then entrusts this responsibility to managers and staff at all levels of the organization. A strong compliance culture encourages employees to raise concerns about compliance risks and the need for additional or improved controls. ConclusionOur review of industry best practices and an analysis of the experience of other industries suggests that organizations need to supplement their enterprise-wide compliance-risk management systems with strategic and dynamic thinking. To prepare for what may be ahead, organizations should draw not only on past experience but also employ quantitative and qualitative scenario analysis and planning. To quote former Chairman Greenspan, "The advent of sophisticated risk models has not made people with gray hair, or none, wholly obsolete."
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy and Federal Reserve Board joint news conference, Washington, D.C. Good morning. We are here today to learn about a report on a topic of vital importance to our economic future: the financial literacy of Americas young people. Increasingly, personal financial security requires the ability to understand and navigate the financial marketplace. For example, buying a home, saving for retirement or for childrens education, or even effectively managing the family budget now requires more financial sophistication than ever before. Financially literate consumers make the financial marketplace work better, and they are better-informed citizens as well. As a former educator and school board member, and as the parent of two young adults, I am personally convinced that improving education is vital to the future of our economy and that promoting financial literacy in particular must be a high priority. I know that those of you here today join me in this conviction. The Jump$tart Coalition is a leader among organizations seeking to improve the personal financial literacy of students from kindergarten to the university level. In particular, through its biennial survey of high school seniors--the results of which you will hear about in a few minutes--Jump$tart has brought increased attention to the issue of financial literacy among youth in the United States. Over the ten-year history of this survey, the data gathered have become some of the most useful measures of what young adults understand about finances. The Federal Reserve is strongly committed to Jump$tarts mission to better educate Americas youth about personal finance. On the regional level, many Federal Reserve Bank staff members work closely with the state coalitions to help achieve this mission. In fact, there is at least one specialist in economic education at each of the Reserve Banks and at most of the Branches. Many of these specialists offer training seminars to help educators teach economics and personal finance in their classrooms. The Federal Reserve also supports a variety of programs and initiatives to increase financial literacy. I want to take a moment to describe just two of these initiatives. The first is a student competition called The Fed Challenge, a program designed to teach students about monetary policy and the national economy. Among other activities, students in this competition take the roles of Federal Reserve governors and regional Reserve Bank presidents in a mock meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. Participating Reserve Banks work in partnership with the Board to bring the winning teams to Washington, where the final rounds of competition will be held here in the Board Room. I have had the opportunity on several occasions to serve as a judge in the national finals of The Fed Challenge, and I can attest that the economic knowledge displayed by the students in that competition is remarkable indeed. The Board also recently collaborated with many of the Reserve Banks on a redesigned Federal Reserve financial education web portal that brings many of the Systems resources for financial education together in one location. The site,FederalReserveEducation.org, offers easy access to educational resources designed to benefit not only students, but also parents and teachers. We will continue to work to expand the resources and programs devoted to this important public purpose. I want to take this opportunity to thank the Jump$tart Coalition and their partners for their continued support and commitment to furthering the financial education of our youth. Now, it is with great pleasure that I introduce to you Laura Levine, executive director of the coalition, who will give a report on the status of financial education of youth in this country.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from February 6 through March 28, 2006. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Tuesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on March 27-28, 2006. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The summary description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's web site atwww.federalreserve/fomc. Minutes of Federal Open Market Committee, March 27-28, 2006
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against David Cronin, previously Executive Vice-President and Treasurer of the former Allfirst Bank, Baltimore, Maryland. Mr. Cronin, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order based on his alleged unsafe and unsound practices in connection with his supervision of a subordinate whose fraudulent proprietary foreign exchange trading caused approximately $691 million in losses to Allfirst. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Robert Ray, previously Senior Vice-President of Treasury Funds Management of the former Allfirst Bank, Baltimore, Maryland. Mr. Ray, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order based on his alleged unsafe and unsound practices in connection with his supervision of a subordinate whose fraudulent proprietary foreign exchange trading caused approximately $691 million in losses to Allfirst. A copy of the Order is attached.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to appear before the Joint Economic Committee to offer my views on the outlook for the U.S. economy and on some of the major economic challenges that the nation faces.Partly because of last year's devastating hurricanes, and partly because of some temporary or special factors, economic activity decelerated noticeably late last year. The growth of the real gross domestic product (GDP) slowed from an average annual rate of nearly 4 percent over the first three quarters of 2005 to less than 2 percent in the fourth quarter. Since then, however, with some rebound in activity under way in the Gulf Coast region and continuing expansion in most other parts of the country, the national economy appears to have grown briskly. Among the key economic indicators, growth in nonfarm payroll employment picked up in November and December, and job gains averaged about 200,000 per month between January and March. Consumer spending and business investment, as inferred from data on motor vehicle sales, retail sales, and shipments of capital goods, are also on track to post sizable first-quarter increases. In light of these signs of strength, most private-sector forecasters, such as those included in the latest Blue Chip survey, estimate that real GDP grew between 4 and 5 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter.If we smooth through the recent quarter-to-quarter variations, we see that the pace of economic growth has been strong for the past three years, averaging nearly 4 percent at an annual rate since the middle of 2003. Much of this growth can be attributed to a substantial expansion in the productive capacity of the U.S. economy, which in turn is largely the result of impressive gains in productivity--that is, in output per hour worked. However, a portion of the recent growth reflects the taking up of economic slack that had developed during the period of economic weakness earlier in the decade. Over the past year, for example, the unemployment rate has fallen nearly 1/2 percentage point, the number of people working part time for economic reasons has declined to its lowest level since August 2001, and the rate of capacity utilization in the industrial sector has moved up 1-1/2 percentage points. As the utilization rates of labor and capital approach their maximum sustainable levels, continued growth in output--if it is to be sustainable and non-inflationary--should be at a rate consistent with the growth in the productive capacity of the economy. Admittedly, determining the rates of capital and labor utilization consistent with stable long-term growth is fraught with difficulty, not least because they tend to vary with economic circumstances. Nevertheless, to allow the expansion to continue in a healthy fashion and to avoid the risk of higher inflation, policymakers must do their best to help to ensure that the aggregate demand for goods and services does not persistently exceed the economy's underlying productive capacity.Based on the information in hand, it seems reasonable to expect that economic growth will moderate toward a more sustainable pace as the year progresses. In particular, one sector that is showing signs of softening is the residential housing market. Both new and existing home sales have dropped back, on net, from their peaks of last summer and early fall. And, while unusually mild weather gave a lift to new housing starts earlier this year, the reading for March points to a slowing in the pace of homebuilding as well. House prices, which have increased rapidly during the past several years, appear to be in the process of decelerating, which will imply slower additions to household wealth and, thereby, less impetus to consumer spending. At this point, the available data on the housing market, together with ongoing support for housing demand from factors such as strong job creation and still-low mortgage rates, suggest that this sector will most likely experience a gradual cooling rather than a sharp slowdown. However, significant uncertainty attends the outlook for housing, and the risk exists that a slowdown more pronounced than we currently expect could prove a drag on growth this year and next. The Federal Reserve will continue to monitor housing markets closely.More broadly, the prospects for maintaining economic growth at a solid pace in the period ahead appear good, although growth rates may well vary quarter to quarter as the economy downshifts from the first-quarter spurt. Productivity growth, job creation, and capital spending are all strong, and continued expansion in the economies of our trading partners seems likely to boost our export sector. That said, energy prices remain a concern: The nominal price of crude oil has risen recently to new highs, and gasoline prices are also up sharply. Rising energy prices pose risks to both economic activity and inflation. If energy prices stabilize this year, even at a high level, their adverse effects on both growth and inflation should diminish somewhat over time. However, as the world has little spare oil production capacity, periodic spikes in oil prices remain a possibility.The outlook for inflation is reasonably favorable but carries some risks. Increases in energy prices have pushed up overall consumer price inflation over the past year or so. However, inflation in core price indexes, which in the past has been a better indicator of longer-term inflation trends, has remained roughly stable over the past year. Among the factors restraining core inflation are ongoing gains in productivity, which have helped to hold unit labor costs in check, and strong domestic and international competition in product markets, which have restrained the ability of firms to pass cost increases on to consumers. The stability of core inflation is also enhanced by the fact that long-term inflation expectations--as measured by surveys and by comparing yields on nominal and indexed Treasury securities--appear to remain well-anchored. Of course, inflation expectations will remain low only so long as the Federal Reserve demonstrates its commitment to price stability. As to inflation risks, I have already noted that continuing growth in aggregate demand in excess of increases in the economy's underlying productive capacity would likely lead to increased inflationary pressures. In addition, although pass-through from energy and commodity price increases to core inflation has thus far been limited, the risk exists that strengthening demand for final products could allow firms to pass on a greater portion of their cost increases in the future.With regard to monetary policy, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has raised the federal funds rate, in increments of 25 basis points, at each of its past fifteen meetings, bringing its current level to 4.75 percent. This sequence of rate increases was necessary to remove the unusual monetary accommodation put in place in response to the soft economic conditions earlier in this decade. Future policy actions will be increasingly dependent on the evolution of the economic outlook, as reflected in the incoming data. Specifically, policy will respond to arriving information that affects the Committee's assessment of the medium-term risks to its objectives of price stability and maximum sustainable employment. Focusing on the medium-term forecast horizon is necessary because of the lags with which monetary policy affects the economy.In the statement issued after its March meeting, the FOMC noted that economic growth had rebounded strongly in the first quarter but appeared likely to moderate to a more sustainable pace. It further noted that a number of factors have contributed to the stability in core inflation. However, the Committee also viewed the possibility that core inflation might rise as a risk to the achievement of its mandated objectives, and it judged that some further policy firming may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance. In my view, data arriving since the meeting have not materially changed that assessment of the risks. To support continued healthy growth of the economy, vigilance in regard to inflation is essential.The FOMC will continue to monitor the incoming data closely to assess the prospects for both growth and inflation. In particular, even if in the Committee's judgment the risks to its objectives are not entirely balanced, at some point in the future the Committee may decide to take no action at one or more meetings in the interest of allowing more time to receive information relevant to the outlook. Of course, a decision to take no action at a particular meeting does not preclude actions at subsequent meetings, and the Committee will not hesitate to act when it determines that doing so is needed to foster the achievement of the Federal Reserve's mandated objectives.Although recent economic developments have been positive, the nation still faces some significant longer-term economic challenges. One such challenge is putting the federal budget on a trajectory that will be sustainable as our society ages. Under current law, federal spending for retirement and health programs will grow substantially in coming decades--both as a share of overall federal spending and relative to the size of the economy--especially if health costs continue to climb rapidly. Slower growth of the workforce may also reduce growth in economic activity and thus in tax revenues.The broad dimensions of the problem are well-known. In fiscal year 2005, federal outlays for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid totaled about 8 percent of GDP. According to the projections of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), by the year 2020 that share will increase by more than three percentage points of GDP, an amount about equal in size to the current federal deficit. By 2040, according to the CBO, the share of GDP devoted to those three programs (excluding contributions by the states) will double from current levels, to about 16 percent of GDP. Were these projections to materialize, the Congress would find itself in the position of having to eliminate essentially all other non-interest spending, raising federal taxes to levels well above their long-term average of about 18 percent of GDP, or choosing some combination of the two. Absent such actions, we would see widening and eventually unsustainable budget deficits, which would impede capital accumulation, slow economic growth, threaten financial stability, and put a heavy burden of debt on our children and grandchildren.The resolution of the nation's long-run fiscal challenge will require hard choices. Fundamentally, the decision confronting the Congress and the American people is how large a share of the nation's economic resources should be devoted to federal government programs, including transfer programs like Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. In making that decision, the full range of benefits and costs associated with each program should be taken into account. Crucially, however, whatever size of government is chosen, tax rates will ultimately have to be set at a level sufficient to achieve a reasonable balance of spending and revenues in the long run. Members of the Congress who want to extend tax cuts and keep tax rates low must accept that low rates will be sustainable over time only if outlays can be held down sufficiently to avoid large deficits. Likewise, members who favor a more expansive role of the government must balance the benefits of government programs with the burden imposed by the additional taxes needed to pay for them, a burden that includes not only the resources transferred from the private sector but also the reductions in the efficiency and growth potential of the economy associated with higher tax rates.Another important challenge is the large and widening deficit in the U.S. current account. This deficit has increased from a little more than $100 billion in 1995 to roughly $800 billion last year, or 6-1/2 percent of nominal GDP. The causes of this deficit are complex and include both domestic and international factors. Fundamentally, the current account deficit reflects the fact that capital investment in the United States, including residential construction, substantially exceeds U.S. national saving. The opposite situation exists abroad, in that the saving of our trading partners exceeds their own capital investment. The excess of domestic investment over domestic saving in the United States, which by definition is the same as the current account deficit, must be financed by net inflows of funds from investors abroad. To date, the United States has had little difficulty in financing its current account deficit, as foreign savers have found U.S. investments attractive and foreign official institutions have added to their stocks of dollar-denominated international reserves. However, the cumulative effect of years of current account deficits have caused the United States to switch from being an international creditor to an international debtor, with a net foreign debt position of more than $3 trillion, roughly 25 percent of a year's GDP. This trend cannot continue forever, as it would imply an ever-growing interest burden owed to foreign creditors. Moreover, as foreign holdings of U.S. assets increase, at some point foreigners may become less willing to add these assets to their portfolios. While it is likely that current account imbalances will be resolved gradually over time, there is a small risk of a sudden shift in sentiment that could lead to disruptive changes in the value of the dollar and in other asset prices.Actions both here and abroad would contribute to a gradual reduction in the U.S. current account deficit and in its mirror image, the current account surpluses of our trading partners. To reduce its dependence on foreign capital, the United States should take action to increase its national saving rate. The most direct way to accomplish this objective would be by putting federal government finances on a more sustainable path. Our trading partners can help to mitigate the global imbalance by relying less on exports as a source of growth, and instead boosting domestic spending relative to their production. In this regard, some policymakers in developing Asia, including China, appear to have recognized the importance of giving domestic demand a greater role in their development strategies and are seeking to increase domestic spending through fiscal measures, financial reforms, and other initiatives. Such actions should be encouraged. For these countries, allowing greater flexibility in exchange rates would be an important additional step toward helping to restore greater balance both in global capital flows and in their own economies. Structural reforms to enhance growth in our industrial trading partners could also be helpful. Each of these actions would be in the long-term interests of the countries involved, regardless of their effects on external imbalances. On the other hand, raising barriers to trade or flows of capital is not a constructive approach for addressing the current account deficit because such barriers would have significant deleterious effects on both the U.S. and global economies.In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the economy has been performing well and the near-term prospects look good, although as always there are risks to the outlook. Monetary policy will continue to pursue its objectives of helping the economy to grow at a strong, sustainable pace while seeking to keep inflation firmly under control. And, while many of the fundamental factors that determine longer-term economic growth appear favorable, actions to move the federal budget toward a more sustainable position would do a great deal to help ensure the future prosperity of our country. Partly because of last year's devastating hurricanes, and partly because of some temporary or special factors, economic activity decelerated noticeably late last year. The growth of the real gross domestic product (GDP) slowed from an average annual rate of nearly 4 percent over the first three quarters of 2005 to less than 2 percent in the fourth quarter. Since then, however, with some rebound in activity under way in the Gulf Coast region and continuing expansion in most other parts of the country, the national economy appears to have grown briskly. Among the key economic indicators, growth in nonfarm payroll employment picked up in November and December, and job gains averaged about 200,000 per month between January and March. Consumer spending and business investment, as inferred from data on motor vehicle sales, retail sales, and shipments of capital goods, are also on track to post sizable first-quarter increases. In light of these signs of strength, most private-sector forecasters, such as those included in the latest Blue Chip survey, estimate that real GDP grew between 4 and 5 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter.If we smooth through the recent quarter-to-quarter variations, we see that the pace of economic growth has been strong for the past three years, averaging nearly 4 percent at an annual rate since the middle of 2003. Much of this growth can be attributed to a substantial expansion in the productive capacity of the U.S. economy, which in turn is largely the result of impressive gains in productivity--that is, in output per hour worked. However, a portion of the recent growth reflects the taking up of economic slack that had developed during the period of economic weakness earlier in the decade. Over the past year, for example, the unemployment rate has fallen nearly 1/2 percentage point, the number of people working part time for economic reasons has declined to its lowest level since August 2001, and the rate of capacity utilization in the industrial sector has moved up 1-1/2 percentage points. As the utilization rates of labor and capital approach their maximum sustainable levels, continued growth in output--if it is to be sustainable and non-inflationary--should be at a rate consistent with the growth in the productive capacity of the economy. Admittedly, determining the rates of capital and labor utilization consistent with stable long-term growth is fraught with difficulty, not least because they tend to vary with economic circumstances. Nevertheless, to allow the expansion to continue in a healthy fashion and to avoid the risk of higher inflation, policymakers must do their best to help to ensure that the aggregate demand for goods and services does not persistently exceed the economy's underlying productive capacity.Based on the information in hand, it seems reasonable to expect that economic growth will moderate toward a more sustainable pace as the year progresses. In particular, one sector that is showing signs of softening is the residential housing market. Both new and existing home sales have dropped back, on net, from their peaks of last summer and early fall. And, while unusually mild weather gave a lift to new housing starts earlier this year, the reading for March points to a slowing in the pace of homebuilding as well. House prices, which have increased rapidly during the past several years, appear to be in the process of decelerating, which will imply slower additions to household wealth and, thereby, less impetus to consumer spending. At this point, the available data on the housing market, together with ongoing support for housing demand from factors such as strong job creation and still-low mortgage rates, suggest that this sector will most likely experience a gradual cooling rather than a sharp slowdown. However, significant uncertainty attends the outlook for housing, and the risk exists that a slowdown more pronounced than we currently expect could prove a drag on growth this year and next. The Federal Reserve will continue to monitor housing markets closely.More broadly, the prospects for maintaining economic growth at a solid pace in the period ahead appear good, although growth rates may well vary quarter to quarter as the economy downshifts from the first-quarter spurt. Productivity growth, job creation, and capital spending are all strong, and continued expansion in the economies of our trading partners seems likely to boost our export sector. That said, energy prices remain a concern: The nominal price of crude oil has risen recently to new highs, and gasoline prices are also up sharply. Rising energy prices pose risks to both economic activity and inflation. If energy prices stabilize this year, even at a high level, their adverse effects on both growth and inflation should diminish somewhat over time. However, as the world has little spare oil production capacity, periodic spikes in oil prices remain a possibility.The outlook for inflation is reasonably favorable but carries some risks. Increases in energy prices have pushed up overall consumer price inflation over the past year or so. However, inflation in core price indexes, which in the past has been a better indicator of longer-term inflation trends, has remained roughly stable over the past year. Among the factors restraining core inflation are ongoing gains in productivity, which have helped to hold unit labor costs in check, and strong domestic and international competition in product markets, which have restrained the ability of firms to pass cost increases on to consumers. The stability of core inflation is also enhanced by the fact that long-term inflation expectations--as measured by surveys and by comparing yields on nominal and indexed Treasury securities--appear to remain well-anchored. Of course, inflation expectations will remain low only so long as the Federal Reserve demonstrates its commitment to price stability. As to inflation risks, I have already noted that continuing growth in aggregate demand in excess of increases in the economy's underlying productive capacity would likely lead to increased inflationary pressures. In addition, although pass-through from energy and commodity price increases to core inflation has thus far been limited, the risk exists that strengthening demand for final products could allow firms to pass on a greater portion of their cost increases in the future.With regard to monetary policy, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has raised the federal funds rate, in increments of 25 basis points, at each of its past fifteen meetings, bringing its current level to 4.75 percent. This sequence of rate increases was necessary to remove the unusual monetary accommodation put in place in response to the soft economic conditions earlier in this decade. Future policy actions will be increasingly dependent on the evolution of the economic outlook, as reflected in the incoming data. Specifically, policy will respond to arriving information that affects the Committee's assessment of the medium-term risks to its objectives of price stability and maximum sustainable employment. Focusing on the medium-term forecast horizon is necessary because of the lags with which monetary policy affects the economy.In the statement issued after its March meeting, the FOMC noted that economic growth had rebounded strongly in the first quarter but appeared likely to moderate to a more sustainable pace. It further noted that a number of factors have contributed to the stability in core inflation. However, the Committee also viewed the possibility that core inflation might rise as a risk to the achievement of its mandated objectives, and it judged that some further policy firming may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance. In my view, data arriving since the meeting have not materially changed that assessment of the risks. To support continued healthy growth of the economy, vigilance in regard to inflation is essential.The FOMC will continue to monitor the incoming data closely to assess the prospects for both growth and inflation. In particular, even if in the Committee's judgment the risks to its objectives are not entirely balanced, at some point in the future the Committee may decide to take no action at one or more meetings in the interest of allowing more time to receive information relevant to the outlook. Of course, a decision to take no action at a particular meeting does not preclude actions at subsequent meetings, and the Committee will not hesitate to act when it determines that doing so is needed to foster the achievement of the Federal Reserve's mandated objectives.Although recent economic developments have been positive, the nation still faces some significant longer-term economic challenges. One such challenge is putting the federal budget on a trajectory that will be sustainable as our society ages. Under current law, federal spending for retirement and health programs will grow substantially in coming decades--both as a share of overall federal spending and relative to the size of the economy--especially if health costs continue to climb rapidly. Slower growth of the workforce may also reduce growth in economic activity and thus in tax revenues.The broad dimensions of the problem are well-known. In fiscal year 2005, federal outlays for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid totaled about 8 percent of GDP. According to the projections of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), by the year 2020 that share will increase by more than three percentage points of GDP, an amount about equal in size to the current federal deficit. By 2040, according to the CBO, the share of GDP devoted to those three programs (excluding contributions by the states) will double from current levels, to about 16 percent of GDP. Were these projections to materialize, the Congress would find itself in the position of having to eliminate essentially all other non-interest spending, raising federal taxes to levels well above their long-term average of about 18 percent of GDP, or choosing some combination of the two. Absent such actions, we would see widening and eventually unsustainable budget deficits, which would impede capital accumulation, slow economic growth, threaten financial stability, and put a heavy burden of debt on our children and grandchildren.The resolution of the nation's long-run fiscal challenge will require hard choices. Fundamentally, the decision confronting the Congress and the American people is how large a share of the nation's economic resources should be devoted to federal government programs, including transfer programs like Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. In making that decision, the full range of benefits and costs associated with each program should be taken into account. Crucially, however, whatever size of government is chosen, tax rates will ultimately have to be set at a level sufficient to achieve a reasonable balance of spending and revenues in the long run. Members of the Congress who want to extend tax cuts and keep tax rates low must accept that low rates will be sustainable over time only if outlays can be held down sufficiently to avoid large deficits. Likewise, members who favor a more expansive role of the government must balance the benefits of government programs with the burden imposed by the additional taxes needed to pay for them, a burden that includes not only the resources transferred from the private sector but also the reductions in the efficiency and growth potential of the economy associated with higher tax rates.Another important challenge is the large and widening deficit in the U.S. current account. This deficit has increased from a little more than $100 billion in 1995 to roughly $800 billion last year, or 6-1/2 percent of nominal GDP. The causes of this deficit are complex and include both domestic and international factors. Fundamentally, the current account deficit reflects the fact that capital investment in the United States, including residential construction, substantially exceeds U.S. national saving. The opposite situation exists abroad, in that the saving of our trading partners exceeds their own capital investment. The excess of domestic investment over domestic saving in the United States, which by definition is the same as the current account deficit, must be financed by net inflows of funds from investors abroad. To date, the United States has had little difficulty in financing its current account deficit, as foreign savers have found U.S. investments attractive and foreign official institutions have added to their stocks of dollar-denominated international reserves. However, the cumulative effect of years of current account deficits have caused the United States to switch from being an international creditor to an international debtor, with a net foreign debt position of more than $3 trillion, roughly 25 percent of a year's GDP. This trend cannot continue forever, as it would imply an ever-growing interest burden owed to foreign creditors. Moreover, as foreign holdings of U.S. assets increase, at some point foreigners may become less willing to add these assets to their portfolios. While it is likely that current account imbalances will be resolved gradually over time, there is a small risk of a sudden shift in sentiment that could lead to disruptive changes in the value of the dollar and in other asset prices.Actions both here and abroad would contribute to a gradual reduction in the U.S. current account deficit and in its mirror image, the current account surpluses of our trading partners. To reduce its dependence on foreign capital, the United States should take action to increase its national saving rate. The most direct way to accomplish this objective would be by putting federal government finances on a more sustainable path. Our trading partners can help to mitigate the global imbalance by relying less on exports as a source of growth, and instead boosting domestic spending relative to their production. In this regard, some policymakers in developing Asia, including China, appear to have recognized the importance of giving domestic demand a greater role in their development strategies and are seeking to increase domestic spending through fiscal measures, financial reforms, and other initiatives. Such actions should be encouraged. For these countries, allowing greater flexibility in exchange rates would be an important additional step toward helping to restore greater balance both in global capital flows and in their own economies. Structural reforms to enhance growth in our industrial trading partners could also be helpful. Each of these actions would be in the long-term interests of the countries involved, regardless of their effects on external imbalances. On the other hand, raising barriers to trade or flows of capital is not a constructive approach for addressing the current account deficit because such barriers would have significant deleterious effects on both the U.S. and global economies.In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the economy has been performing well and the near-term prospects look good, although as always there are risks to the outlook. Monetary policy will continue to pursue its objectives of helping the economy to grow at a strong, sustainable pace while seeking to keep inflation firmly under control. And, while many of the fundamental factors that determine longer-term economic growth appear favorable, actions to move the federal budget toward a more sustainable position would do a great deal to help ensure the future prosperity of our country. If we smooth through the recent quarter-to-quarter variations, we see that the pace of economic growth has been strong for the past three years, averaging nearly 4 percent at an annual rate since the middle of 2003. Much of this growth can be attributed to a substantial expansion in the productive capacity of the U.S. economy, which in turn is largely the result of impressive gains in productivity--that is, in output per hour worked. However, a portion of the recent growth reflects the taking up of economic slack that had developed during the period of economic weakness earlier in the decade. Over the past year, for example, the unemployment rate has fallen nearly 1/2 percentage point, the number of people working part time for economic reasons has declined to its lowest level since August 2001, and the rate of capacity utilization in the industrial sector has moved up 1-1/2 percentage points. As the utilization rates of labor and capital approach their maximum sustainable levels, continued growth in output--if it is to be sustainable and non-inflationary--should be at a rate consistent with the growth in the productive capacity of the economy. Admittedly, determining the rates of capital and labor utilization consistent with stable long-term growth is fraught with difficulty, not least because they tend to vary with economic circumstances. Nevertheless, to allow the expansion to continue in a healthy fashion and to avoid the risk of higher inflation, policymakers must do their best to help to ensure that the aggregate demand for goods and services does not persistently exceed the economy's underlying productive capacity.Based on the information in hand, it seems reasonable to expect that economic growth will moderate toward a more sustainable pace as the year progresses. In particular, one sector that is showing signs of softening is the residential housing market. Both new and existing home sales have dropped back, on net, from their peaks of last summer and early fall. And, while unusually mild weather gave a lift to new housing starts earlier this year, the reading for March points to a slowing in the pace of homebuilding as well. House prices, which have increased rapidly during the past several years, appear to be in the process of decelerating, which will imply slower additions to household wealth and, thereby, less impetus to consumer spending. At this point, the available data on the housing market, together with ongoing support for housing demand from factors such as strong job creation and still-low mortgage rates, suggest that this sector will most likely experience a gradual cooling rather than a sharp slowdown. However, significant uncertainty attends the outlook for housing, and the risk exists that a slowdown more pronounced than we currently expect could prove a drag on growth this year and next. The Federal Reserve will continue to monitor housing markets closely.More broadly, the prospects for maintaining economic growth at a solid pace in the period ahead appear good, although growth rates may well vary quarter to quarter as the economy downshifts from the first-quarter spurt. Productivity growth, job creation, and capital spending are all strong, and continued expansion in the economies of our trading partners seems likely to boost our export sector. That said, energy prices remain a concern: The nominal price of crude oil has risen recently to new highs, and gasoline prices are also up sharply. Rising energy prices pose risks to both economic activity and inflation. If energy prices stabilize this year, even at a high level, their adverse effects on both growth and inflation should diminish somewhat over time. However, as the world has little spare oil production capacity, periodic spikes in oil prices remain a possibility.The outlook for inflation is reasonably favorable but carries some risks. Increases in energy prices have pushed up overall consumer price inflation over the past year or so. However, inflation in core price indexes, which in the past has been a better indicator of longer-term inflation trends, has remained roughly stable over the past year. Among the factors restraining core inflation are ongoing gains in productivity, which have helped to hold unit labor costs in check, and strong domestic and international competition in product markets, which have restrained the ability of firms to pass cost increases on to consumers. The stability of core inflation is also enhanced by the fact that long-term inflation expectations--as measured by surveys and by comparing yields on nominal and indexed Treasury securities--appear to remain well-anchored. Of course, inflation expectations will remain low only so long as the Federal Reserve demonstrates its commitment to price stability. As to inflation risks, I have already noted that continuing growth in aggregate demand in excess of increases in the economy's underlying productive capacity would likely lead to increased inflationary pressures. In addition, although pass-through from energy and commodity price increases to core inflation has thus far been limited, the risk exists that strengthening demand for final products could allow firms to pass on a greater portion of their cost increases in the future.With regard to monetary policy, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has raised the federal funds rate, in increments of 25 basis points, at each of its past fifteen meetings, bringing its current level to 4.75 percent. This sequence of rate increases was necessary to remove the unusual monetary accommodation put in place in response to the soft economic conditions earlier in this decade. Future policy actions will be increasingly dependent on the evolution of the economic outlook, as reflected in the incoming data. Specifically, policy will respond to arriving information that affects the Committee's assessment of the medium-term risks to its objectives of price stability and maximum sustainable employment. Focusing on the medium-term forecast horizon is necessary because of the lags with which monetary policy affects the economy.In the statement issued after its March meeting, the FOMC noted that economic growth had rebounded strongly in the first quarter but appeared likely to moderate to a more sustainable pace. It further noted that a number of factors have contributed to the stability in core inflation. However, the Committee also viewed the possibility that core inflation might rise as a risk to the achievement of its mandated objectives, and it judged that some further policy firming may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance. In my view, data arriving since the meeting have not materially changed that assessment of the risks. To support continued healthy growth of the economy, vigilance in regard to inflation is essential.The FOMC will continue to monitor the incoming data closely to assess the prospects for both growth and inflation. In particular, even if in the Committee's judgment the risks to its objectives are not entirely balanced, at some point in the future the Committee may decide to take no action at one or more meetings in the interest of allowing more time to receive information relevant to the outlook. Of course, a decision to take no action at a particular meeting does not preclude actions at subsequent meetings, and the Committee will not hesitate to act when it determines that doing so is needed to foster the achievement of the Federal Reserve's mandated objectives.Although recent economic developments have been positive, the nation still faces some significant longer-term economic challenges. One such challenge is putting the federal budget on a trajectory that will be sustainable as our society ages. Under current law, federal spending for retirement and health programs will grow substantially in coming decades--both as a share of overall federal spending and relative to the size of the economy--especially if health costs continue to climb rapidly. Slower growth of the workforce may also reduce growth in economic activity and thus in tax revenues.The broad dimensions of the problem are well-known. In fiscal year 2005, federal outlays for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid totaled about 8 percent of GDP. According to the projections of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), by the year 2020 that share will increase by more than three percentage points of GDP, an amount about equal in size to the current federal deficit. By 2040, according to the CBO, the share of GDP devoted to those three programs (excluding contributions by the states) will double from current levels, to about 16 percent of GDP. Were these projections to materialize, the Congress would find itself in the position of having to eliminate essentially all other non-interest spending, raising federal taxes to levels well above their long-term average of about 18 percent of GDP, or choosing some combination of the two. Absent such actions, we would see widening and eventually unsustainable budget deficits, which would impede capital accumulation, slow economic growth, threaten financial stability, and put a heavy burden of debt on our children and grandchildren.The resolution of the nation's long-run fiscal challenge will require hard choices. Fundamentally, the decision confronting the Congress and the American people is how large a share of the nation's economic resources should be devoted to federal government programs, including transfer programs like Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. In making that decision, the full range of benefits and costs associated with each program should be taken into account. Crucially, however, whatever size of government is chosen, tax rates will ultimately have to be set at a level sufficient to achieve a reasonable balance of spending and revenues in the long run. Members of the Congress who want to extend tax cuts and keep tax rates low must accept that low rates will be sustainable over time only if outlays can be held down sufficiently to avoid large deficits. Likewise, members who favor a more expansive role of the government must balance the benefits of government programs with the burden imposed by the additional taxes needed to pay for them, a burden that includes not only the resources transferred from the private sector but also the reductions in the efficiency and growth potential of the economy associated with higher tax rates.Another important challenge is the large and widening deficit in the U.S. current account. This deficit has increased from a little more than $100 billion in 1995 to roughly $800 billion last year, or 6-1/2 percent of nominal GDP. The causes of this deficit are complex and include both domestic and international factors. Fundamentally, the current account deficit reflects the fact that capital investment in the United States, including residential construction, substantially exceeds U.S. national saving. The opposite situation exists abroad, in that the saving of our trading partners exceeds their own capital investment. The excess of domestic investment over domestic saving in the United States, which by definition is the same as the current account deficit, must be financed by net inflows of funds from investors abroad. To date, the United States has had little difficulty in financing its current account deficit, as foreign savers have found U.S. investments attractive and foreign official institutions have added to their stocks of dollar-denominated international reserves. However, the cumulative effect of years of current account deficits have caused the United States to switch from being an international creditor to an international debtor, with a net foreign debt position of more than $3 trillion, roughly 25 percent of a year's GDP. This trend cannot continue forever, as it would imply an ever-growing interest burden owed to foreign creditors. Moreover, as foreign holdings of U.S. assets increase, at some point foreigners may become less willing to add these assets to their portfolios. While it is likely that current account imbalances will be resolved gradually over time, there is a small risk of a sudden shift in sentiment that could lead to disruptive changes in the value of the dollar and in other asset prices.Actions both here and abroad would contribute to a gradual reduction in the U.S. current account deficit and in its mirror image, the current account surpluses of our trading partners. To reduce its dependence on foreign capital, the United States should take action to increase its national saving rate. The most direct way to accomplish this objective would be by putting federal government finances on a more sustainable path. Our trading partners can help to mitigate the global imbalance by relying less on exports as a source of growth, and instead boosting domestic spending relative to their production. In this regard, some policymakers in developing Asia, including China, appear to have recognized the importance of giving domestic demand a greater role in their development strategies and are seeking to increase domestic spending through fiscal measures, financial reforms, and other initiatives. Such actions should be encouraged. For these countries, allowing greater flexibility in exchange rates would be an important additional step toward helping to restore greater balance both in global capital flows and in their own economies. Structural reforms to enhance growth in our industrial trading partners could also be helpful. Each of these actions would be in the long-term interests of the countries involved, regardless of their effects on external imbalances. On the other hand, raising barriers to trade or flows of capital is not a constructive approach for addressing the current account deficit because such barriers would have significant deleterious effects on both the U.S. and global economies.In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the economy has been performing well and the near-term prospects look good, although as always there are risks to the outlook. Monetary policy will continue to pursue its objectives of helping the economy to grow at a strong, sustainable pace while seeking to keep inflation firmly under control. And, while many of the fundamental factors that determine longer-term economic growth appear favorable, actions to move the federal budget toward a more sustainable position would do a great deal to help ensure the future prosperity of our country. Based on the information in hand, it seems reasonable to expect that economic growth will moderate toward a more sustainable pace as the year progresses. In particular, one sector that is showing signs of softening is the residential housing market. Both new and existing home sales have dropped back, on net, from their peaks of last summer and early fall. And, while unusually mild weather gave a lift to new housing starts earlier this year, the reading for March points to a slowing in the pace of homebuilding as well. House prices, which have increased rapidly during the past several years, appear to be in the process of decelerating, which will imply slower additions to household wealth and, thereby, less impetus to consumer spending. At this point, the available data on the housing market, together with ongoing support for housing demand from factors such as strong job creation and still-low mortgage rates, suggest that this sector will most likely experience a gradual cooling rather than a sharp slowdown. However, significant uncertainty attends the outlook for housing, and the risk exists that a slowdown more pronounced than we currently expect could prove a drag on growth this year and next. The Federal Reserve will continue to monitor housing markets closely.More broadly, the prospects for maintaining economic growth at a solid pace in the period ahead appear good, although growth rates may well vary quarter to quarter as the economy downshifts from the first-quarter spurt. Productivity growth, job creation, and capital spending are all strong, and continued expansion in the economies of our trading partners seems likely to boost our export sector. That said, energy prices remain a concern: The nominal price of crude oil has risen recently to new highs, and gasoline prices are also up sharply. Rising energy prices pose risks to both economic activity and inflation. If energy prices stabilize this year, even at a high level, their adverse effects on both growth and inflation should diminish somewhat over time. However, as the world has little spare oil production capacity, periodic spikes in oil prices remain a possibility.The outlook for inflation is reasonably favorable but carries some risks. Increases in energy prices have pushed up overall consumer price inflation over the past year or so. However, inflation in core price indexes, which in the past has been a better indicator of longer-term inflation trends, has remained roughly stable over the past year. Among the factors restraining core inflation are ongoing gains in productivity, which have helped to hold unit labor costs in check, and strong domestic and international competition in product markets, which have restrained the ability of firms to pass cost increases on to consumers. The stability of core inflation is also enhanced by the fact that long-term inflation expectations--as measured by surveys and by comparing yields on nominal and indexed Treasury securities--appear to remain well-anchored. Of course, inflation expectations will remain low only so long as the Federal Reserve demonstrates its commitment to price stability. As to inflation risks, I have already noted that continuing growth in aggregate demand in excess of increases in the economy's underlying productive capacity would likely lead to increased inflationary pressures. In addition, although pass-through from energy and commodity price increases to core inflation has thus far been limited, the risk exists that strengthening demand for final products could allow firms to pass on a greater portion of their cost increases in the future.With regard to monetary policy, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has raised the federal funds rate, in increments of 25 basis points, at each of its past fifteen meetings, bringing its current level to 4.75 percent. This sequence of rate increases was necessary to remove the unusual monetary accommodation put in place in response to the soft economic conditions earlier in this decade. Future policy actions will be increasingly dependent on the evolution of the economic outlook, as reflected in the incoming data. Specifically, policy will respond to arriving information that affects the Committee's assessment of the medium-term risks to its objectives of price stability and maximum sustainable employment. Focusing on the medium-term forecast horizon is necessary because of the lags with which monetary policy affects the economy.In the statement issued after its March meeting, the FOMC noted that economic growth had rebounded strongly in the first quarter but appeared likely to moderate to a more sustainable pace. It further noted that a number of factors have contributed to the stability in core inflation. However, the Committee also viewed the possibility that core inflation might rise as a risk to the achievement of its mandated objectives, and it judged that some further policy firming may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance. In my view, data arriving since the meeting have not materially changed that assessment of the risks. To support continued healthy growth of the economy, vigilance in regard to inflation is essential.The FOMC will continue to monitor the incoming data closely to assess the prospects for both growth and inflation. In particular, even if in the Committee's judgment the risks to its objectives are not entirely balanced, at some point in the future the Committee may decide to take no action at one or more meetings in the interest of allowing more time to receive information relevant to the outlook. Of course, a decision to take no action at a particular meeting does not preclude actions at subsequent meetings, and the Committee will not hesitate to act when it determines that doing so is needed to foster the achievement of the Federal Reserve's mandated objectives.Although recent economic developments have been positive, the nation still faces some significant longer-term economic challenges. One such challenge is putting the federal budget on a trajectory that will be sustainable as our society ages. Under current law, federal spending for retirement and health programs will grow substantially in coming decades--both as a share of overall federal spending and relative to the size of the economy--especially if health costs continue to climb rapidly. Slower growth of the workforce may also reduce growth in economic activity and thus in tax revenues.The broad dimensions of the problem are well-known. In fiscal year 2005, federal outlays for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid totaled about 8 percent of GDP. According to the projections of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), by the year 2020 that share will increase by more than three percentage points of GDP, an amount about equal in size to the current federal deficit. By 2040, according to the CBO, the share of GDP devoted to those three programs (excluding contributions by the states) will double from current levels, to about 16 percent of GDP. Were these projections to materialize, the Congress would find itself in the position of having to eliminate essentially all other non-interest spending, raising federal taxes to levels well above their long-term average of about 18 percent of GDP, or choosing some combination of the two. Absent such actions, we would see widening and eventually unsustainable budget deficits, which would impede capital accumulation, slow economic growth, threaten financial stability, and put a heavy burden of debt on our children and grandchildren.The resolution of the nation's long-run fiscal challenge will require hard choices. Fundamentally, the decision confronting the Congress and the American people is how large a share of the nation's economic resources should be devoted to federal government programs, including transfer programs like Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. In making that decision, the full range of benefits and costs associated with each program should be taken into account. Crucially, however, whatever size of government is chosen, tax rates will ultimately have to be set at a level sufficient to achieve a reasonable balance of spending and revenues in the long run. Members of the Congress who want to extend tax cuts and keep tax rates low must accept that low rates will be sustainable over time only if outlays can be held down sufficiently to avoid large deficits. Likewise, members who favor a more expansive role of the government must balance the benefits of government programs with the burden imposed by the additional taxes needed to pay for them, a burden that includes not only the resources transferred from the private sector but also the reductions in the efficiency and growth potential of the economy associated with higher tax rates.Another important challenge is the large and widening deficit in the U.S. current account. This deficit has increased from a little more than $100 billion in 1995 to roughly $800 billion last year, or 6-1/2 percent of nominal GDP. The causes of this deficit are complex and include both domestic and international factors. Fundamentally, the current account deficit reflects the fact that capital investment in the United States, including residential construction, substantially exceeds U.S. national saving. The opposite situation exists abroad, in that the saving of our trading partners exceeds their own capital investment. The excess of domestic investment over domestic saving in the United States, which by definition is the same as the current account deficit, must be financed by net inflows of funds from investors abroad. To date, the United States has had little difficulty in financing its current account deficit, as foreign savers have found U.S. investments attractive and foreign official institutions have added to their stocks of dollar-denominated international reserves. However, the cumulative effect of years of current account deficits have caused the United States to switch from being an international creditor to an international debtor, with a net foreign debt position of more than $3 trillion, roughly 25 percent of a year's GDP. This trend cannot continue forever, as it would imply an ever-growing interest burden owed to foreign creditors. Moreover, as foreign holdings of U.S. assets increase, at some point foreigners may become less willing to add these assets to their portfolios. While it is likely that current account imbalances will be resolved gradually over time, there is a small risk of a sudden shift in sentiment that could lead to disruptive changes in the value of the dollar and in other asset prices.Actions both here and abroad would contribute to a gradual reduction in the U.S. current account deficit and in its mirror image, the current account surpluses of our trading partners. To reduce its dependence on foreign capital, the United States should take action to increase its national saving rate. The most direct way to accomplish this objective would be by putting federal government finances on a more sustainable path. Our trading partners can help to mitigate the global imbalance by relying less on exports as a source of growth, and instead boosting domestic spending relative to their production. In this regard, some policymakers in developing Asia, including China, appear to have recognized the importance of giving domestic demand a greater role in their development strategies and are seeking to increase domestic spending through fiscal measures, financial reforms, and other initiatives. Such actions should be encouraged. For these countries, allowing greater flexibility in exchange rates would be an important additional step toward helping to restore greater balance both in global capital flows and in their own economies. Structural reforms to enhance growth in our industrial trading partners could also be helpful. Each of these actions would be in the long-term interests of the countries involved, regardless of their effects on external imbalances. On the other hand, raising barriers to trade or flows of capital is not a constructive approach for addressing the current account deficit because such barriers would have significant deleterious effects on both the U.S. and global economies.In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the economy has been performing well and the near-term prospects look good, although as always there are risks to the outlook. Monetary policy will continue to pursue its objectives of helping the economy to grow at a strong, sustainable pace while seeking to keep inflation firmly under control. And, while many of the fundamental factors that determine longer-term economic growth appear favorable, actions to move the federal budget toward a more sustainable position would do a great deal to help ensure the future prosperity of our country. More broadly, the prospects for maintaining economic growth at a solid pace in the period ahead appear good, although growth rates may well vary quarter to quarter as the economy downshifts from the first-quarter spurt. Productivity growth, job creation, and capital spending are all strong, and continued expansion in the economies of our trading partners seems likely to boost our export sector. That said, energy prices remain a concern: The nominal price of crude oil has risen recently to new highs, and gasoline prices are also up sharply. Rising energy prices pose risks to both economic activity and inflation. If energy prices stabilize this year, even at a high level, their adverse effects on both growth and inflation should diminish somewhat over time. However, as the world has little spare oil production capacity, periodic spikes in oil prices remain a possibility.The outlook for inflation is reasonably favorable but carries some risks. Increases in energy prices have pushed up overall consumer price inflation over the past year or so. However, inflation in core price indexes, which in the past has been a better indicator of longer-term inflation trends, has remained roughly stable over the past year. Among the factors restraining core inflation are ongoing gains in productivity, which have helped to hold unit labor costs in check, and strong domestic and international competition in product markets, which have restrained the ability of firms to pass cost increases on to consumers. The stability of core inflation is also enhanced by the fact that long-term inflation expectations--as measured by surveys and by comparing yields on nominal and indexed Treasury securities--appear to remain well-anchored. Of course, inflation expectations will remain low only so long as the Federal Reserve demonstrates its commitment to price stability. As to inflation risks, I have already noted that continuing growth in aggregate demand in excess of increases in the economy's underlying productive capacity would likely lead to increased inflationary pressures. In addition, although pass-through from energy and commodity price increases to core inflation has thus far been limited, the risk exists that strengthening demand for final products could allow firms to pass on a greater portion of their cost increases in the future.With regard to monetary policy, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has raised the federal funds rate, in increments of 25 basis points, at each of its past fifteen meetings, bringing its current level to 4.75 percent. This sequence of rate increases was necessary to remove the unusual monetary accommodation put in place in response to the soft economic conditions earlier in this decade. Future policy actions will be increasingly dependent on the evolution of the economic outlook, as reflected in the incoming data. Specifically, policy will respond to arriving information that affects the Committee's assessment of the medium-term risks to its objectives of price stability and maximum sustainable employment. Focusing on the medium-term forecast horizon is necessary because of the lags with which monetary policy affects the economy.In the statement issued after its March meeting, the FOMC noted that economic growth had rebounded strongly in the first quarter but appeared likely to moderate to a more sustainable pace. It further noted that a number of factors have contributed to the stability in core inflation. However, the Committee also viewed the possibility that core inflation might rise as a risk to the achievement of its mandated objectives, and it judged that some further policy firming may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance. In my view, data arriving since the meeting have not materially changed that assessment of the risks. To support continued healthy growth of the economy, vigilance in regard to inflation is essential.The FOMC will continue to monitor the incoming data closely to assess the prospects for both growth and inflation. In particular, even if in the Committee's judgment the risks to its objectives are not entirely balanced, at some point in the future the Committee may decide to take no action at one or more meetings in the interest of allowing more time to receive information relevant to the outlook. Of course, a decision to take no action at a particular meeting does not preclude actions at subsequent meetings, and the Committee will not hesitate to act when it determines that doing so is needed to foster the achievement of the Federal Reserve's mandated objectives.Although recent economic developments have been positive, the nation still faces some significant longer-term economic challenges. One such challenge is putting the federal budget on a trajectory that will be sustainable as our society ages. Under current law, federal spending for retirement and health programs will grow substantially in coming decades--both as a share of overall federal spending and relative to the size of the economy--especially if health costs continue to climb rapidly. Slower growth of the workforce may also reduce growth in economic activity and thus in tax revenues.The broad dimensions of the problem are well-known. In fiscal year 2005, federal outlays for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid totaled about 8 percent of GDP. According to the projections of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), by the year 2020 that share will increase by more than three percentage points of GDP, an amount about equal in size to the current federal deficit. By 2040, according to the CBO, the share of GDP devoted to those three programs (excluding contributions by the states) will double from current levels, to about 16 percent of GDP. Were these projections to materialize, the Congress would find itself in the position of having to eliminate essentially all other non-interest spending, raising federal taxes to levels well above their long-term average of about 18 percent of GDP, or choosing some combination of the two. Absent such actions, we would see widening and eventually unsustainable budget deficits, which would impede capital accumulation, slow economic growth, threaten financial stability, and put a heavy burden of debt on our children and grandchildren.The resolution of the nation's long-run fiscal challenge will require hard choices. Fundamentally, the decision confronting the Congress and the American people is how large a share of the nation's economic resources should be devoted to federal government programs, including transfer programs like Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. In making that decision, the full range of benefits and costs associated with each program should be taken into account. Crucially, however, whatever size of government is chosen, tax rates will ultimately have to be set at a level sufficient to achieve a reasonable balance of spending and revenues in the long run. Members of the Congress who want to extend tax cuts and keep tax rates low must accept that low rates will be sustainable over time only if outlays can be held down sufficiently to avoid large deficits. Likewise, members who favor a more expansive role of the government must balance the benefits of government programs with the burden imposed by the additional taxes needed to pay for them, a burden that includes not only the resources transferred from the private sector but also the reductions in the efficiency and growth potential of the economy associated with higher tax rates.Another important challenge is the large and widening deficit in the U.S. current account. This deficit has increased from a little more than $100 billion in 1995 to roughly $800 billion last year, or 6-1/2 percent of nominal GDP. The causes of this deficit are complex and include both domestic and international factors. Fundamentally, the current account deficit reflects the fact that capital investment in the United States, including residential construction, substantially exceeds U.S. national saving. The opposite situation exists abroad, in that the saving of our trading partners exceeds their own capital investment. The excess of domestic investment over domestic saving in the United States, which by definition is the same as the current account deficit, must be financed by net inflows of funds from investors abroad. To date, the United States has had little difficulty in financing its current account deficit, as foreign savers have found U.S. investments attractive and foreign official institutions have added to their stocks of dollar-denominated international reserves. However, the cumulative effect of years of current account deficits have caused the United States to switch from being an international creditor to an international debtor, with a net foreign debt position of more than $3 trillion, roughly 25 percent of a year's GDP. This trend cannot continue forever, as it would imply an ever-growing interest burden owed to foreign creditors. Moreover, as foreign holdings of U.S. assets increase, at some point foreigners may become less willing to add these assets to their portfolios. While it is likely that current account imbalances will be resolved gradually over time, there is a small risk of a sudden shift in sentiment that could lead to disruptive changes in the value of the dollar and in other asset prices.Actions both here and abroad would contribute to a gradual reduction in the U.S. current account deficit and in its mirror image, the current account surpluses of our trading partners. To reduce its dependence on foreign capital, the United States should take action to increase its national saving rate. The most direct way to accomplish this objective would be by putting federal government finances on a more sustainable path. Our trading partners can help to mitigate the global imbalance by relying less on exports as a source of growth, and instead boosting domestic spending relative to their production. In this regard, some policymakers in developing Asia, including China, appear to have recognized the importance of giving domestic demand a greater role in their development strategies and are seeking to increase domestic spending through fiscal measures, financial reforms, and other initiatives. Such actions should be encouraged. For these countries, allowing greater flexibility in exchange rates would be an important additional step toward helping to restore greater balance both in global capital flows and in their own economies. Structural reforms to enhance growth in our industrial trading partners could also be helpful. Each of these actions would be in the long-term interests of the countries involved, regardless of their effects on external imbalances. On the other hand, raising barriers to trade or flows of capital is not a constructive approach for addressing the current account deficit because such barriers would have significant deleterious effects on both the U.S. and global economies.In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the economy has been performing well and the near-term prospects look good, although as always there are risks to the outlook. Monetary policy will continue to pursue its objectives of helping the economy to grow at a strong, sustainable pace while seeking to keep inflation firmly under control. And, while many of the fundamental factors that determine longer-term economic growth appear favorable, actions to move the federal budget toward a more sustainable position would do a great deal to help ensure the future prosperity of our country. The outlook for inflation is reasonably favorable but carries some risks. Increases in energy prices have pushed up overall consumer price inflation over the past year or so. However, inflation in core price indexes, which in the past has been a better indicator of longer-term inflation trends, has remained roughly stable over the past year. Among the factors restraining core inflation are ongoing gains in productivity, which have helped to hold unit labor costs in check, and strong domestic and international competition in product markets, which have restrained the ability of firms to pass cost increases on to consumers. The stability of core inflation is also enhanced by the fact that long-term inflation expectations--as measured by surveys and by comparing yields on nominal and indexed Treasury securities--appear to remain well-anchored. Of course, inflation expectations will remain low only so long as the Federal Reserve demonstrates its commitment to price stability. As to inflation risks, I have already noted that continuing growth in aggregate demand in excess of increases in the economy's underlying productive capacity would likely lead to increased inflationary pressures. In addition, although pass-through from energy and commodity price increases to core inflation has thus far been limited, the risk exists that strengthening demand for final products could allow firms to pass on a greater portion of their cost increases in the future.With regard to monetary policy, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has raised the federal funds rate, in increments of 25 basis points, at each of its past fifteen meetings, bringing its current level to 4.75 percent. This sequence of rate increases was necessary to remove the unusual monetary accommodation put in place in response to the soft economic conditions earlier in this decade. Future policy actions will be increasingly dependent on the evolution of the economic outlook, as reflected in the incoming data. Specifically, policy will respond to arriving information that affects the Committee's assessment of the medium-term risks to its objectives of price stability and maximum sustainable employment. Focusing on the medium-term forecast horizon is necessary because of the lags with which monetary policy affects the economy.In the statement issued after its March meeting, the FOMC noted that economic growth had rebounded strongly in the first quarter but appeared likely to moderate to a more sustainable pace. It further noted that a number of factors have contributed to the stability in core inflation. However, the Committee also viewed the possibility that core inflation might rise as a risk to the achievement of its mandated objectives, and it judged that some further policy firming may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance. In my view, data arriving since the meeting have not materially changed that assessment of the risks. To support continued healthy growth of the economy, vigilance in regard to inflation is essential.The FOMC will continue to monitor the incoming data closely to assess the prospects for both growth and inflation. In particular, even if in the Committee's judgment the risks to its objectives are not entirely balanced, at some point in the future the Committee may decide to take no action at one or more meetings in the interest of allowing more time to receive information relevant to the outlook. Of course, a decision to take no action at a particular meeting does not preclude actions at subsequent meetings, and the Committee will not hesitate to act when it determines that doing so is needed to foster the achievement of the Federal Reserve's mandated objectives.Although recent economic developments have been positive, the nation still faces some significant longer-term economic challenges. One such challenge is putting the federal budget on a trajectory that will be sustainable as our society ages. Under current law, federal spending for retirement and health programs will grow substantially in coming decades--both as a share of overall federal spending and relative to the size of the economy--especially if health costs continue to climb rapidly. Slower growth of the workforce may also reduce growth in economic activity and thus in tax revenues.The broad dimensions of the problem are well-known. In fiscal year 2005, federal outlays for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid totaled about 8 percent of GDP. According to the projections of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), by the year 2020 that share will increase by more than three percentage points of GDP, an amount about equal in size to the current federal deficit. By 2040, according to the CBO, the share of GDP devoted to those three programs (excluding contributions by the states) will double from current levels, to about 16 percent of GDP. Were these projections to materialize, the Congress would find itself in the position of having to eliminate essentially all other non-interest spending, raising federal taxes to levels well above their long-term average of about 18 percent of GDP, or choosing some combination of the two. Absent such actions, we would see widening and eventually unsustainable budget deficits, which would impede capital accumulation, slow economic growth, threaten financial stability, and put a heavy burden of debt on our children and grandchildren.The resolution of the nation's long-run fiscal challenge will require hard choices. Fundamentally, the decision confronting the Congress and the American people is how large a share of the nation's economic resources should be devoted to federal government programs, including transfer programs like Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. In making that decision, the full range of benefits and costs associated with each program should be taken into account. Crucially, however, whatever size of government is chosen, tax rates will ultimately have to be set at a level sufficient to achieve a reasonable balance of spending and revenues in the long run. Members of the Congress who want to extend tax cuts and keep tax rates low must accept that low rates will be sustainable over time only if outlays can be held down sufficiently to avoid large deficits. Likewise, members who favor a more expansive role of the government must balance the benefits of government programs with the burden imposed by the additional taxes needed to pay for them, a burden that includes not only the resources transferred from the private sector but also the reductions in the efficiency and growth potential of the economy associated with higher tax rates.Another important challenge is the large and widening deficit in the U.S. current account. This deficit has increased from a little more than $100 billion in 1995 to roughly $800 billion last year, or 6-1/2 percent of nominal GDP. The causes of this deficit are complex and include both domestic and international factors. Fundamentally, the current account deficit reflects the fact that capital investment in the United States, including residential construction, substantially exceeds U.S. national saving. The opposite situation exists abroad, in that the saving of our trading partners exceeds their own capital investment. The excess of domestic investment over domestic saving in the United States, which by definition is the same as the current account deficit, must be financed by net inflows of funds from investors abroad. To date, the United States has had little difficulty in financing its current account deficit, as foreign savers have found U.S. investments attractive and foreign official institutions have added to their stocks of dollar-denominated international reserves. However, the cumulative effect of years of current account deficits have caused the United States to switch from being an international creditor to an international debtor, with a net foreign debt position of more than $3 trillion, roughly 25 percent of a year's GDP. This trend cannot continue forever, as it would imply an ever-growing interest burden owed to foreign creditors. Moreover, as foreign holdings of U.S. assets increase, at some point foreigners may become less willing to add these assets to their portfolios. While it is likely that current account imbalances will be resolved gradually over time, there is a small risk of a sudden shift in sentiment that could lead to disruptive changes in the value of the dollar and in other asset prices.Actions both here and abroad would contribute to a gradual reduction in the U.S. current account deficit and in its mirror image, the current account surpluses of our trading partners. To reduce its dependence on foreign capital, the United States should take action to increase its national saving rate. The most direct way to accomplish this objective would be by putting federal government finances on a more sustainable path. Our trading partners can help to mitigate the global imbalance by relying less on exports as a source of growth, and instead boosting domestic spending relative to their production. In this regard, some policymakers in developing Asia, including China, appear to have recognized the importance of giving domestic demand a greater role in their development strategies and are seeking to increase domestic spending through fiscal measures, financial reforms, and other initiatives. Such actions should be encouraged. For these countries, allowing greater flexibility in exchange rates would be an important additional step toward helping to restore greater balance both in global capital flows and in their own economies. Structural reforms to enhance growth in our industrial trading partners could also be helpful. Each of these actions would be in the long-term interests of the countries involved, regardless of their effects on external imbalances. On the other hand, raising barriers to trade or flows of capital is not a constructive approach for addressing the current account deficit because such barriers would have significant deleterious effects on both the U.S. and global economies.In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the economy has been performing well and the near-term prospects look good, although as always there are risks to the outlook. Monetary policy will continue to pursue its objectives of helping the economy to grow at a strong, sustainable pace while seeking to keep inflation firmly under control. And, while many of the fundamental factors that determine longer-term economic growth appear favorable, actions to move the federal budget toward a more sustainable position would do a great deal to help ensure the future prosperity of our country. With regard to monetary policy, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has raised the federal funds rate, in increments of 25 basis points, at each of its past fifteen meetings, bringing its current level to 4.75 percent. This sequence of rate increases was necessary to remove the unusual monetary accommodation put in place in response to the soft economic conditions earlier in this decade. Future policy actions will be increasingly dependent on the evolution of the economic outlook, as reflected in the incoming data. Specifically, policy will respond to arriving information that affects the Committee's assessment of the medium-term risks to its objectives of price stability and maximum sustainable employment. Focusing on the medium-term forecast horizon is necessary because of the lags with which monetary policy affects the economy.In the statement issued after its March meeting, the FOMC noted that economic growth had rebounded strongly in the first quarter but appeared likely to moderate to a more sustainable pace. It further noted that a number of factors have contributed to the stability in core inflation. However, the Committee also viewed the possibility that core inflation might rise as a risk to the achievement of its mandated objectives, and it judged that some further policy firming may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance. In my view, data arriving since the meeting have not materially changed that assessment of the risks. To support continued healthy growth of the economy, vigilance in regard to inflation is essential.The FOMC will continue to monitor the incoming data closely to assess the prospects for both growth and inflation. In particular, even if in the Committee's judgment the risks to its objectives are not entirely balanced, at some point in the future the Committee may decide to take no action at one or more meetings in the interest of allowing more time to receive information relevant to the outlook. Of course, a decision to take no action at a particular meeting does not preclude actions at subsequent meetings, and the Committee will not hesitate to act when it determines that doing so is needed to foster the achievement of the Federal Reserve's mandated objectives.Although recent economic developments have been positive, the nation still faces some significant longer-term economic challenges. One such challenge is putting the federal budget on a trajectory that will be sustainable as our society ages. Under current law, federal spending for retirement and health programs will grow substantially in coming decades--both as a share of overall federal spending and relative to the size of the economy--especially if health costs continue to climb rapidly. Slower growth of the workforce may also reduce growth in economic activity and thus in tax revenues.The broad dimensions of the problem are well-known. In fiscal year 2005, federal outlays for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid totaled about 8 percent of GDP. According to the projections of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), by the year 2020 that share will increase by more than three percentage points of GDP, an amount about equal in size to the current federal deficit. By 2040, according to the CBO, the share of GDP devoted to those three programs (excluding contributions by the states) will double from current levels, to about 16 percent of GDP. Were these projections to materialize, the Congress would find itself in the position of having to eliminate essentially all other non-interest spending, raising federal taxes to levels well above their long-term average of about 18 percent of GDP, or choosing some combination of the two. Absent such actions, we would see widening and eventually unsustainable budget deficits, which would impede capital accumulation, slow economic growth, threaten financial stability, and put a heavy burden of debt on our children and grandchildren.The resolution of the nation's long-run fiscal challenge will require hard choices. Fundamentally, the decision confronting the Congress and the American people is how large a share of the nation's economic resources should be devoted to federal government programs, including transfer programs like Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. In making that decision, the full range of benefits and costs associated with each program should be taken into account. Crucially, however, whatever size of government is chosen, tax rates will ultimately have to be set at a level sufficient to achieve a reasonable balance of spending and revenues in the long run. Members of the Congress who want to extend tax cuts and keep tax rates low must accept that low rates will be sustainable over time only if outlays can be held down sufficiently to avoid large deficits. Likewise, members who favor a more expansive role of the government must balance the benefits of government programs with the burden imposed by the additional taxes needed to pay for them, a burden that includes not only the resources transferred from the private sector but also the reductions in the efficiency and growth potential of the economy associated with higher tax rates.Another important challenge is the large and widening deficit in the U.S. current account. This deficit has increased from a little more than $100 billion in 1995 to roughly $800 billion last year, or 6-1/2 percent of nominal GDP. The causes of this deficit are complex and include both domestic and international factors. Fundamentally, the current account deficit reflects the fact that capital investment in the United States, including residential construction, substantially exceeds U.S. national saving. The opposite situation exists abroad, in that the saving of our trading partners exceeds their own capital investment. The excess of domestic investment over domestic saving in the United States, which by definition is the same as the current account deficit, must be financed by net inflows of funds from investors abroad. To date, the United States has had little difficulty in financing its current account deficit, as foreign savers have found U.S. investments attractive and foreign official institutions have added to their stocks of dollar-denominated international reserves. However, the cumulative effect of years of current account deficits have caused the United States to switch from being an international creditor to an international debtor, with a net foreign debt position of more than $3 trillion, roughly 25 percent of a year's GDP. This trend cannot continue forever, as it would imply an ever-growing interest burden owed to foreign creditors. Moreover, as foreign holdings of U.S. assets increase, at some point foreigners may become less willing to add these assets to their portfolios. While it is likely that current account imbalances will be resolved gradually over time, there is a small risk of a sudden shift in sentiment that could lead to disruptive changes in the value of the dollar and in other asset prices.Actions both here and abroad would contribute to a gradual reduction in the U.S. current account deficit and in its mirror image, the current account surpluses of our trading partners. To reduce its dependence on foreign capital, the United States should take action to increase its national saving rate. The most direct way to accomplish this objective would be by putting federal government finances on a more sustainable path. Our trading partners can help to mitigate the global imbalance by relying less on exports as a source of growth, and instead boosting domestic spending relative to their production. In this regard, some policymakers in developing Asia, including China, appear to have recognized the importance of giving domestic demand a greater role in their development strategies and are seeking to increase domestic spending through fiscal measures, financial reforms, and other initiatives. Such actions should be encouraged. For these countries, allowing greater flexibility in exchange rates would be an important additional step toward helping to restore greater balance both in global capital flows and in their own economies. Structural reforms to enhance growth in our industrial trading partners could also be helpful. Each of these actions would be in the long-term interests of the countries involved, regardless of their effects on external imbalances. On the other hand, raising barriers to trade or flows of capital is not a constructive approach for addressing the current account deficit because such barriers would have significant deleterious effects on both the U.S. and global economies.In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the economy has been performing well and the near-term prospects look good, although as always there are risks to the outlook. Monetary policy will continue to pursue its objectives of helping the economy to grow at a strong, sustainable pace while seeking to keep inflation firmly under control. And, while many of the fundamental factors that determine longer-term economic growth appear favorable, actions to move the federal budget toward a more sustainable position would do a great deal to help ensure the future prosperity of our country. In the statement issued after its March meeting, the FOMC noted that economic growth had rebounded strongly in the first quarter but appeared likely to moderate to a more sustainable pace. It further noted that a number of factors have contributed to the stability in core inflation. However, the Committee also viewed the possibility that core inflation might rise as a risk to the achievement of its mandated objectives, and it judged that some further policy firming may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance. In my view, data arriving since the meeting have not materially changed that assessment of the risks. To support continued healthy growth of the economy, vigilance in regard to inflation is essential.The FOMC will continue to monitor the incoming data closely to assess the prospects for both growth and inflation. In particular, even if in the Committee's judgment the risks to its objectives are not entirely balanced, at some point in the future the Committee may decide to take no action at one or more meetings in the interest of allowing more time to receive information relevant to the outlook. Of course, a decision to take no action at a particular meeting does not preclude actions at subsequent meetings, and the Committee will not hesitate to act when it determines that doing so is needed to foster the achievement of the Federal Reserve's mandated objectives.Although recent economic developments have been positive, the nation still faces some significant longer-term economic challenges. One such challenge is putting the federal budget on a trajectory that will be sustainable as our society ages. Under current law, federal spending for retirement and health programs will grow substantially in coming decades--both as a share of overall federal spending and relative to the size of the economy--especially if health costs continue to climb rapidly. Slower growth of the workforce may also reduce growth in economic activity and thus in tax revenues.The broad dimensions of the problem are well-known. In fiscal year 2005, federal outlays for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid totaled about 8 percent of GDP. According to the projections of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), by the year 2020 that share will increase by more than three percentage points of GDP, an amount about equal in size to the current federal deficit. By 2040, according to the CBO, the share of GDP devoted to those three programs (excluding contributions by the states) will double from current levels, to about 16 percent of GDP. Were these projections to materialize, the Congress would find itself in the position of having to eliminate essentially all other non-interest spending, raising federal taxes to levels well above their long-term average of about 18 percent of GDP, or choosing some combination of the two. Absent such actions, we would see widening and eventually unsustainable budget deficits, which would impede capital accumulation, slow economic growth, threaten financial stability, and put a heavy burden of debt on our children and grandchildren.The resolution of the nation's long-run fiscal challenge will require hard choices. Fundamentally, the decision confronting the Congress and the American people is how large a share of the nation's economic resources should be devoted to federal government programs, including transfer programs like Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. In making that decision, the full range of benefits and costs associated with each program should be taken into account. Crucially, however, whatever size of government is chosen, tax rates will ultimately have to be set at a level sufficient to achieve a reasonable balance of spending and revenues in the long run. Members of the Congress who want to extend tax cuts and keep tax rates low must accept that low rates will be sustainable over time only if outlays can be held down sufficiently to avoid large deficits. Likewise, members who favor a more expansive role of the government must balance the benefits of government programs with the burden imposed by the additional taxes needed to pay for them, a burden that includes not only the resources transferred from the private sector but also the reductions in the efficiency and growth potential of the economy associated with higher tax rates.Another important challenge is the large and widening deficit in the U.S. current account. This deficit has increased from a little more than $100 billion in 1995 to roughly $800 billion last year, or 6-1/2 percent of nominal GDP. The causes of this deficit are complex and include both domestic and international factors. Fundamentally, the current account deficit reflects the fact that capital investment in the United States, including residential construction, substantially exceeds U.S. national saving. The opposite situation exists abroad, in that the saving of our trading partners exceeds their own capital investment. The excess of domestic investment over domestic saving in the United States, which by definition is the same as the current account deficit, must be financed by net inflows of funds from investors abroad. To date, the United States has had little difficulty in financing its current account deficit, as foreign savers have found U.S. investments attractive and foreign official institutions have added to their stocks of dollar-denominated international reserves. However, the cumulative effect of years of current account deficits have caused the United States to switch from being an international creditor to an international debtor, with a net foreign debt position of more than $3 trillion, roughly 25 percent of a year's GDP. This trend cannot continue forever, as it would imply an ever-growing interest burden owed to foreign creditors. Moreover, as foreign holdings of U.S. assets increase, at some point foreigners may become less willing to add these assets to their portfolios. While it is likely that current account imbalances will be resolved gradually over time, there is a small risk of a sudden shift in sentiment that could lead to disruptive changes in the value of the dollar and in other asset prices.Actions both here and abroad would contribute to a gradual reduction in the U.S. current account deficit and in its mirror image, the current account surpluses of our trading partners. To reduce its dependence on foreign capital, the United States should take action to increase its national saving rate. The most direct way to accomplish this objective would be by putting federal government finances on a more sustainable path. Our trading partners can help to mitigate the global imbalance by relying less on exports as a source of growth, and instead boosting domestic spending relative to their production. In this regard, some policymakers in developing Asia, including China, appear to have recognized the importance of giving domestic demand a greater role in their development strategies and are seeking to increase domestic spending through fiscal measures, financial reforms, and other initiatives. Such actions should be encouraged. For these countries, allowing greater flexibility in exchange rates would be an important additional step toward helping to restore greater balance both in global capital flows and in their own economies. Structural reforms to enhance growth in our industrial trading partners could also be helpful. Each of these actions would be in the long-term interests of the countries involved, regardless of their effects on external imbalances. On the other hand, raising barriers to trade or flows of capital is not a constructive approach for addressing the current account deficit because such barriers would have significant deleterious effects on both the U.S. and global economies.In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the economy has been performing well and the near-term prospects look good, although as always there are risks to the outlook. Monetary policy will continue to pursue its objectives of helping the economy to grow at a strong, sustainable pace while seeking to keep inflation firmly under control. And, while many of the fundamental factors that determine longer-term economic growth appear favorable, actions to move the federal budget toward a more sustainable position would do a great deal to help ensure the future prosperity of our country. The FOMC will continue to monitor the incoming data closely to assess the prospects for both growth and inflation. In particular, even if in the Committee's judgment the risks to its objectives are not entirely balanced, at some point in the future the Committee may decide to take no action at one or more meetings in the interest of allowing more time to receive information relevant to the outlook. Of course, a decision to take no action at a particular meeting does not preclude actions at subsequent meetings, and the Committee will not hesitate to act when it determines that doing so is needed to foster the achievement of the Federal Reserve's mandated objectives.Although recent economic developments have been positive, the nation still faces some significant longer-term economic challenges. One such challenge is putting the federal budget on a trajectory that will be sustainable as our society ages. Under current law, federal spending for retirement and health programs will grow substantially in coming decades--both as a share of overall federal spending and relative to the size of the economy--especially if health costs continue to climb rapidly. Slower growth of the workforce may also reduce growth in economic activity and thus in tax revenues.The broad dimensions of the problem are well-known. In fiscal year 2005, federal outlays for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid totaled about 8 percent of GDP. According to the projections of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), by the year 2020 that share will increase by more than three percentage points of GDP, an amount about equal in size to the current federal deficit. By 2040, according to the CBO, the share of GDP devoted to those three programs (excluding contributions by the states) will double from current levels, to about 16 percent of GDP. Were these projections to materialize, the Congress would find itself in the position of having to eliminate essentially all other non-interest spending, raising federal taxes to levels well above their long-term average of about 18 percent of GDP, or choosing some combination of the two. Absent such actions, we would see widening and eventually unsustainable budget deficits, which would impede capital accumulation, slow economic growth, threaten financial stability, and put a heavy burden of debt on our children and grandchildren.The resolution of the nation's long-run fiscal challenge will require hard choices. Fundamentally, the decision confronting the Congress and the American people is how large a share of the nation's economic resources should be devoted to federal government programs, including transfer programs like Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. In making that decision, the full range of benefits and costs associated with each program should be taken into account. Crucially, however, whatever size of government is chosen, tax rates will ultimately have to be set at a level sufficient to achieve a reasonable balance of spending and revenues in the long run. Members of the Congress who want to extend tax cuts and keep tax rates low must accept that low rates will be sustainable over time only if outlays can be held down sufficiently to avoid large deficits. Likewise, members who favor a more expansive role of the government must balance the benefits of government programs with the burden imposed by the additional taxes needed to pay for them, a burden that includes not only the resources transferred from the private sector but also the reductions in the efficiency and growth potential of the economy associated with higher tax rates.Another important challenge is the large and widening deficit in the U.S. current account. This deficit has increased from a little more than $100 billion in 1995 to roughly $800 billion last year, or 6-1/2 percent of nominal GDP. The causes of this deficit are complex and include both domestic and international factors. Fundamentally, the current account deficit reflects the fact that capital investment in the United States, including residential construction, substantially exceeds U.S. national saving. The opposite situation exists abroad, in that the saving of our trading partners exceeds their own capital investment. The excess of domestic investment over domestic saving in the United States, which by definition is the same as the current account deficit, must be financed by net inflows of funds from investors abroad. To date, the United States has had little difficulty in financing its current account deficit, as foreign savers have found U.S. investments attractive and foreign official institutions have added to their stocks of dollar-denominated international reserves. However, the cumulative effect of years of current account deficits have caused the United States to switch from being an international creditor to an international debtor, with a net foreign debt position of more than $3 trillion, roughly 25 percent of a year's GDP. This trend cannot continue forever, as it would imply an ever-growing interest burden owed to foreign creditors. Moreover, as foreign holdings of U.S. assets increase, at some point foreigners may become less willing to add these assets to their portfolios. While it is likely that current account imbalances will be resolved gradually over time, there is a small risk of a sudden shift in sentiment that could lead to disruptive changes in the value of the dollar and in other asset prices.Actions both here and abroad would contribute to a gradual reduction in the U.S. current account deficit and in its mirror image, the current account surpluses of our trading partners. To reduce its dependence on foreign capital, the United States should take action to increase its national saving rate. The most direct way to accomplish this objective would be by putting federal government finances on a more sustainable path. Our trading partners can help to mitigate the global imbalance by relying less on exports as a source of growth, and instead boosting domestic spending relative to their production. In this regard, some policymakers in developing Asia, including China, appear to have recognized the importance of giving domestic demand a greater role in their development strategies and are seeking to increase domestic spending through fiscal measures, financial reforms, and other initiatives. Such actions should be encouraged. For these countries, allowing greater flexibility in exchange rates would be an important additional step toward helping to restore greater balance both in global capital flows and in their own economies. Structural reforms to enhance growth in our industrial trading partners could also be helpful. Each of these actions would be in the long-term interests of the countries involved, regardless of their effects on external imbalances. On the other hand, raising barriers to trade or flows of capital is not a constructive approach for addressing the current account deficit because such barriers would have significant deleterious effects on both the U.S. and global economies.In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the economy has been performing well and the near-term prospects look good, although as always there are risks to the outlook. Monetary policy will continue to pursue its objectives of helping the economy to grow at a strong, sustainable pace while seeking to keep inflation firmly under control. And, while many of the fundamental factors that determine longer-term economic growth appear favorable, actions to move the federal budget toward a more sustainable position would do a great deal to help ensure the future prosperity of our country. Although recent economic developments have been positive, the nation still faces some significant longer-term economic challenges. One such challenge is putting the federal budget on a trajectory that will be sustainable as our society ages. Under current law, federal spending for retirement and health programs will grow substantially in coming decades--both as a share of overall federal spending and relative to the size of the economy--especially if health costs continue to climb rapidly. Slower growth of the workforce may also reduce growth in economic activity and thus in tax revenues.The broad dimensions of the problem are well-known. In fiscal year 2005, federal outlays for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid totaled about 8 percent of GDP. According to the projections of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), by the year 2020 that share will increase by more than three percentage points of GDP, an amount about equal in size to the current federal deficit. By 2040, according to the CBO, the share of GDP devoted to those three programs (excluding contributions by the states) will double from current levels, to about 16 percent of GDP. Were these projections to materialize, the Congress would find itself in the position of having to eliminate essentially all other non-interest spending, raising federal taxes to levels well above their long-term average of about 18 percent of GDP, or choosing some combination of the two. Absent such actions, we would see widening and eventually unsustainable budget deficits, which would impede capital accumulation, slow economic growth, threaten financial stability, and put a heavy burden of debt on our children and grandchildren.The resolution of the nation's long-run fiscal challenge will require hard choices. Fundamentally, the decision confronting the Congress and the American people is how large a share of the nation's economic resources should be devoted to federal government programs, including transfer programs like Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. In making that decision, the full range of benefits and costs associated with each program should be taken into account. Crucially, however, whatever size of government is chosen, tax rates will ultimately have to be set at a level sufficient to achieve a reasonable balance of spending and revenues in the long run. Members of the Congress who want to extend tax cuts and keep tax rates low must accept that low rates will be sustainable over time only if outlays can be held down sufficiently to avoid large deficits. Likewise, members who favor a more expansive role of the government must balance the benefits of government programs with the burden imposed by the additional taxes needed to pay for them, a burden that includes not only the resources transferred from the private sector but also the reductions in the efficiency and growth potential of the economy associated with higher tax rates.Another important challenge is the large and widening deficit in the U.S. current account. This deficit has increased from a little more than $100 billion in 1995 to roughly $800 billion last year, or 6-1/2 percent of nominal GDP. The causes of this deficit are complex and include both domestic and international factors. Fundamentally, the current account deficit reflects the fact that capital investment in the United States, including residential construction, substantially exceeds U.S. national saving. The opposite situation exists abroad, in that the saving of our trading partners exceeds their own capital investment. The excess of domestic investment over domestic saving in the United States, which by definition is the same as the current account deficit, must be financed by net inflows of funds from investors abroad. To date, the United States has had little difficulty in financing its current account deficit, as foreign savers have found U.S. investments attractive and foreign official institutions have added to their stocks of dollar-denominated international reserves. However, the cumulative effect of years of current account deficits have caused the United States to switch from being an international creditor to an international debtor, with a net foreign debt position of more than $3 trillion, roughly 25 percent of a year's GDP. This trend cannot continue forever, as it would imply an ever-growing interest burden owed to foreign creditors. Moreover, as foreign holdings of U.S. assets increase, at some point foreigners may become less willing to add these assets to their portfolios. While it is likely that current account imbalances will be resolved gradually over time, there is a small risk of a sudden shift in sentiment that could lead to disruptive changes in the value of the dollar and in other asset prices.Actions both here and abroad would contribute to a gradual reduction in the U.S. current account deficit and in its mirror image, the current account surpluses of our trading partners. To reduce its dependence on foreign capital, the United States should take action to increase its national saving rate. The most direct way to accomplish this objective would be by putting federal government finances on a more sustainable path. Our trading partners can help to mitigate the global imbalance by relying less on exports as a source of growth, and instead boosting domestic spending relative to their production. In this regard, some policymakers in developing Asia, including China, appear to have recognized the importance of giving domestic demand a greater role in their development strategies and are seeking to increase domestic spending through fiscal measures, financial reforms, and other initiatives. Such actions should be encouraged. For these countries, allowing greater flexibility in exchange rates would be an important additional step toward helping to restore greater balance both in global capital flows and in their own economies. Structural reforms to enhance growth in our industrial trading partners could also be helpful. Each of these actions would be in the long-term interests of the countries involved, regardless of their effects on external imbalances. On the other hand, raising barriers to trade or flows of capital is not a constructive approach for addressing the current account deficit because such barriers would have significant deleterious effects on both the U.S. and global economies.In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the economy has been performing well and the near-term prospects look good, although as always there are risks to the outlook. Monetary policy will continue to pursue its objectives of helping the economy to grow at a strong, sustainable pace while seeking to keep inflation firmly under control. And, while many of the fundamental factors that determine longer-term economic growth appear favorable, actions to move the federal budget toward a more sustainable position would do a great deal to help ensure the future prosperity of our country. The broad dimensions of the problem are well-known. In fiscal year 2005, federal outlays for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid totaled about 8 percent of GDP. According to the projections of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), by the year 2020 that share will increase by more than three percentage points of GDP, an amount about equal in size to the current federal deficit. By 2040, according to the CBO, the share of GDP devoted to those three programs (excluding contributions by the states) will double from current levels, to about 16 percent of GDP. Were these projections to materialize, the Congress would find itself in the position of having to eliminate essentially all other non-interest spending, raising federal taxes to levels well above their long-term average of about 18 percent of GDP, or choosing some combination of the two. Absent such actions, we would see widening and eventually unsustainable budget deficits, which would impede capital accumulation, slow economic growth, threaten financial stability, and put a heavy burden of debt on our children and grandchildren.The resolution of the nation's long-run fiscal challenge will require hard choices. Fundamentally, the decision confronting the Congress and the American people is how large a share of the nation's economic resources should be devoted to federal government programs, including transfer programs like Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. In making that decision, the full range of benefits and costs associated with each program should be taken into account. Crucially, however, whatever size of government is chosen, tax rates will ultimately have to be set at a level sufficient to achieve a reasonable balance of spending and revenues in the long run. Members of the Congress who want to extend tax cuts and keep tax rates low must accept that low rates will be sustainable over time only if outlays can be held down sufficiently to avoid large deficits. Likewise, members who favor a more expansive role of the government must balance the benefits of government programs with the burden imposed by the additional taxes needed to pay for them, a burden that includes not only the resources transferred from the private sector but also the reductions in the efficiency and growth potential of the economy associated with higher tax rates.Another important challenge is the large and widening deficit in the U.S. current account. This deficit has increased from a little more than $100 billion in 1995 to roughly $800 billion last year, or 6-1/2 percent of nominal GDP. The causes of this deficit are complex and include both domestic and international factors. Fundamentally, the current account deficit reflects the fact that capital investment in the United States, including residential construction, substantially exceeds U.S. national saving. The opposite situation exists abroad, in that the saving of our trading partners exceeds their own capital investment. The excess of domestic investment over domestic saving in the United States, which by definition is the same as the current account deficit, must be financed by net inflows of funds from investors abroad. To date, the United States has had little difficulty in financing its current account deficit, as foreign savers have found U.S. investments attractive and foreign official institutions have added to their stocks of dollar-denominated international reserves. However, the cumulative effect of years of current account deficits have caused the United States to switch from being an international creditor to an international debtor, with a net foreign debt position of more than $3 trillion, roughly 25 percent of a year's GDP. This trend cannot continue forever, as it would imply an ever-growing interest burden owed to foreign creditors. Moreover, as foreign holdings of U.S. assets increase, at some point foreigners may become less willing to add these assets to their portfolios. While it is likely that current account imbalances will be resolved gradually over time, there is a small risk of a sudden shift in sentiment that could lead to disruptive changes in the value of the dollar and in other asset prices.Actions both here and abroad would contribute to a gradual reduction in the U.S. current account deficit and in its mirror image, the current account surpluses of our trading partners. To reduce its dependence on foreign capital, the United States should take action to increase its national saving rate. The most direct way to accomplish this objective would be by putting federal government finances on a more sustainable path. Our trading partners can help to mitigate the global imbalance by relying less on exports as a source of growth, and instead boosting domestic spending relative to their production. In this regard, some policymakers in developing Asia, including China, appear to have recognized the importance of giving domestic demand a greater role in their development strategies and are seeking to increase domestic spending through fiscal measures, financial reforms, and other initiatives. Such actions should be encouraged. For these countries, allowing greater flexibility in exchange rates would be an important additional step toward helping to restore greater balance both in global capital flows and in their own economies. Structural reforms to enhance growth in our industrial trading partners could also be helpful. Each of these actions would be in the long-term interests of the countries involved, regardless of their effects on external imbalances. On the other hand, raising barriers to trade or flows of capital is not a constructive approach for addressing the current account deficit because such barriers would have significant deleterious effects on both the U.S. and global economies.In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the economy has been performing well and the near-term prospects look good, although as always there are risks to the outlook. Monetary policy will continue to pursue its objectives of helping the economy to grow at a strong, sustainable pace while seeking to keep inflation firmly under control. And, while many of the fundamental factors that determine longer-term economic growth appear favorable, actions to move the federal budget toward a more sustainable position would do a great deal to help ensure the future prosperity of our country. The resolution of the nation's long-run fiscal challenge will require hard choices. Fundamentally, the decision confronting the Congress and the American people is how large a share of the nation's economic resources should be devoted to federal government programs, including transfer programs like Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. In making that decision, the full range of benefits and costs associated with each program should be taken into account. Crucially, however, whatever size of government is chosen, tax rates will ultimately have to be set at a level sufficient to achieve a reasonable balance of spending and revenues in the long run. Members of the Congress who want to extend tax cuts and keep tax rates low must accept that low rates will be sustainable over time only if outlays can be held down sufficiently to avoid large deficits. Likewise, members who favor a more expansive role of the government must balance the benefits of government programs with the burden imposed by the additional taxes needed to pay for them, a burden that includes not only the resources transferred from the private sector but also the reductions in the efficiency and growth potential of the economy associated with higher tax rates.Another important challenge is the large and widening deficit in the U.S. current account. This deficit has increased from a little more than $100 billion in 1995 to roughly $800 billion last year, or 6-1/2 percent of nominal GDP. The causes of this deficit are complex and include both domestic and international factors. Fundamentally, the current account deficit reflects the fact that capital investment in the United States, including residential construction, substantially exceeds U.S. national saving. The opposite situation exists abroad, in that the saving of our trading partners exceeds their own capital investment. The excess of domestic investment over domestic saving in the United States, which by definition is the same as the current account deficit, must be financed by net inflows of funds from investors abroad. To date, the United States has had little difficulty in financing its current account deficit, as foreign savers have found U.S. investments attractive and foreign official institutions have added to their stocks of dollar-denominated international reserves. However, the cumulative effect of years of current account deficits have caused the United States to switch from being an international creditor to an international debtor, with a net foreign debt position of more than $3 trillion, roughly 25 percent of a year's GDP. This trend cannot continue forever, as it would imply an ever-growing interest burden owed to foreign creditors. Moreover, as foreign holdings of U.S. assets increase, at some point foreigners may become less willing to add these assets to their portfolios. While it is likely that current account imbalances will be resolved gradually over time, there is a small risk of a sudden shift in sentiment that could lead to disruptive changes in the value of the dollar and in other asset prices.Actions both here and abroad would contribute to a gradual reduction in the U.S. current account deficit and in its mirror image, the current account surpluses of our trading partners. To reduce its dependence on foreign capital, the United States should take action to increase its national saving rate. The most direct way to accomplish this objective would be by putting federal government finances on a more sustainable path. Our trading partners can help to mitigate the global imbalance by relying less on exports as a source of growth, and instead boosting domestic spending relative to their production. In this regard, some policymakers in developing Asia, including China, appear to have recognized the importance of giving domestic demand a greater role in their development strategies and are seeking to increase domestic spending through fiscal measures, financial reforms, and other initiatives. Such actions should be encouraged. For these countries, allowing greater flexibility in exchange rates would be an important additional step toward helping to restore greater balance both in global capital flows and in their own economies. Structural reforms to enhance growth in our industrial trading partners could also be helpful. Each of these actions would be in the long-term interests of the countries involved, regardless of their effects on external imbalances. On the other hand, raising barriers to trade or flows of capital is not a constructive approach for addressing the current account deficit because such barriers would have significant deleterious effects on both the U.S. and global economies.In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the economy has been performing well and the near-term prospects look good, although as always there are risks to the outlook. Monetary policy will continue to pursue its objectives of helping the economy to grow at a strong, sustainable pace while seeking to keep inflation firmly under control. And, while many of the fundamental factors that determine longer-term economic growth appear favorable, actions to move the federal budget toward a more sustainable position would do a great deal to help ensure the future prosperity of our country. Another important challenge is the large and widening deficit in the U.S. current account. This deficit has increased from a little more than $100 billion in 1995 to roughly $800 billion last year, or 6-1/2 percent of nominal GDP. The causes of this deficit are complex and include both domestic and international factors. Fundamentally, the current account deficit reflects the fact that capital investment in the United States, including residential construction, substantially exceeds U.S. national saving. The opposite situation exists abroad, in that the saving of our trading partners exceeds their own capital investment. The excess of domestic investment over domestic saving in the United States, which by definition is the same as the current account deficit, must be financed by net inflows of funds from investors abroad. To date, the United States has had little difficulty in financing its current account deficit, as foreign savers have found U.S. investments attractive and foreign official institutions have added to their stocks of dollar-denominated international reserves. However, the cumulative effect of years of current account deficits have caused the United States to switch from being an international creditor to an international debtor, with a net foreign debt position of more than $3 trillion, roughly 25 percent of a year's GDP. This trend cannot continue forever, as it would imply an ever-growing interest burden owed to foreign creditors. Moreover, as foreign holdings of U.S. assets increase, at some point foreigners may become less willing to add these assets to their portfolios. While it is likely that current account imbalances will be resolved gradually over time, there is a small risk of a sudden shift in sentiment that could lead to disruptive changes in the value of the dollar and in other asset prices.Actions both here and abroad would contribute to a gradual reduction in the U.S. current account deficit and in its mirror image, the current account surpluses of our trading partners. To reduce its dependence on foreign capital, the United States should take action to increase its national saving rate. The most direct way to accomplish this objective would be by putting federal government finances on a more sustainable path. Our trading partners can help to mitigate the global imbalance by relying less on exports as a source of growth, and instead boosting domestic spending relative to their production. In this regard, some policymakers in developing Asia, including China, appear to have recognized the importance of giving domestic demand a greater role in their development strategies and are seeking to increase domestic spending through fiscal measures, financial reforms, and other initiatives. Such actions should be encouraged. For these countries, allowing greater flexibility in exchange rates would be an important additional step toward helping to restore greater balance both in global capital flows and in their own economies. Structural reforms to enhance growth in our industrial trading partners could also be helpful. Each of these actions would be in the long-term interests of the countries involved, regardless of their effects on external imbalances. On the other hand, raising barriers to trade or flows of capital is not a constructive approach for addressing the current account deficit because such barriers would have significant deleterious effects on both the U.S. and global economies.In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the economy has been performing well and the near-term prospects look good, although as always there are risks to the outlook. Monetary policy will continue to pursue its objectives of helping the economy to grow at a strong, sustainable pace while seeking to keep inflation firmly under control. And, while many of the fundamental factors that determine longer-term economic growth appear favorable, actions to move the federal budget toward a more sustainable position would do a great deal to help ensure the future prosperity of our country. Actions both here and abroad would contribute to a gradual reduction in the U.S. current account deficit and in its mirror image, the current account surpluses of our trading partners. To reduce its dependence on foreign capital, the United States should take action to increase its national saving rate. The most direct way to accomplish this objective would be by putting federal government finances on a more sustainable path. Our trading partners can help to mitigate the global imbalance by relying less on exports as a source of growth, and instead boosting domestic spending relative to their production. In this regard, some policymakers in developing Asia, including China, appear to have recognized the importance of giving domestic demand a greater role in their development strategies and are seeking to increase domestic spending through fiscal measures, financial reforms, and other initiatives. Such actions should be encouraged. For these countries, allowing greater flexibility in exchange rates would be an important additional step toward helping to restore greater balance both in global capital flows and in their own economies. Structural reforms to enhance growth in our industrial trading partners could also be helpful. Each of these actions would be in the long-term interests of the countries involved, regardless of their effects on external imbalances. On the other hand, raising barriers to trade or flows of capital is not a constructive approach for addressing the current account deficit because such barriers would have significant deleterious effects on both the U.S. and global economies.In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the economy has been performing well and the near-term prospects look good, although as always there are risks to the outlook. Monetary policy will continue to pursue its objectives of helping the economy to grow at a strong, sustainable pace while seeking to keep inflation firmly under control. And, while many of the fundamental factors that determine longer-term economic growth appear favorable, actions to move the federal budget toward a more sustainable position would do a great deal to help ensure the future prosperity of our country. In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the economy has been performing well and the near-term prospects look good, although as always there are risks to the outlook. Monetary policy will continue to pursue its objectives of helping the economy to grow at a strong, sustainable pace while seeking to keep inflation firmly under control. And, while many of the fundamental factors that determine longer-term economic growth appear favorable, actions to move the federal budget toward a more sustainable position would do a great deal to help ensure the future prosperity of our country.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur. Caisse Nationale de Credit Agricole, Paris, France,Credit Agricole Indosuez, Paris, France, andCredit Agricole Indosuez, New York BranchWritten Agreement dated November 30, 2000Terminated March 9, 2004
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's,public web site, as they occur. Premier Financial Bancorp, Inc., Huntington, W.Va.Written Agreement dated January 29, 2003Terminated April 19, 2006 AmSouth Bancorporation andAmSouth Bank, Birmingham, Ala.Cease and Desist Order dated October 12, 2004Terminated April 20, 2006
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the Conference on the Future of Financial Regulation, London School of Economics, London I am delighted that my first speeches as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System are in international settings. Earlier this week I spoke at the European Central Bank, and I am honored today to be able to address this group at the London School of Economics (LSE). The global collection of top academics, key policymakers, and leading private-market participants in these audiences represents what I believe is vital in today's world: a strong spirit of international cooperation and understanding. I am also pleased about the forward-looking nature of the conference on "The Future of Financial Regulation" and would like to express special thanks to two of our hosts at the LSE who have had much first-hand experience at policymaking, Sir Howard Davies, formerly of the U.K.'s Financial Services Authority, and Professor Charles Goodhart, formerly a member of the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee. LSE certainly seems to have all of the bases covered! I will focus my remarks on the U.S. experience with removing restrictions on the geographic expansion of banking organizations because I believe that this experience is timely and important for current debates in the European Union (EU). Over the past year or so, the winds of nationalistic protectionism seem to have strengthened in Europe, especially with regard to cross-border mergers. The desire to impede cross-border integration has been expressed in quite a few EU countries and with respect to a number of different industries, including banking. Just a month ago, in commenting on this position in a speech at the LSE on "The Development of the European Capital Market," EU Commissioner McCreevy said, "Protectionism denies everyone in Europe the economic benefits of market integration--higher growth, and more jobs." And later in that speech, he said, "We have to get rid of the unfavorable and even disabling environment for conducting cross-border transactions. Some supervisors and governments play fair, regrettably others do not."1 What I want to do in my remarks today is to focus on the economic consequences of removing cross-border barriers in banking to show that Commissioner McCreevy is correct: After the removal of barriers to the geographic expansion of banks, the United States experienced substantial gains in terms of banking efficiency, employment growth, and economic growth. Before I begin, I want to emphasize that much of my speech is based on research I conducted with Philip Strahan, of Boston College, before I joined the Federal Reserve Board.2The views I express here today are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of my colleagues on the Board. Historically, banking in the United States has been subject to extensive government regulation covering the prices banks can charge, the activities they can engage in, the risks they can take, the capital they must hold, and the locations in which they can operate. But during the past thirty years, many restrictions on bank prices and activities in the United States have been lifted, including the restrictions on entry and geographic expansion. As barriers to banking expansion across borders have come down, the structure of the industry has changed dramatically. Geographic deregulation has spawned a substantial reduction in the number of banking organizations in the United States with, on average, virtually no change in concentration at the local level. In addition, the average number of distinct banking organizations operating in local markets--both urban and rural--is little changed. The total number of banking offices in the United States has risen steadily since the mid-1990s. Moreover, consolidation has produced important benefits for the banking industry, as many banks have become more diversified, less risky, and more efficient. A growing body of research provides evidence that geographic deregulation has provided substantial benefits to the broader economy as well (Levine, 2004). In the United States, economic performance improved after geographic deregulation, as evidenced by increases in the rate of state-level employment growth and the rate of new business formation. Geographic deregulation may also be associated with improvements in state-level economic stability. Volatility in the growth rates of employment declined, and the link between the health of local banks and growth in the local economy weakened. In my judgment, the U.S. experience with geographic deregulation provides some valuable lessons for the European Union, so let me turn to that experience now. Origins and Deregulation of Geographic Restrictions in the United StatesRestrictions on the geographic expansion of banks have a long history in the United States. Because the U.S. Constitution prevents states from issuing paper money and from taxing interstate commerce, the states used their power to grant bank charters to generate a substantial part of state revenues (Sylla, Legler, and Wallis, 1987). A state received no charter fees from banks incorporated in other states, so states prohibited out-of-state banks from operating in their territories--hence the prohibition on interstate banking originated in the states themselves and as a fiscal strategy rather than as a matter of optimal policy for banking and consumers. In addition, states restricted the ability of banks to expand geographically within their borders, effectively creating a series of local monopolies from which state governments could extract at least part of the rents. Some state legislatures even passed "unit banking" laws, which prevented a bank from having any branches at all. In 1927, the Congress passed the McFadden Act, which clarified the authority of the states over national banks' branching within their borders. Although some branching restrictions were removed in the 1930s, most states continued to enforce restrictions into the 1970s. Between 1970 and 1994, however, most states relaxed their restrictions on branching, typically in a two-step process. First, states permitted multibank holding companies to convert subsidiary banks (existing or acquired) into branches. The holding companies could then expand geographically by acquiring banks and converting them into branches of one of their existing bank subsidiaries. Second, states began permitting de novo branching, whereby banks could open new branches anywhere within state borders.Figure 1describes the timing of intrastate branching deregulation across the states. In addition to limiting branching within a state, states prohibited cross-state ownership of banks until the 1980s. Although some banks attempted to circumvent the McFadden Act by building multibank holding companies with operations in many states, the Congress stopped them with the 1956 amendments to the Banking Holding Company Act. Starting in 1978, states began to pass "reciprocity" laws in which a state would allow entry by bank holding companies from other states if, in return, bank holding companies from the state were permitted to enter the other states. By 1992, all states but Hawaii had passed such laws. The transition to full interstate banking was completed with passage of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, which effectively permitted banks and holding companies to enter any state (Kroszner and Strahan, 1999). Consequences of Deregulation of Geographic RestrictionsDeregulation of restrictions on geographic expansion within the United States has led to a more consolidated, but not a less competitive, banking system--one that is increasingly characterized by better diversified and more-efficient banking organizations that operate across wider geographic areas. Moreover, this system has also has had positive effects on overall economic and employment growth. I believe that better cross-border integration of the European banking system would produce similar benefits in Europe. Structural ChangesLet me begin by describing the effect of geographic deregulation on the structure of the banking industry itself.Figure 2shows that the number of bank and thrift organizations--that is, holding companies and independent institutions--has fallen by more than half since the early 1980s, when states began to dismantle restrictions on geographic expansion. Much of this decline in the number of bank and thrift organizations is due to mergers and acquisitions, although some is also due to failures.3 Although consolidation is often a mechanism for eliminating excess capacity from an industry, such does not appear to be the case for the U.S. banking industry. Again as figure 2 illustrates, the number of bank and thrift offices was about the same in 1993 as it had been in 1984, and the number has increased steadily since 1993. Moreover, the rate of de novo bank formation resulting from new charters has been high, on average, since the early 1980s, another indication that the decline in the number of institutions and organizations does not reflect the removal of excess capacity.4 After passage of the Riegle-Neal act in 1994, the U.S. banking industry was transformed from a balkanized system, in which institutions operated locally or within a state, to a system that is increasingly integrated nationally. As shown infigure 3, the number of multistate organizations, defined as those with offices in more than one state, more than doubled from 1990 to 2005. Moreover, as figure 3 also illustrates, between 1990 and 2005 the share of offices located in a state other than the one in which the parent organization was headquartered rose substantially; currently, more than 37,000 such bank and thrift offices are in the United States. Clearly, a lot of customers are being served by banking facilities that are located outside the state in which the banking organization's main office is located.5 It is important to consider whether such dramatic structural changes had an effect on competition, particularly at the local level. Although concentration increased at the national level, a comparable increase in concentration at the local level has not taken place.6Figure 4illustrates the local market effects: For both urban and rural markets, the average Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HHI) based on bank and thrift deposits, a commonly used measure of concentration in local areas, remained basically unchanged from 1990 to 2005.7Patterns in the average number of bank and thrift organizations operating in local markets tell a similar story, as shown infigure 5. The average number of alternatives available to the many banking customers that rely on local institutions has remained remarkably constant in rural markets over the past fifteen years and has been quite stable in urban markets since the mid-1990s. The many customers--primarily households and small businesses--that rely on local banks and thrifts for financial products and services have not been harmed by structural changes in the industry. The consolidation of the banking system has involved mergers across local areas as well as within a single area (Pilloff, 2004). Antitrust policy in the United States has also likely contributed to the absence of a change in concentration in local urban and rural markets because mergers that would have significantly increased concentration at the local level were discouraged or were permitted only on the condition of appropriate divestitures. Effect on Efficiency and Pricing in the Banking SectorI would now like to turn to the effect of geographic deregulation on efficiency and pricing in the banking sector. Regulatory changes appear to have led to meaningful improvements in the efficiency of banks, reductions in costs, and reductions in the prices of banking services. Studies show that non-interest costs, wages, and loan losses all declined in the aftermath of branching reform (Jayaratne and Strahan, 1998; Black and Strahan, 2001). These cost reductions led, in turn, to lower prices on loans, although deposit interest rates changed little. The mechanism for this improved performance seems to be changes in the market shares of banks after geographic deregulation (Stiroh and Strahan, 2003). Before regulatory reform, well-run banks faced binding constraints on the markets in which they could operate. When these constraints were lifted, however, assets were reallocated toward more-profitable banks as they gained the opportunity to increase market share, largely by acquiring less-profitable banks. The consequences of these healthy competitive dynamics are shown infigure 6, which portrays the average share of assets held by banks with above-median profits (or, for short, the "high-profit share of assets"). In 1980, before geographic deregulation, the high-profit share of assets in the sixteen unit-banking states (those that did not permit any form of branching) was much less than the high-profit share in the twelve states that have permitted branching since the 1930s or earlier. This difference disappears completely by 1994. By then, the unit-banking states had permitted within-state branching, thus allowing more-profitable banks to dominate the industry. The Real Economic Effect of Geographic Deregulation beyond BankingThe consequences of a more efficient banking system can go beyond the banking industry to affect the real performance of the economy as a whole. It has been argued that efficient financial systems promote innovations; hence, better finance leads to faster growth (Schumpeter, 1969). This argument has been countered by assertions that the causality is reversed; economies with good growth prospects develop institutions to provide the funds necessary to support those good prospects (Robinson, 1952). In other words, the economy leads and finance follows. Recent theoretical developments have fleshed out two ways that good financial systems can lead to growth. Financial markets can matter by affecting the volume of savings available for investment and by increasing the productivity or quality of that investment. These theories show that an improvement in financial market efficiency can act as a lubricant to the engine of economic growth, allowing that engine to run faster. Of course other factors, including sound monetary and fiscal policies, remain critical; but it seems increasingly clear that well-functioning financial markets are also a central factor. Empirical research provides support for the view that financial market development can play an important role in driving long-run growth. For example, one study finds evidence of a positive correlation between the size and depth of an economy's financial system and its future growth in per capita real income (King and Levine, 1993). Although this evidence is appealing, it cannot rule out the possibility that financial development and growth are simultaneously driven by some common factor, such as good political or legal institutions, that may be difficult to fully hold constant in the empirical analysis. Other studies attempt to answer this criticism by exploiting cross-industry differences in financial dependence within a country, thereby holding constant those factors specific to a country. These works suggest that in countries with well-developed financial markets, industries that require more external sources of financing for their investment (that is, the "financially dependent") tend to grow faster than "cash cow" industries (that is, those that can finance investment with internally generated funds).8Other research that I have been involved with examines the consequences of banking crises across different types of industries. In particular, this work finds that bank crises have a disproportionately negative effect on financially dependent firms in countries with well-developed financial systems: In such systems, the financially dependent firms grow faster in normal times but are hit harder in crisis times, a difference suggesting that the banking system plays a critical role in overall economic performance (Kroszner, Laeven, and Klingebiel, forthcoming). The state-by-state deregulation of branching and banking restrictions provides a useful laboratory for investigating the effect of better banking on economic growth. Because states share a common legal system and broadly similar institutional environments, we can investigate the response of the state economy to policy changes that lead to more-efficient finance. A number of studies give a consistent answer: State economic performance measured in a variety of ways improves after the deregulation of geographic restrictions on banking (for example, Kroszner and Strahan, 2006; Stiroh and Strahan, 2003; Black and Strahan, 2001; Jayaratne and Strahan, 1998; and Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996). These results have important implications for the policy debate in Europe and around the globe. First, after controlling for other factors, data on state-level economic performance over the period 1972 to 1992 suggests that state-level branching deregulation spurred faster economic growth (Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996). Second, evidence from 1976 to 1994 shows that state-level employment growth accelerated after the deregulation of intrastate branching as well as after the deregulation of interstate banking (Kroszner and Strahan, 2006). Third, if more competitive banking really spurs growth, we would expect particularly large benefits among relatively bank-dependent sectors of the economy, such as small firms or entrepreneurs. In work with Strahan, I have found that the rate of new business incorporation increases significantly after branching deregulation (Kroszner and Strahan, 2006; Black and Strahan, 2001). Moreover, the magnitude of the effects of geographic banking reform on entrepreneurial activity are larger than their effects on the overall growth of employment. This differential effect makes sense because bank credit is most important in financing small businesses that do not have access to public securities markets; the effect suggests that the reason that growth accelerates after geographic deregulation is that credit supply to the entrepreneurial sector expands.9 Fourth, a more efficient and diversified financial sector might have an important effect on overall economic stability. The expected effect of banking integration on business cycles is theoretically ambiguous, however. On the one hand, shocks to the local economy and local banking system may become less destabilizing when banks are well diversified and operate across many markets. On the other hand, some commentators have raised concerns that negative shocks to the local economy might be destabilizing after integration because, for example, multistate banks can move capital elsewhere. Recent empirical evidence suggests that the former effect dominates, as state-level economic volatility appears to decline with interstate banking deregulation.10 This finding of better state-level economic stability after geographic deregulation may reflect the fact that state economies became more insulated from shocks to their own banks. In a non-integrated banking system, such as the one we had in the United States before the 1970s, shocks to bank capital lead to reductions in lending, thereby worsening local downturns. In contrast, with integration, a state can import bank capital from other regions when its banks are down, thus continuing to fund projects with a positive net present value. According to this explanation, the correlation of local measures of economic performance or loan availability with the financial capital of local banks ought to weaken with geographic deregulation and integration. Recent evidence seems to support this idea (Kroszner and Strahan, 2006; Morgan, Rime, and Strahan, 2004). Before the advent of geographic deregulation, there was a nearly one-to-one correspondence between state-level loan growth and state-level bank capital growth. This link weakened significantly after interstate deregulation. Similarly, we also observe a weakened correlation between the growth of local employment and that of local bank capital, although the effect is less dramatic than the effect on loan growth. In short, banking integration appears to have salutary effects on business cycles by insulating the local economy from the ups and downs of its local banking system, and vice versa. Lessons for EuropeAs I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks, I think that the U.S. experience with the change in its banking structure holds potentially valuable lessons for Europe. In my view, if Europeans can prevent nonprudential, noncompetitive, political concerns from impeding cross-border, intra-European bank mergers, then Europe will be likely to enjoy benefits similar to those enjoyed in the United States when interstate banking restrictions were removed. To recap, these benefits are likely to be Barriers to Greater Banking Integration in EuropeOf course, some of you may be thinking that I am overlooking significant structural obstacles to cross-border mergers in Europe and that such obstacles may make such integration less beneficial, on net. I have, however, already mentioned what I view as the largest obstacle--political opposition, which makes integration less likely to happen (but not less beneficial when it occurs). I hope that I have given pause to opponents of such integration by pointing out the benefits that the United States has reaped from reducing geographic restrictions on banking. Another obstacle is posed by differences in language and culture, which are clearly greater across European countries than they are across U.S. states, and these differences can create nonregulatory barriers. I have no easy answers for reducing such barriers. However, I would point out that a few truly global banks seem to have succeeded in overcoming them. I hope that my remarks on the U.S. experience have highlighted the potential gains that, in my opinion, would be likely to follow a similar liberalization in Europe. I want to remind you of the words of Commissioner McCreevy, which I cited at the outset: "Protectionism denies everyone in Europe the economic benefits of market integration--higher growth, and more jobs." I hope that the evidence I have provided here will help make liberalization in Europe more likely so that Europeans will not be denied the benefits that we have experienced in the United States. References Barth, James R., Gerald Caprio, and Ross Levine (2002). Bank Regulation and Supervision: What Works Best? unpublished paper, January 2002. Black, Sandra E., and Philip E. Strahan (2001). The Division of Spoils: Rent Sharing and Discrimination in a Regulated Industry, American Economic Review, vol. 91, pp. 814-31. Cetorelli, Nicola, and Michele Gambera (2001). Bank Structure, Financial Dependence and Growth: International Evidence from Industrial Data, Journal of Finance, vol. 56, pp. 617-48. Jayaratne, Jith, and Philip E. Strahan (1996). The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank Branch Deregulation, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 101, pp. 639-70. Jayaratne, Jith, and Philip E. Strahan (1998). Entry Restrictions, Industry Evolution and Dynamic Efficiency: Evidence from Commercial Banking (332KB PDF), Journal of Law and Economics, vol. 41, pp. 239-74. King, Robert, and Ross Levine (1993). Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 108, pp. 717-38. Kroszner, Randall S., Luc Laeven, and Daniela Klingebiel (forthcoming). Banking Crises, Financial Dependence, and Growth, Journal of Financial Economics. Kroszner, Randall S., and Philip E. Strahan (1999). What Drives Deregulation? Economics and Politics of the Relaxation of Bank Branching Restrictions," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 114, pp. 1437-67. Kroszner, Randall S., and Philip E. Strahan (2006). Regulation and Deregulation of the U.S. Banking Industry: Causes, Consequences, and Implications for the Future, unpublished paper. Levine, Ross (2004). Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence, Working Paper Series 10766. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research. Levine Ross, Norman Loayza, and Thorsten Beck (2000). Financial Intermediation and Growth: Causality and Causes, Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 46, pp. 31-77. Morgan, Donald P., Bertrand Rime, and Philip E. Strahan (2004). Bank Integration and State Business Cycles, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 119, pp. 1555-85. Pilloff, Steven J. (2004). Bank Merger Activity in the United States, 1994-2003, Staff Study 176. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May. Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales (1998). Financial Dependence and Growth, American Economic Review, vol. 88, pp. 559-86. Robinson, Joan (1952). The Rate of Interest and Other Essays. London: Macmillan. Schumpeter, Joseph (1969). The Theory of Economic Development. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Stiroh, Kevin J., and Philip E. Strahan (2003). The Competitive Dynamics of Competition: Evidence from U.S. Banking Deregulation, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 35, pp. 801-828. Sylla, Richard, John Legler, and John Wallis (1987). "Banks and State Public Finance in the New Republic: The United States, 1790-1860," Journal of Economic History, vol. 47, pp. 391-403. Footnotes 1.Charlie McCreevy, The Development of the European Capital Market (943KB PDF), speech at the London School of Economics, March 9, 2006.Return to text 2.A summary is in Kroszner and Strahan (2006).Return to text 3.The term institution refers to a separately chartered commercial bank or savings institution. The term organization refers to (1) a holding company that owns one or more commercial banks or savings institutions or (2) an independent commercial bank or savings institution that is not part of a holding company. The number of organizations has declined from nearly 18,000 in 1980 to fewer than 8,000 in 2005. The number of institutions has also fallen, from almost 20,000 in 1980 to fewer than 9,000 in 2005. The large reduction in the number of institutions is attributable to bank holding companies consolidating multiple bank subsidiaries into a single institution, to mergers and acquisitions of previously unrelated institutions, and to failures.Return to text 4.According to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, more than 4,000 new bank and savings institution charters have been granted since 1984.Return to text 5.The increase in interstate banking is even more dramatic if the individual institution, rather than the organization, is the unit of analysis. The number of multistate institutions increased from 99 in 1990 to 520 in 2005. Over the same period, the share of bank and thrift offices located in a state other than that of the institutions headquarters office rose from 3 percent to 34 percent. The difference in patterns based on organizations and institutions is attributable to the fact that, at the beginning of the period, many multistate bank holding companies had offices in multiple states, but they operated multiple subsidiaries, each of which had branches in only one state.Return to text 6.In 1990, the ten largest organizations controlled 14 percent of all deposits. Primarily as a result of mergers among very large organizations, the deposit share of the top ten nearly tripled by 2005, to 39 percent.Return to text 7.Urban local markets are approximated by metropolitan statistical areas as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau, and rural local markets are approximated by nonmetropolitan counties. The HHI equals 10,000 times the sum of squared market shares of each competitor in a market. An alternative way to measure deposit concentration would be to look at commercial banks only. Concentration levels based on commercial bank deposits unambiguously fell between 1990 and 2005, as the average HHI fell in both urban and rural markets. Much of this decline may be due to the conversion of savings institutions to commercial banks.Return to text 8.Rajan and Zingales (1998) and Cetorelli and Gambera (2001). In addition, Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000) shows that the exogenous component of banking development is positively related to economic growth.Return to text 9.We are beginning to obtain cross-country evidence suggesting that opening up financial markets to foreign entry can also create benefits associated with macroeconomic stability (Barth, Caprio, and Levine, 2002).Return to text 10.Morgan, Rime, and Strahan (2004) and Kroszner and Strahan (2006). In particular, the magnitude of business cycle shocks, estimated as the absolute value of deviations from expected employment growth, became smaller on average after interstate banking reform and the associated integration of the banking system.Return to text
Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Conference on Modern Financial Institutions, Financial Markets, and Systemic Risk, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia I am very pleased to open this conference on Modern Financial Institutions, Financial Markets and Systemic Risk. Let me begin by thanking the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta for hosting this conference and for organizing, along with the International Association of Financial Engineers, an impressive program that is filled with high-quality papers on topics of keen interest to central bankers. Before proceeding, I must indicate that the views I am about to express are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of other members of the Board of Governors or the Federal Reserve more generally. Few subjects are more important for central bankers than the efficiency and stability of our financial system. The term "financial instability" is often poorly defined. Some argue that financial instability occurs when imperfections or externalities in the financial system are substantial enough to create significant risks for real aggregate economic performance. Others argue that financial stability is potentially absent, or that financial instability is on the horizon, when they perceive that some important set of financial asset prices seem to have diverged sharply from fundamentals. Finally, many observers have used the term "financial instability" to describe their perception that market functioning seems to have been significantly distorted or impaired. Regardless of the definitions used for financial instability, they lead us to a strong interest in ensuring that our financial infrastructure is robust and that our supervisory operations are sound and up-to-date. Ironically, our interest in financial stability seem to have increased in recent years even as real (that is, inflation-adjusted) variability in economic aggregates seems to have decreased. Since 1985, the volatility of real growth in gross domestic product (GDP) has been only about half of what it was during the preceding twenty-five years. In addition, as shown in a number of papers, the volatility of many components of GDP and of other measures of aggregate economic activity also declined sharply between these periods. The source of the moderation in the real economy is unclear. Changes in data construction do not seem to be responsible. Fiscal policy has not become appreciably more countercyclical, and the shift of the economy toward producing more services appears to have played only a small role. The leading explanations of the moderation are that (1) economic shocks have been milder; (2) inventory management has improved; (3) financial innovations such as improved risk assessment and risk-based pricing have made credit more widely available, even during economic downturns; and (4) monetary policy has been better. The first explanation--milder economic shocks--has seemed less persuasive following the events of the late 1990s and early 2000s. From the Asian financial crisis to the September 11 attacks to the corporate governance scandals to the surge in oil prices, powerful economic shocks have marked the past few years. Yet, the economy has performed rather well, on balance, over this period. As for the second explanation--better inventory management--changes in inventory dynamics have indeed contributed significantly to the reduced volatility of GDP growth. Those changes are consistent with anecdotal evidence and case studies about the use of information technology and better inventory management practices to catch incipient inventory overhangs before they become a problem. Regarding the third explanation--better availability of credit--Karen Dynan, Doug Elmendorf and Dan Sichel, of the Board's staff, present evidence in a recent paper that financial innovation has been partly responsible for the reduced variability of real activity of the past two decades or so.1According to their work, the greater availability and use of credit over time may have reduced economic volatility by reducing the sensitivity of household spending to downturns in income and cash flows and to fluctuations in interest rates, with the result that consumer spending and home purchases have become less sensitive to contemporaneous income. Let me focus for a moment on the fourth explanation, that monetary policy has been better. I think it has indeed been better. We are better at understanding how the economy operates (and therefore, at evaluating the appropriate stance of monetary policy) and we are more determined to pursue the goal of price stability. But secondarily, I think the greater dominance of market-based finance, combined with a greater transparency by the Federal Reserve, has made both the mechanism of monetary policy and the intentions of the central bank more understandable to market participants. The mechanism of monetary policy is clearer with greater market-based finance relative to bank-dominated finance because the direct effects of policy on corporate and household balance sheets are more easily observed by both policymakers and market participants. In contrast, bank-dominated finance involves more complicated interactions between depositor behavior, loan underwriting standards, and interest rates. The greater transparency of central banks also seems to have led to improved economic performance. Market expectations are more likely to remain anchored in the face of various shocks when investors can see more clearly that central bankers are committed to long-run objectives such as price stability and sustainable economic growth. This commitment feeds into the planning and execution of investments by firms and households, which are more likely to undertake such investments given greater certainty about the commitment of the central bank. Moreover, with this greater certainty, prices and pricing decisions more clearly communicate the desires of households and firms. Some evidence for this view is found in the decline of inflation volatility relative to real interest rate volatility. Both inflation volatility and bond term premiums have declined significantly in recent years. Research at the Federal Reserve Board by Don Kim and Jonathan Wright, as well as work by others outside the Federal Reserve, have suggested that inflation expectations that are more firmly anchored, combined with the reduction in the volatility of real activity, seem to be a significant part of the explanation for the decline in term premiums.2I would argue that the greater transparency of central banks has played a role in communicating and emphasizing to the markets our commitment to price stability. Thus, the moderation in aggregate economic volatility seems somewhat understandable. But why, then, the seemingly greater concern these days about financial market instability? This anxiety appears to be driven by three factors: First, some asset prices, such as housing prices, seem to be high by historical standards. Given the substantial decline of stock prices beginning in 2000, many observers worry that greater boom or bust cycles in some asset prices could be the "flip-side" of the moderation of real economic volatility during recent decades. Asset prices are the key channel through which monetary policy is transmitted to the real economy. Moreover, because asset prices embody the expectations of forward-looking investors, they might contain information of value for the policy-setting process. But from the Federal Reserve's perspective, asset prices must ultimately be seen through the lens of long-term growth and price stability. If inflation seems contained and the prospects for economic growth are good, then it's unclear why the policymaker should set aside thesedirectsignals in preference for signals from asset prices that may or may not be out of line with their historical relationships to fundamentals--the very fundamentals, I should add, that we look at directly in judging the health of the economy. Indeed, even in retrospect, our knowledge of what drove the price-earnings ratios for U.S. equities so high in the late 1990s and our ability to estimate what a more "appropriate" level for the price-earnings ratio might have been are very incomplete and, frankly, probably will not improve substantially. Additionally, in the current conjuncture, some have expressed a concern that an unwinding of global imbalances, should it occur, might be disorderly and associated with financial instability. Others question whether the simultaneous removal of monetary accommodation by central banks in several major economies could possibly trigger a period of financial instability emanating from the inevitable rebalancing of portfolios. Should events such as these occur, central bank communication and understanding market participants' reactions will certainly be important considerations for maintaining financial stability. A third source of anxiety concerning financial market instability arises because some of the more recent crises have been financial in nature. Although their effects on the real economy in the United States have been relatively limited, the economies of other nations have been significantly affected, and there is concern that a financial crisis might, at some point, have more severe consequences for the real economy in the United States. When we review these recent cases of financial market turmoil, it appears that each is a unique event. But some common lessons can be learned, and I will outline them after I briefly review two of these crises that have been important in the United States during the past decade. The market turmoil in the fall of 1998 was touched off by the Russian debt default in August and then exacerbated by the well-publicized travails of Long-Term Capital Management. During this time, nearly all financial indicators portrayed a dour picture of economic prospects--risk spreads widened sharply, stock prices fell, and banks reported tightening the terms and lending standards on business loans. In addition, market reports indicated that the capital markets were seizing up as dealers and other marketmakers recoiled from risk taking. In response, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) lowered its target for the federal funds rate 75 basis points in three equal steps and maintained the lower rate through June of the subsequent year. This response mainly reflected FOMC concerns that these financial instabilities had either signaled or created significant downside risks to the economic outlook, particularly for business investment. The FOMC's significant aversion to the possible negative outcomes associated with these risks was part of a risk-management perspective--that is, that the economic recovery from a financial shock could be more difficult to manage than the financial shock itself. As for events after 1998, it is more difficult to identify a "pure" financial crisis. The devastating terrorist attacks in 2001 caused tragic loss of life and major damage to the physical infrastructure of a number of key firms central to trading and market-making activities. Although there were many important differences, this crisis mimicked a financial meltdown in the sense that important financial markets could not operate because of the cessation of activities by some firms. The Federal Reserve responded in a manner that was appropriate to the nature of the crisis. We issued a statement that we were up and running and ready, if needed, to extend loans from the discount window. Depository institutions took up the offer; their borrowing surged to more than $45 billion but dropped quickly after a few days. We also worked jointly with foreign central banks to provide funds to promote the smoother operation of foreign exchange transactions and established swap lines that channeled funds to institutions that needed dollars. In addition, the Federal Reserve took a variety of other actions, including waiving daylight overdraft fees, extending the operating hours for Fedwire, and easing the limits on securities lending to reduce the pressure on firms requiring securities that were made scarce because of settlement difficulties. All these measures were taken quickly, maintained temporarily, and wound down in an orderly manner as the need for them receded. After the initial rush of activity, we focused on the nonfinancial economy. Evidence of a weakening economy had already emerged before the terrorist attacks; the decline in stock prices, the widening of risk spreads, and the impairment of market functioning created by the attacks caused many policymakers to worry that this weakening would accelerate. Again reflecting the risk-management perspective I described earlier, the FOMC lowered its target for the federal funds rate 50 basis points before the reopening of the markets on Monday, September 17, 2001. In explaining its action, the FOMC pointed to a less sanguine economic outlook and to significant downside risks associated with that outlook. Besides the crisis of 1998 and the September 11 terrorist attacks, other episodes of financial turmoil were important, but these episodes did not raise the same level of concern that the negative shock might be transmitted to the nonfinancial economy in a rapid and disorderly fashion. For example, the significant decline of stock prices starting in 2000 was not accompanied by a major market malfunctioning, and the resulting loss of equity wealth did not seem likely to have negative ramifications for the real economy that were so immediate and severe as to be considered a crisis. Similarly, the major accounting and corporate scandals of 2002 led to a significant widening of risk premiums and much anxiety about the veracity of many corporations' financial statements. But for the most part, the markets again functioned smoothly and risks seemed to be priced normally. Finally, the more pronounced interest rate volatility during the summer of 2003, which appears to have been significantly amplified by mortgage hedging, created some short-lived market difficulties. But again, this volatility seemed unlikely to have significant effects on the real economy. Despite the rarity of internally generated financial crisis, some argue that ongoing trends in the United States should be examined closely for their potential effects on financial stability. Four trends are often mentioned. The first is increased concentration in the financial services industry. In particular, consolidation has resulted in a smaller number of firms doing a larger share of the bank lending throughout the world. For example, the origination and servicing of consumer loans have become more concentrated. For the most part, these rising levels of concentration appear to be motivated by cost savings that are often attributed to economies of scale, or by expectations of greater revenue stability derived from either greater diversification of products or greater geographic diversification. While the risks to financial stability that arise from the creation of a small number of large and complex firms are obvious, there may be benefits as well. Greater concentration in financial services has the potential to have some positive impact on financial stability because lower costs can allow firms to build the capital reserves that help insulate them from shocks, and greater diversification can reduce firm risk. Moreover, the market and financial supervisors are requiring the adoption of more sophisticated and comprehensive techniques for the management of risks associated with larger and more complex firms. However, the benefits of lower costs, greater diversification, and better risk management at large, complex firms depend on many particulars, including robust infrastructure and a reduction in the opaqueness that results from increased firm complexity. In this regard, infrastructure is one area in which the increase in concentration has received attention. The creation of NewBank, which I describe later, is a recent private-sector response to the concentration of clearing and settlement activities in the market for government securities. The second trend is that the pricing and management of credit continues to become more market oriented. This development should increase financial stability, because market pricing and the management of credit risk via marketable securities would be expected to promote a more robust system for risk management. In this scenario, a broad-based and diversified group of rational market participants would determine the success or failure of financial products through an evolutionary process, allowing the available set of financial assets to gradually become more useful and comprehensive. However, some hold to a more pessimistic scenario that envisions smaller groups of market participants, with short time horizons and an excessive interest in mark-to-market profitability, who create more volatility because of their high sensitivity to the latest rumors and news. I tend to adopt the more optimistic view, but in any case the central bank will need to maintain its focus on markets as more credit is intermediated through them. The third trend is similar to the second. The ongoing increase in the scope and availability of financial instruments is probably providing many firms and households with improved methods of risk diversification and hedging and with greater access to credit. As I noted earlier, such financial innovations have likely been partly responsible for the lowered variability in many real economic aggregates over the past two decades. That said, the increasing complexity of these instruments raises a host of policy questions regarding, to name just a few items, financial education for households, and, for financial institutions, operational procedures, valuation practices, accounting treatments, disclosure policies, and capital provisions. Moreover, these financial innovations often rely on the ready availability of market liquidity, an assumption that likely will not hold during a financial crisis. Therefore, one hopes that all market participants who are involved in these complex instruments have liquidity plans in place. The final trend is the ongoing and increasing globalization of markets. Make no mistake; I think such a trend is to be welcomed because it brings about the usual gains from trade. But we must be mindful that borrowers are raising funds in multiple financial centers in multiple currencies across diverse legal and political systems; that investors are taking on greater international exposure; and that arbitrageurs are establishing leveraged positions across currencies and international markets. These actions increase cross-border interdependence and thus in some circumstances might propagate financial problems more quickly and widely. Given these trends, what roles should a central bank play with regard to financial stability? I would suggest three. First and foremost, the central bank's role is to maintain a focus on the possible effects of financial instability for its two core objectives, namely price stability and long-run real growth. Any actions to promote financial stability need to be seen through this lens. We must always ask: Do our potential actions credibly mitigate a risk of inflation or a threat to the real economy? Such a standard helps reduce the danger that we might pursue financial stability to the point of changing the behavior of market participants in counterproductive ways, such as increasing moral hazard, which would, in turn, create problems for the real economy. This objective also suggests that the central bank needs to continually monitor financial developments, including those regarding financial accounting and reporting standards, to be able to appropriately assess the effect of these developments on the real economy. Secondly, I would argue that the examples of the recent past, combined with our understanding of how markets function, suggest that much of the central bank's work lies in bank supervision, including promoting better risk management and the avoidance of operational risks on the part of other financial institutions, and emphasizing the importance of backup and contingency arrangements. That is, the central bank can assist in getting market participants to consider and focus on the management of risk in general and of the risk of low probability, but high cost, outcomes in particular. Along these lines, we have encouraged banks to adopt the most modern risk-management techniques, and we have encouraged all financial institutions to ensure the robustness of their systems. We have also strived to bring our capital regulations up-to-date and make them more risk sensitive through the Basel II process and the effort to revise Basel I; both of these efforts are intended to modernize capital regimes as part of our ongoing effort to improve safety and soundness and, ultimately, financial stability. And following our own advice, the Federal Reserve has implemented additional layers of backup and contingency arrangements for our key payment system operations. Most recently, the Federal Reserve Board endorsed the creation of a dormant bank, referred to as NewBank, which would be available for activation to clear and settle U.S. government securities. Such activation would occur if a credit or legal problem caused the market to lose confidence in an existing clearing bank and no well-qualified bank stepped forward to purchase that bank's clearing business. Similarly, the Federal Reserve System, operating through the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, has met with major dealers to improve the practices of the credit derivatives industry in various ways, including implementing procedures to improve the settlement process for credit default swaps, establishing targets for the reduction of confirmation backlogs, and insisting that dealers obtain the consent of the original counterparty before accepting an assignment of a contract. The final role I would suggest for a central bank is to research the implications of longer-term financial trends for the economy more generally. As I mentioned above, the consolidation of financial services, increasing market intermediation of credit, the greater complexity of financial instruments, and increasing globalization of financial institutions and markets all might raise concerns about our financial system. Although my assessment, and that of many other observers, is that these forces and developments support financial stability, they merit ongoing study. In a more proactive vein, once the central bank identifies a longer-run concern, it can try to raise the awareness of other policymakers regarding the potential problems. Recently, for example, the government-sponsored enterprises, which lack the normal market discipline to check the growth of their portfolios, have been a concern that the Federal Reserve Board has been highlighting before the Congress. As another example of being proactive, I would suggest that the efforts to increase the transparency of central bank actions that I discussed at the beginning of my talk have, in some part, been motivated by a desire to enhance financial stability.3 One lesson that stands out from our experience gained during the past decade is that only looking backward is not useful. Prudent central bankers must be forward-looking, searching for developments that might become significant problems under some circumstances. What would be useful from a risk-management perspective is more information along the lines of what we have for inflation--market instruments that allow us to measure, to some extent, market participants' expectations. The absence of such direct measures of financial stability, however, suggests that we should continue to present our views of potential financial risks and their associated propagation mechanisms, both to other public-sector colleagues and to private-sector analysts and observers. Participation in official organizations such as the President's Working Group, the Financial Stability Forum, and the Committee on the Global Financial System, which are little known to the general public but are well regarded by the official community, offers the Federal Reserve such engagement. Moreover, we should develop theoretical and empirical models to help us understand potential risks. That is why conferences such as this one, which bring together researchers, policymakers, and practitioners to discuss issues related to financial stability, are so important. Footnotes 1.Karen E. Dynan, Douglas W. Elmendorf, and Daniel E. Sichel (2006), "Can Financial Innovation Help to Explain the Reduced Volatility of Economic Activity?" Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 53, pp. 123-50.Return to text 2.Don H. Kim and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), "An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates," Finance and Economy Discussion Series 2005-33 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August)Return to text 3.Indeed, when the FOMC began issuing its policy decisions more than a decade ago, it did so in order to avoid possible misunderstandings of its intentions and a consequent overreaction in the markets.Return to text
Governor Mark W. Olson At the University of Arkansas at Little Rock, Little Rock, Arkansas Recent trends in the U.S. economy have been, on the whole, quite favorable. Real gross domestic product (GDP) increased 3-1/4 percent during 2005, on the heels of two years during which it rose at an annual rate of almost 4 percent. By the end of last year, businesses had added another 2 million jobs to their payrolls, and the unemployment rate had dropped to its lowest level in five years. Although top-line consumer price inflation was boosted by the run-up in energy prices, core consumer price inflation remained relatively steady, at about 2 percent for the year. One of the significant challenges for a policymaker is to be able to discern the underlying trends in real activity and inflation in the midst of the inevitable noise and shocks that come along. The recent period has presented a number of those types of unanticipated events: Most notably, the devastating hurricanes that hit the Gulf Coast last fall destroyed residential and business capital and tragically uprooted the lives of many people. The resulting disruptions to economic activity, particularly in the energy and petrochemical sectors, held down the rise in real GDP in the fourth quarter. The restarting and rebuilding that began late last year should be providing a boost to activity this year, but the size of that effect and the extent to which it will be distributed in coming quarters remain uncertain. Another special factor at work early this year was the atypically warm weather that very likely advanced homebuilding and perhaps other spending that might otherwise have stretched into the spring. As a result, most forecasters believe that the incoming information has been adding up to a sizable, but quite likely temporary, acceleration in real GDP in the first quarter after the small increase in the final quarter of 2005. Another, more persistent economic challenge in recent years has been the climb in world oil prices. As a result, last year marked a third consecutive year of rapidly rising--and sometimes volatile--domestic energy costs. To be sure, higher energy prices cut into households' purchasing power and the profits of non-energy firms. While recognizing the difficulty of identifying the reactions of consumers and businesses to higher energy prices, Chairman Bernanke has recently noted that the surge in energy prices since late 2003 probably reduced the growth of real GDP between 1/2 percent and 1 percent per year. One important change in the economic landscape that has limited the current effect of an energy shock compared with the effects in our earlier experience is that energy costs today are not nearly as important as they were during the 1970s, when the energy intensity of U.S. production was significantly higher. After taking into consideration the unusual factors that have been influencing the pattern of economic activity of late, most forecasters are projecting that, after a sizable increase in the first quarter, production and spending will return to a moderate and sustainable pace over the remainder of the year. Several fundamental factors support that view. First, although longer-term yields have begun to move up recently, they remain low by historical standards, and financial conditions remain favorable. Second, business balance sheets are strong, and corporate earnings have been robust. Third, household credit quality has shown few signs of stress. Finally, households' real income has been receiving a boost from the recent strong gains in employment, and the ongoing increases in house prices and gains in the stock market have kept the ratio of wealth to income at a high level. All told, prospects for ongoing gains in consumer spending and business investment appear good, and the recent indicators are positive. This morning's report on retail sales, together with the information on motor vehicle sales released last week, points to a solid rise in real consumer spending in March and a very strong reading for the first quarter as a whole. The outlook for moderate increases in personal consumption expenditures in the near term is consistent with the latest readings on consumer sentiment. In addition, the continued low level of new claims for unemployment insurance bodes well for further net gains in employment and, thus, income. A survey of businesses' capital spending plans conducted by the National Association of Business Economists at the end of last year pointed to another solid year of spending on plant and equipment. And, through February, backlogs of orders for nondefense capital goods were still moving up. Another important factor in the outlook for the United States is the likelihood of a continued solid expansion in economic activity abroad. Notably, the Japanese economy has strengthened, and economic activity in emerging Asian economies has continued to rise at a brisk pace, while the outlook in Canada calls for sustained moderate growth. Domestic economic activity should also continue to receive a boost in coming quarters from reconstruction in the Gulf region. In part, the reconstruction represents some temporary federal fiscal stimulus from the hurricane relief that the Congress has provided. However, despite the additional support to construction from hurricane-related repair and rebuilding, residential construction overall appears likely to cool a bit this year. The most recent indicators suggest that demand and home-price inflation have begun to moderate. With respect to inflation, although forecasting energy prices is risky, I should note that the futures market suggests that crude oil prices will move up a bit further in coming months before flattening out at $70 per barrel. If so, the drag on real income and spending from rising energy costs should diminish over time, as should the risk of additional energy cost pressure on underlying, or "core," inflation. The general contour of economic activity that most forecasters are expecting, in which they see little change in resource utilization over the year, should be consistent with relatively stable core inflation. As I noted earlier, the unemployment rate is now at a five-year low of 4-3/4 percent. More important, it and other indicators of resource utilization--such as the industrial capacity utilization rate--are now at levels at which, in the past, little or no economic slack remained. At this point, we have seen few signs of upward pressure on labor compensation or core inflation. Although we have experienced run-ups in prices of commodities, such as building supplies, that are more sensitive to changes in supply and demand conditions and in prices of energy-intensive commodities and services, the pass-through to core inflation appears to have been limited. Important in that regard is the fact that longer-run inflation expectations have been well anchored, as is apparent in the stability of the five-to-ten-year inflation expectations of households in the Michigan SRC survey and in the reading implicit in Treasury-inflation-protected securities. The observations I've just shared illustrate the evolving economic forces that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) will consider as it makes monetary policy decisions over the remainder of the year. The FOMC has raised the target federal funds rate 25 basis points at each of the past fifteen meetings over roughly two years. During much of that time, we described our actions as "removing accommodation" at a "measured pace." At our March meeting, we indicated that some additional tightening may be necessary to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance. Thus, the future path for the target federal funds rate will depend importantly on how incoming information on economic activity and inflation affect our assessment of these risks.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Sella Holding Banca, S.p.A., Biella, Italy; Sella Holding Banca, S.p.A. Miami Agency, Miami, Florida; the State of Florida Office of Financial Regulation, Tallahassee, Florida; and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among The Bank of New York; the New York State Banking Department; and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.