The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies announced Thursday an interim decision that the Statement ofFinancial Accounting Standards No. 158,Employers’ Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans(FAS 158), will not affect banking organizations’ regulatory capital. Until the Federal Reserve Board, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision determine otherwise through a rulemaking, banks, bank holding companies, and savings associations should exclude from regulatory capital any amounts recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI) resulting from the adoption and application of FAS 158. FAS 158 will require, as early as December 31, 2006, a banking organization that sponsors a single-employer defined benefit postretirement plan, such as a pension plan or health care plan, to recognize the overfunded or underfunded status of each such plan as an asset or liability on its balance sheet with corresponding adjustments recognized in AOCI, a component of equity capital. After a banking organization initially applies FAS 158, changes in the benefit plan asset or liability reported on the organization’s balance sheet will be recognized in the year in which the changes occur and will result in an increase or decrease in AOCI. The agencies plan to provide regulatory reporting instructions to banking organizations to assist them in implementing the interim exclusion of the effects of FAS 158 on AOCI from the measurement of regulatory capital.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the Federal Reserve Board, and the New York State Banking Department (NYSBD) today announced the issuance of separate but coordinated enforcement actions regarding The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan, and some of its U.S. operations. The FDIC and the NYSBD issued a joint Order to Cease and Desist against the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ Trust Company, a New York State-chartered banking corporation. Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ Trust Company, without admitting or denying the allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order. The Order determined that Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ Trust Company failed to implement adequate Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money laundering compliance programs. The Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the NYSBD executed a Written Agreement with Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group Inc., Tokyo, Japan; its subsidiary bank, The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan; and the bank’s branch in New York, New York. The Written Agreement addresses Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money laundering compliance policies and practices at The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Ltd.’s New York branch. Copies of the Order and the Written Agreement are attached.
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Board) on Monday announced the release of joint proposed rules to implement the “broker” exceptions for banks under Section 3(a)(4) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. These exceptions were adopted as part of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 (GLB Act). The SEC and the Board approved issuing the joint proposed rules for public comment at separate open meetings held on December 13, 2006, and December 18, 2006, respectively. The proposed rules would help define the scope of securities activities that banks may conduct without registering with the SEC as a securities broker and would implement the most important “broker” exceptions for banks adopted by the GLB Act. Specifically, the proposed rules would implement the statutory exceptions that allow a bank, subject to certain conditions, to continue to conduct securities transactions for its customers as part of the bank’s trust and fiduciary, custodial and deposit “sweep” functions, and to refer customers to a securities broker-dealer pursuant to a networking arrangement with the broker-dealer. The proposed rules are designed to accommodate the business practices of banks and to protect investors. In developing these proposed joint rules, the agencies consulted extensively with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of Thrift Supervision. Comments on the proposed rules are requested within 90 days of publication in the Federal Register, which is expected soon. The agencies request comment on all aspects of the proposed rules. The Federal Register notice is attached. # # # Attachment (383 KB PDF)
The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced the annual adjustment to the asset-size thresholds used to define “small bank” and “intermediate small bank” under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations. The annual adjustments are required by the 2005 CRA regulatory amendments. Annual increases to these asset-size thresholds are based on the year-to-year change in the average of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers, not seasonally adjusted, for each twelve-month period ending in November, with rounding to the nearest million. As a result of the 3.32% increase in the CPI index for the period ending in November 2006, the definitions of small and intermediate small banks for CRA examinations will change as follows: These asset-size threshold adjustments are effective January 1, 2007. The agencies will publish the adjustments in the Federal Register. In addition, the agencies will post a list of the current and historical asset size thresholds on the web site of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (http://www.ffiec.gov/cra). Federal Register Notice57 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday published its annual notice of the asset-size exemption threshold for depository institutions under Regulation C, which implements the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). The asset-size exemption for depository institutions will increase from $35 million to $36 million based on the annual percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers for the twelve-month period ending in November 2006. As a result, depository institutions with assets of $36 million or less as of December 31, 2006, are exempt from collecting data in 2007. An institution’s exemption from collecting data in 2007 does not affect its responsibility to report the data it was required to collect in 2006. The adjustment is effective January 1, 2007. HMDA and the Board’s Regulation C require most mortgage lenders located in metropolitan areas to collect, report, and disclose data about applications for, and originations and purchases of, home purchase loans, home improvement loans, and refinancings. Data reported include the type, purpose, and amount of the loan; the race, ethnicity, sex, and income of the loan applicant; the location of the property; and loan price information for some loans. The purposes of HMDA include helping to determine whether financial institutions are serving the housing needs of their communities and assisting in fair lending enforcement. The Board’s notice is attached. Federal Register Notice51 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday published its annual notice of the asset-size exemption threshold for depository institutions under Regulation C, which implements the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). The asset-size exemption for depository institutions will increase from $35 million to $36 million based on the annual percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers for the twelve-month period ending in November 2006. As a result, depository institutions with assets of $36 million or less as of December 31, 2006, are exempt from collecting data in 2007. An institution’s exemption from collecting data in 2007 does not affect its responsibility to report the data it was required to collect in 2006. The adjustment is effective January 1, 2007. HMDA and the Board’s Regulation C require most mortgage lenders located in metropolitan areas to collect, report, and disclose data about applications for, and originations and purchases of, home purchase loans, home improvement loans, and refinancings. Data reported include the type, purpose, and amount of the loan; the race, ethnicity, sex, and income of the loan applicant; the location of the property; and loan price information for some loans. The purposes of HMDA include helping to determine whether financial institutions are serving the housing needs of their communities and assisting in fair lending enforcement. The Board’s notice is attached. Federal Register Notice51 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday published its annual notice of the asset-size exemption threshold for depository institutions under Regulation C, which implements the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). The asset-size exemption for depository institutions will increase from $35 million to $36 million based on the annual percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers for the twelve-month period ending in November 2006. As a result, depository institutions with assets of $36 million or less as of December 31, 2006, are exempt from collecting data in 2007. An institution’s exemption from collecting data in 2007 does not affect its responsibility to report the data it was required to collect in 2006. The adjustment is effective January 1, 2007. HMDA and the Board’s Regulation C require most mortgage lenders located in metropolitan areas to collect, report, and disclose data about applications for, and originations and purchases of, home purchase loans, home improvement loans, and refinancings. Data reported include the type, purpose, and amount of the loan; the race, ethnicity, sex, and income of the loan applicant; the location of the property; and loan price information for some loans. The purposes of HMDA include helping to determine whether financial institutions are serving the housing needs of their communities and assisting in fair lending enforcement. The Board’s notice is attached. Federal Register Notice51 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the approval of, and invited public comment on, an interim rule that would implement section 601 of the Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2006, which eliminated several statutory reporting and disclosure requirements relating to insider lending by insured depository institutions. The Board proposed and supported eliminating these statutory reporting and disclosure provisions because the federal banking agencies have not found them particularly useful in monitoring insider lending or preventing insider abuse. The interim rule would amend the Board's Regulation O (12 CFR part 215) to reflect the elimination of these reporting and disclosure requirements. Regulation O implements statutory restrictions on the ability of insured depository institutions to extend credit to their executive officers, directors, principal shareholders, and to related interests of such persons (insiders). The interim rule does not alter the substantive restrictions on loans by insured depository institutions to their insiders or to insiders of their correspondent banks. Because section 601 of the act became effective on October 13, 2006, the interim rule would be effective immediately upon publication in theFederal Register. The Board is, however, seeking public comment on the rule for a 30-day period. The Board's notice is attached. Federal Registernotice64 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by AFNB Holdings, Inc. to become a bank holding company and acquire all the voting shares of American First National Bank, both of Houston, Texas. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the proposal by Citizens Banking Corporation, Flint, to acquire Republic Bancorp Inc., Owosso, and its subsidiary bank, Republic Bank, Lansing, all in Michigan. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., will be closed on Tuesday, January 2, 2007, in observance of the national day of mourning for former President Ford. The minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting of December 12, 2006, originally scheduled for release on January 2, will instead be released at 2 p.m. EST Wednesday, January 3. The twelve regional Reserve Banks will be open and operating during normal business hours and will provide all financial services as usual.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released a draft interagency notice of proposed rulemaking that would revise the existing risk-based capital framework by giving the vast majority of banks, bank holding companies, and savings associations the option of either continuing to use the existing Basel I-based capital rule or adopting a more risk sensitive rule, known as Basel IA. However, as proposed, Basel IA would not be available to large, complex international banking organizations subject to the proposed Basel II advanced capital framework."Basel IA is intended as an option for the wide range of institutions that will not be adopting the advanced approaches of Basel II," said Governor Susan S. Bies. "The goal is to improve the Basel I standards by making them somewhat more risk sensitive while at the same time retaining a relatively simple and straightforward approach suitable for all but the largest and most complex institutions."The proposed Basel IA modifications represent the latest of more than twenty modifications to the original U.S. risk-based capital standards adopted under the Basel I Accord of 1988. They would:Allow banking organizations other than the advanced Basel II organizations to elect to adopt Basel IA or remain subject to the existing risk-based capital rulesUse loan-to-value ratios to determine risk-weights for most residential mortgagesIncrease the number of risk weight categories to which credit exposures may be assignedExpand the use of external credit ratings for certain externally-rated exposuresExpand the range of collateral and guarantors that may qualify an exposure for lower risk weightsIncrease the credit conversion factors for certain commitments with an original maturity of less than one yearAssess a risk-based capital charge to reflect the risks in securitizations with early amortization provisions that are backed by revolving exposuresRemove the 50 percent limit on the risk weight that applies to certain derivative contracts"A goal of Basel IA is to foster competitive equity for banks that do not adopt the advanced approaches of Basel II," said Governor Randall S. Kroszner. "Perhaps the most significant of the Basel IA proposals in that regard is a more risk-sensitive treatment of home mortgages."The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) also are considering the notice of proposed rulemaking. The Board authorized the staff to publish the notice in theFederal Registerfor public comment after the other agencies complete their approval processes. For the OCC and OTS, that includes review by the Office of Management and Budget, which may result in changes to the notice of proposed rulemaking.The draftFederal Registernotice is attached.Preamble (272 KB PDF)Draft Notice (311 KB PDF) "Basel IA is intended as an option for the wide range of institutions that will not be adopting the advanced approaches of Basel II," said Governor Susan S. Bies. "The goal is to improve the Basel I standards by making them somewhat more risk sensitive while at the same time retaining a relatively simple and straightforward approach suitable for all but the largest and most complex institutions." The proposed Basel IA modifications represent the latest of more than twenty modifications to the original U.S. risk-based capital standards adopted under the Basel I Accord of 1988. They would: "A goal of Basel IA is to foster competitive equity for banks that do not adopt the advanced approaches of Basel II," said Governor Randall S. Kroszner. "Perhaps the most significant of the Basel IA proposals in that regard is a more risk-sensitive treatment of home mortgages." The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) also are considering the notice of proposed rulemaking. The Board authorized the staff to publish the notice in theFederal Registerfor public comment after the other agencies complete their approval processes. For the OCC and OTS, that includes review by the Office of Management and Budget, which may result in changes to the notice of proposed rulemaking. The draftFederal Registernotice is attached. Preamble (272 KB PDF)Draft Notice (311 KB PDF)
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on Wednesday issued final guidance on sound risk management practices for concentrations in commercial real estate lending. The guidance is intended to help ensure that institutions pursuing a significant commercial real estate lending strategy remain healthy and profitable while continuing to serve the credit needs of their communities. The agencies have observed that commercial real estate is an area in which some banks are becoming increasingly concentrated. This trend is particularly evident among small- to medium- sized banks that are facing strong competition in other business lines. The agencies support banks serving a vital role in their communities by supplying credit for business and real estate development. However, the agencies are concerned that rising commercial real estate loan concentrations may expose institutions to unanticipated earnings and capital volatility in the event of adverse changes in commercial real estate markets. The final Interagency Guidance on Concentrations in Commercial Real Estate Lending, Sound Risk Management Practices reminds institutions that strong risk management practices and appropriate levels of capital are important elements of a sound lending program, particularly when an institution has a concentration in commercial real estate loans. The final guidance reinforces and enhances existing regulations and guidelines for safe and sound real estate lending. The guidance provides supervisory criteria, including numerical indicators to assist in identifying institutions with potentially significant CRE loan concentrations that may warrant greater supervisory scrutiny. These criteria do not constitute limits on CRE lending. On January 10, 2006, the agencies issued proposed interagency guidance on concentrations in commercial real estate lending. The agencies have carefully considered these comments on the proposal and, as a result, have made changes to the proposal to clarify its purpose and respond to commenters’ concerns. While the fundamental principles of the final guidance remain unchanged, the agencies have revised the guidance to: The agencies are committed to ensuring consistent application of this guidance and are developing training programs for their supervisory staff. These training materials will emphasize that the numerical screening criteria are not to be viewed as limits on an institution’s commercial real estate lending activity. The guidance is attached. Federal Registernotice:84 KB PDF|TEXT
The federal financial regulatory agencies announced today the issuance of a new interagency policy statement on the Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses (ALLL) and supplemental Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs). The policy statement revises and replaces a 1993 policy statement on the ALLL. The agencies believe an assessment of the appropriateness of the ALLL is critical to the safety and soundness of a financial institution, especially in today’s uncertain economic environment and when concentrations in untested loan products are present. The policy statement has been updated to ensure consistency with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and post-1993 supervisory guidance. The 1993 policy statement was issued by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of Thrift Supervision. It was intended to describe: the responsibilities of the boards of directors, management, and examiners of banks and savings associations regarding the ALLL; factors to be considered in the estimation of the ALLL; and the objectives and elements of an effective loan review system, including a sound credit grading system. The revised policy statement updates this guidance and also extends it to credit unions and their examiners. The National Credit Union Administration has joined the other agencies in issuing the revised policy statement. This revision reiterates key concepts and requirements included in GAAP and existing ALLL supervisory guidance. The ALLL represents one of the most significant estimates in an institution’s financial statements and regulatory reports. Because of its significance, each institution has a responsibility for developing, maintaining and documenting a comprehensive, systematic, and consistently applied process appropriate to its size and the nature, scope, and risk of its lending activities for determining the amounts of the ALLL and the provision for loan and lease losses. To fulfill this responsibility, each institution should ensure controls are in place to consistently determine the ALLL in accordance with GAAP, the institution’s stated policies and procedures, management’s best judgment and relevant supervisory guidance. Consistent with longstanding supervisory guidance, institutions must maintain an ALLL at a level that is appropriate to cover estimated credit losses on individually evaluated loans determined to be impaired as well as estimated credit losses inherent in the remainder of the loan and lease portfolio. Estimates of credit losses should reflect consideration of all significant factors that affect the collectibility of the portfolio as of the evaluation date. Arriving at an appropriate allowance involves a high degree of management judgment and results in a range of estimated losses. Accordingly, prudent, conservative, but not excessive, loan loss allowances that represent management’s best estimate from within an acceptable range of estimated losses are appropriate. In addition to the revised policy statement, the agencies are issuing sixteen FAQs to assist institutions in complying with GAAP and the ALLL supervisory guidance. The Interagency Policy Statement on the ALLL and the FAQs are attached. Attachment (1,539 KB PDF)Attachment (848 KB PDF)Media Contacts:OCCKevin Mukri(202) 874-5770Federal ReserveSusan Stawick(202) 452-2955FDICDavid Barr(202) 898-6992NCUAJohn J. McKechnie, III(703) 518-6331OTSKatie Fitzgerald(202) 906-6677 Attachment (1,539 KB PDF)Attachment (848 KB PDF)Media Contacts:OCCKevin Mukri(202) 874-5770Federal ReserveSusan Stawick(202) 452-2955FDICDavid Barr(202) 898-6992NCUAJohn J. McKechnie, III(703) 518-6331OTSKatie Fitzgerald(202) 906-6677
The Federal Reserve Board and the Office of Thrift Supervision today announced the availability of a revised Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate Mortgages (the CHARM booklet), which provides information to consumers about the features and risks of such loans. In recognition of the growing use of nontraditional mortgage products that allow borrowers to defer payment of principal and sometimes interest, the agencies have substantially revised the CHARM booklet to include discussions about "interest-only" and "payment option" mortgages. The revised booklet describes how these loans typically work, showing how much (and how often) monthly payments could increase, and how the loan balance could increase if minimum monthly payments are made. The booklet includes a mortgage shopping worksheet to help consumers compare the features of different products, and a glossary to help them understand some of the terminology. Under the Board's Regulation Z (which implements the Truth in Lending Act), creditors must provide a copy of the CHARM booklet, or a suitable substitute, to consumers with every application for an adjustable rate mortgage loan. The Board is publishing a notice in theFederal Registerinforming creditors that they may begin immediately using the revised CHARM booklet, but also have the option to continue using their existing stock of CHARM booklets until October 1, 2007, the date when they must use the revised CHARM booklet (or suitable substitute) to comply with Regulation Z. The agencies originally published the CHARM booklet in 1987, to help educate consumers about adjustable rate mortgage loans. The booklet, which has been updated periodically, is available on the Internet athere (PDF). The Spanish version of the revised booklet is forthcoming. Up to 100 copies of the brochure are available free of charge from: Publications, Mail Stop 127, Federal Reserve Board, 20th and C Streets, N.W., Washington, DC 20551; 202-452-3245 TheFederal Registernotice is attached. Federal Register Notice54 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 percent. Economic growth has slowed over the course of the year, partly reflecting a substantial cooling of the housing market. Although recent indicators have been mixed, the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace on balance over coming quarters. Readings on core inflation have been elevated, and the high level of resource utilization has the potential to sustain inflation pressures. However, inflation pressures seem likely to moderate over time, reflecting reduced impetus from energy prices, contained inflation expectations, and the cumulative effects of monetary policy actions and other factors restraining aggregate demand. Nonetheless, the Committee judges that some inflation risks remain. The extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to address these risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Susan S. Bies; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Frederic S. Mishkin; Sandra Pianalto; William Poole; Kevin M. Warsh; and Janet L. Yellen. Voting against was Jeffrey M. Lacker, who preferred an increase of 25 basis points in the federal funds rate target at this meeting.
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Fourth Conference of the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Washington, D.C. Tonight I will talk about one of the themes of this conference: uncertainty and its influence on the monetary policy process. Policymakers always face an uncertain economic environment, and from time to time I think it is useful to review the nature of the uncertainties we face and the prescriptions for dealing with them. Both of these tend to evolve over time, and we may find some lessons--or at least subjects for further research--in recent experience. Of course, the views I express tonight are my own and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of my fellow members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1 What are the basic sorts of uncertainty faced by central banks? In informal terms, we are uncertain about where the economy has been, where it is now, and where it is going. In gauging the past and current state of the economy, measurement difficulties are rife and so I will review some of the challenges that we face in that area. As for where the economy is headed, central banks confront many sources of uncertainty but tonight I will focus on one in particular, namely, our inadequate understanding of the public’s expectations. Finally, I will conclude with a few observations on the ways that central bankers cope with risk in its various forms.2 Measurement UncertaintyAn important source of our uncertainty about the recent past and the current state of the economy is that economic data typically come in with a considerable lag and are subject to substantial measurement errors and revision. Work by Athanasios Orphanides and other economists has helped to heighten economists’ awareness of this issue by exploring the extent to which faulty estimates of potential output may have contributed to the monetary policy errors of the 1970s.3However, academic economists may still not fully appreciate the degree to which measurement uncertainty bedevils policymaking. These difficulties are especially pronounced at times like the present, when resource utilization and the rate of economic growth are probably not far from their long-run potential, inflation trends may be shifting, and policy interest rates are close to their historical averages in real (that is, inflation adjusted) terms. Consider our estimates of real economic activity. These estimates often change markedly with the receipt of just a few more days or weeks of data. For example, the Bureau of Economic Analysis released revised estimates in late July that showed persistently slower growth in real gross domestic product (GDP) in recent years. These more pessimistic data were then followed over the balance of the summer and into the fall by stronger-than-expected readings on current labor market conditions as well as by the announcement of upcoming benchmark revisions that will raise the level of payroll employment 1/2 percent. Taken together, these revisions have had important implications for our estimates of employment, productivity, labor costs, and related statistics. Price data are subject to several measurement problems besides the well-known issues of quality changes and appropriate weights. For example, a significant portion of the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index is based on imputations of prices for important categories of household purchases, such as banking services, rather than on direct observations of market prices. This "nonmarket" component of the index is hard to replicate, tends to move in an erratic manner from month to month, and is subject to considerable revision--factors that reduce the usefulness of the overall index as a short-run indicator of price pressures. Measures of labor compensation pose their own special problems. To begin, the available indicators often do not tell a consistent story. For example, the data in hand last week showed hourly compensation rising almost 7 percent over the past four quarters based on the national accounts measure, but only 3 percent as measured by the employment cost index. Beyond this, the compensation figures in the national accounts are subject to significant revision, as illustrated by the release of new data this week that suggests hourly compensation rose only 4-1/2 percent, not 7 percent, over the past year. Changes such as this make real-time estimates of unit labor costs and labor’s share of total income much less useful in our analyses than studies based on revised data might suggest. Finally, the existing wage data are not well suited for measuring certain concepts important to modeling and policymaking, such as marginal labor costs. For example, hourly compensation in the national accounts includes stock options at their exercise value rather than at their value at the time of issuance. Perhaps the most intractable problems surround the measurement of such key concepts as the equilibrium real interest rate, trend productivity, and potential output. We never observe these variables, which often figure prominently in our deliberations, but can only infer them from the behavior of other variables that are themselves subject to mismeasurement. As I just hinted, recent revisions to GDP and to labor input would seem to point to downward adjustments to estimates of trend productivity, but sorting out trend from cycle in the new data has been a challenge. These revisions may or may not also have implications for the level of the real federal funds rate consistent with longer-run macroeconomic stability. I will return later to the policy implications of this sort of measurement uncertainty. Expectations UncertaintyExpectations--which are critical to the decisions of households and firms--are an area in which measurement problems are compounded by questions about the behavior of private agents and hence of the economy. We have only limited information on households’ views of their income prospects or firms’ beliefs about their future sales. For example, in the United States we have some survey information on household expectations for their financial situation and their labor market prospects. These expectations are undoubtedly important in households’ estimates of their permanent income and hence in determining aggregate demand; indeed, econometric analysis suggests that these survey measures can help in predicting consumer spending. Nonetheless, our understanding of movements in household perceptions of permanent income is limited by a general paucity of data and associated research. Similar difficulties arise when considering firms’ assessment of future demand. Although we have some information on expected conditions from various surveys and from the earnings guidance provided by publicly traded companies, these indications are mostly qualitative, the quality is mixed, and research has not clarified their link to aggregate economic prospects. In the case of inflation expectations, we do have a larger number of indicators at our disposal. Yet here, too, the reliability and usefulness of the existing data are less than we might like. For example, survey measures of households are based on small samples. In addition, household expectations do not refer to any specific index and focus on time horizons that may not correspond to those relevant for wage bargaining or financial planning. Moreover, the wide dispersion of views across households strongly suggests varying levels of sophistication in forming expectations, to a degree that raises questions about the link between measured expectations and behavior relative to common assumptions, at least for some households. Measures of inflation compensation derived from nominal and indexed Treasury yields provide information that addresses some of the weaknesses in survey measures. For example, investors have strong incentives to ensure that inflation compensation reflects their beliefs about the prospects for a specific index, the consumer price index (CPI), over a fixed time horizon. Even here, however, we encounter important technical difficulties: These inflation compensation measures are "contaminated" both by an inflation risk premium and by differences in liquidity between the markets for nominal and indexed Treasury securities. More fundamentally, even a "rational" forecast of inflation from financial markets provides only part of the information needed to form monetary policy because it gives only a sense ofwhereinflation is expected to go, notwhyit is going there. The latter question is often important for assessing the appropriate stance of policy. Of course, asset prices are a category for which expectations are extremely important and for which data are available on a large scale. The term structure of interest rates, the spread between private and public yields on debt, equity prices, and the exchange value of the dollar--to name a few--are of first-order macroeconomic importance and are directly related to expectations. But we still face the challenge of distinguishing the quantitative role of, say, time-varying term and risk premiums on the one hand from that of expectations (including any speculative component) regarding underlying fundamentals on the other. As an example, consider house prices. Some commentators have suggested that, over the past several years, households extrapolated previous gains in house prices in thinking about the likely return to real estate and, in doing so, created a speculative bubble that pushed home prices significantly above their "fundamental" level.4However, others have argued that the rapid rise in home prices was fully justified by strong income growth and low interest rates.5Distinguishing between these alternatives would be aided both by better measures of households’ expectations regarding the appreciation of their homes and by a better grasp of the determinants of those expectations. As I have noted elsewhere, our lack of understanding of the dynamics of asset price determination is a significant hurdle to giving them extra weight in setting monetary policy.6 Much of my discussion regarding expectations has so far focused on measurement issues, but the question of why economic conditions unfold as they do also raises a critically important question: How are expectations formed? The baseline assumption used in much research is that expectations are rational, in the sense that private agents use a fixed and known model of the economy to process all relevant information. This assumption is extremely useful because it is a benchmark that facilitates comparisons with other hypotheses about expectations formation, and it allows various questions to be considered without an extraneous focus on expectations. But this form of rational expectations seems to be of limited usefulness when the question at hand is the evolution of expectations and their effect on activity and inflation. For example, rational expectations models will often rule out the possibility that learning errors in households’ expectations of future labor market conditions can have an independent effect on aggregate demand. And, these models usually simply assume that "irrational" movements in asset prices are not an important factor in the macroeconomic outlook. Of course, research has led to some relaxation in the baseline assumption of rational expectations. One prominent example is the work in behavioral finance on how alternative assumptions regarding rationality can affect predictions for asset prices and saving behavior; another is the growing literature on the interaction of learning, inflation dynamics, and monetary policy. Nonetheless, this research has only begun to investigate how households and firms actually form their expectations, and the models we use for policy analysis, at most, only crudely embed the early lessons from this literature. As a result, uncertainty over how best to model expectations and hence how best to model the aggregate economy remains a central concern of policymakers. To illustrate the effect of this sort of uncertainty on policy, consider the interaction of inflation dynamics and expectations--a subject of major study over the past thirty years. At one end of the spectrum of possible views is a policymaker who thinks that inflation expectations are rational and consistent with a New-Keynesian model of the economy, in which intrinsic sources of inflation persistence are not especially important. In this case, the policymaker might not be too worried that, say, a string of adverse supply shocks would create a severe conflict between the goals of price stability and of full employment. According to this worldview, if people expect the central bank to follow a price-stabilizing strategy, and the central bank ratifies that belief, then any undesired movement in inflation will be quite short lived. And restoring price stability in such a world will likely involve little cost in terms of real activity. At the other end of the spectrum are policymakers who suspect that most firms and households form their expectations using something closer to simple rules of thumb based on recent history. Under this alternative worldview, a string of adverse supply shocks is dangerous because it has the potential to cause rising inflation to become embedded in expectations. Should this shift in expectations occur, the central bank would face a persistent inflation problem, one whose correction would likely require a prolonged period of tight monetary policy. In this less comfortable world, restoring price stability can involve a painful process of slow growth and elevated unemployment. Of course, these considerations are more than a theoretical curiosity and help to explain the intense focus of central banks on inflation expectations. The marked rise in energy prices over the past few years led until recently to a rate of overall consumer price inflation notably above core inflation. However, the available measures of expectations--whether from surveys or financial markets--have shown longer-term expectations increasing very little, if at all, throughout this period, providing some assurance about the inflation outlook. However, this is an ex post assessment. As a policymaker, I would have been more confident in my ex ante judgment about the risk of expectations moving higher if we had had a better understanding of the determinants of expectations regarding prices and of the links between these expectations and the subsequent performance of inflation. More generally, the uncertainty we face about the process of expectations formation makes interpretation of the underlying correlations in the data challenging. This is no surprise: The rational expectations revolution begun by Robert Lucas more than thirty years ago started from the premise that it is impossible to move from reduced-form evidence to the underlying economic structure without understanding the evolution of expectations. Much of the macroeconomic literature over the past few years has focused on how alternative assumptions about expectations may explain the patterns of correlations in aggregate data. However, the empirical weaknesses of the rational expectations assumption have limited our progress in this area. The growing interest in research examining the evolution of expectations at the microeconomic level may provide better ways to discriminate between alternative hypotheses. In the meantime, policymakers must live with their uncertainty regarding how expectations are formed and how these expectations shape aggregate activity. Coping with UncertaintyGiven that uncertainty is pervasive, how should central banks deal with it? One obvious response has been to look for cost-effective ways to support both the development of more accurate and timely data and research to improve our understanding of the economy. Central banks also try to mitigate measurement problems by using data in a nuanced manner--for example, by looking at a multitude of alternative data series and by being cautious about the weight placed on short-run movements in various indicators. Realistically, however, such efforts can take policymakers only so far. Thus, risk is unavoidable, and central banks need to conduct policy in a manner that takes account of uncertainty in its various forms, as they strive to maximize public welfare. But what exactly does this mean? The literature on this topic extends at least as far back as William Brainard’s original paper on uncertainty and policy almost forty years ago.7Brainard’s analysis showed that if policymakers are uncertain about how real activity and inflation will be affected over time by monetary actions, they should be less aggressive in responding to changes in economic conditions than would be the case if they knew the true model of the economy. Subsequent research has largely supported Brainard’s conclusions and highlighted a corollary to it: Monetary policy should not respond too strongly to any one economic indicator, as the relationship between that indicator and the goals of policy--price stability and full employment--often differs across alternative models in important ways. More generally, this literature suggests that central banks should be cautious about boldly acting on the predictions and policy prescriptions of any one model, especially given that policymakers usually are unsure about the nature and persistence of the shocks hitting the economy. Central bankers around the world certainly seem receptive to taking a gradualist and cautious approach to policy under most circumstances, as indicated by (among other things) their apparent tendency to smooth interest rates. The behavior of the Federal Reserve during the second half of the 1990s illustrates this approach to policy. During this period, incoming data suggested that trend productivity might be accelerating. However, the evidence for this unexpected development was far from conclusive; moreover, the short-run implications for inflation and employment of a sustained pickup in productivity growth were ambiguous. Staff analysis at the time supported Brainard’s conclusion that the appropriate response to heightened uncertainty about the economy’s true productive potential would be to reduce the importance of the estimated output gap in setting policy.8Whatever the persuasiveness of this analysis, the FOMC did respond in a restrained manner to unusually robust real economic activity--as I believe was appropriate in light of the low and stable inflation that followed. Of course, gradualism and model averaging may not be appropriate in all circumstances. For example, it may be necessary for monetary policy to respond to what might be called "tail events," along the lines suggested by recent work on "robust control." To simplify greatly, this approach often amounts to choosing policy settings to minimize themaximumpossible loss across different models of the economy, in contrast to the standard Bayesian approach, which (loosely speaking) seeks to minimize theaverageloss across models. Much of the research on robust control has been a bit technical and esoteric. But the notion that policymakers may at times base policy settings on especially pernicious risks has an important ring of truth. For example, in 2003 the FOMC noted that a continued fall in inflation would be unwelcome largely because such an eventuality might potentially lead to persistently weak real activity with interest rates stuck at zero. Partly in response, the FOMC reduced the federal funds rate to an unusually low level and kept it there for an extended period, in a manner that perhaps would not have occurred in the absence of concerns about the "worst case" effects of deflation. This type of risk management--in which the central bank takes out some insurance against a bad but improbable event--has been an aspect of policymaking for some time and does seem to respond to extreme risks in a way reminiscent of the literature on robust control.9 Policymakers also seem to have absorbed another lesson from the recent literature, namely, the desirability of reducing the public’s uncertainty about how the central bank will respond to changes in economic conditions. To this end, central banks now strive to conduct policy in a predictable (albeit flexible) manner that is consistent with their stated objectives. On occasion, however, the goal of predictability may conflict with the concept of risk management, particularly when risk management requires taking steps to deal with an unusual or unprecedented risk. This conflict is probably unavoidable, and all that policymakers can do in such circumstances is to try to communicate as best they can the rationale behind their departure from standard practice. Most central banks also strive to follow at least the spirit of Bayesian thinking by taking an eclectic approach to forecasting and to policy analysis. To see this, consider the range of material that the staff supplies to the FOMC. In the case of the economic projections contained in the briefing document we call the Greenbook, the staff consults a variety of indicators and models and then judgmentally pools this information to produce the baseline outlook. The staff then supplements this analysis with various alternative scenarios intended to illustrate the primary risks to the outlook. Although these scenarios are usually constructed using a single model (FRB/US), the simulations actually encompass a wider range of views about the nature of the economy. For example, the simulations routinely consider alternative characterizations of such key aspects of the economy as the expectations formation process, wealth effects, and the sensitivity of inflation to changes in resource utilization and monetary policy. Finally, the staff provides the FOMC with estimated confidence intervals for the forecast and produces studies addressing such questions as the optimal design of policy under different types of uncertainty. Of course, there is always room for improvement and the staff continues to refine and expand this type of analysis. In addition, the structure of the FOMC, like that of a number of foreign monetary authorities, may also provide Bayesian-like benefits in attempting to deal with uncertainty. Many of the individuals who participate in policymaking at the Fed have different views about the structure of the economy. These differences enter our discussions and, through the Committee’s deliberations, affect the course of policy, although, I admit, how we weigh these competing views to arrive at a decision can appear to be murky. Certainly, the process is one that a good Bayesian might find hard to recognize. Nevertheless, studies suggest that the decisions reached by committees are usually superior to those produced by individuals.10In any event, I know that the heterogeneous viewpoints expressed by my fellow Committee members are intellectually stimulating and that they spur me to improve my own thinking about the economy and about the best course for monetary policy. Thus policymakers and the public at large live in an uncertain world. For example, most of you are probably wondering when this speech will end. I thought about gradually drawing to a close at, say, a measured pace, but my risk-management instincts tell me just to stop. Thank you. Endnotes 1.Michael Kiley and David Reifschneider, of the Board’s staff, contributed to these remarks.Return to text 2.In this speech, I use the words "risk" and "uncertainty" loosely. Although economists usually apply the former term to random events with known likelihood and the latter to possibilities whose probability is unknown, we often do not know enough in practice about actual probability distributions to make a sharp distinction between the two concepts.Return to text 3.Athanasios Orphanides (2003), "The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 50 (April), pp. 633-63.Return to text 4.Joshua Gallin (2004), "The Long-Run Relationship Between House Price and Rents," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2004-50 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).Return to text 5.Jonathan McCarthy and Richard Peach (2004), "Are Home Prices the Next ‘Bubble’?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Economic Policy Review, vol. 10 (December), pp. 1-17.Return to text 6.Donald L. Kohn (2006), "Monetary Policy and Asset Prices," speech given at the European Central Bank Colloquium held in honor of Otmar Issing, March 16.Return to text 7.William C. Brainard (1967), "Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy,"American Economic Review, vol. 57 (May), pp. 411-25.Return to text 8.For an example of this type of analysis, refer to Athanasios Orphanides, Richard D. Porter, David Reifschneider, Robert Tetlow, and Frederico Finan (2000), "Errors in the Measurement of the Output Gap and the Design of Monetary Policy,"Journal of Economics and Business, vol. 52 (January-April), pp. 117-41.Return to text 9.A discussion of risk management by central bankers is in Alan Greenspan (2004), "Risk and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy," speech given at the Meetings of the American Economic Association, January 3.Return to text 10.Alan S. Blinder and John Morgan (2005), "Are Two Heads Better Than One? Monetary Policy by Committee,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 37 (October), pp.789-811.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Oregon Pacific Bank, Florence, Oregon, a state member bank. Oregon Pacific Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires Oregon Pacific Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $4,950, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Order requires Planters Bank and Trust Company to pay a civil money penalty of $6,750, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) and the federal banking agencies announced Thursday that the format for the Suspicious Activity Report by Depository Institutions (SAR-DI) has been revised to support a new joint filing initiative, which will reduce the number of duplicate SARs filed for a single suspicious transaction. The revisions are the result of a joint effort by FinCEN and the federal banking agencies. Recently approved by the Office of Management and Budget, the revised SAR-DI format is being released today to allow depository institutions subject to SAR filing requirements to begin initial planning for the effective implementation date of June 30, 2007. On this date, depository institutions will have the option of using either the existing or the revised SAR-DI formats. Use of the revised format for filing will become mandatory December 31, 2007. The ability to file using E-Filing, or electronic filing, is currently being finalized, as are the Magnetic Media Specifications. This is an approved final form, but the form should not be filed until the actual effective implementation date of June 30, 2007. Financial institutions can review and download the PC fill-in version (using Adobe Reader or Acrobat) from the FinCEN website at www.fincen.gov under "What's New." The accompanying form instructions contain critical "How to" information for completing the form. Any questions regarding the revised format may be directed to the FinCEN BSA Forms Manager via the FinCEN Helpline at 1-800-949-2732 (option 6) or to the appropriate federal banking agency. # # # Attachment (520 KB PDF)
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaWritten Agreement dated December 22, 2003Terminated December 22, 2006
Citigroup Inc., New York, New YorkWritten Agreement dated July 28, 2003Terminated December 21, 2006
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Beijing, China The emergence of China as a global economic power is one of the most important developments of recent decades. For the past twenty years, the Chinese economy has achieved a growth rate averaging nearly 10 percent per year, resulting in a quintupling of output per person. In overall size, China's economy today ranks as the fourth largest in the world in terms of gross domestic product (GDP) at current exchange rates and the second largest when adjustments are made for the differences in the domestic purchasing power of national currencies. This strong economic performance has resulted in improved living standards for the Chinese people. By some estimates, about 200 million Chinese have been brought out of poverty since the reforms began in 1978.1Moreover, by 2004 life expectancy at birth in China had reached seventy-one years, the infant mortality rate had fallen to 26 per 1,000 live births, and the literacy rate of those aged fifteen or above had reached 90 percent.2These are remarkable accomplishments. Nonetheless, by most measures China remains a developing nation.3In particular, although life in some urban centers is typical of a modern, affluent society, average household incomes and consumption remain quite low in rural and inland areas. Thus, China faces the double challenge of sustaining a high and stable overall rate of economic growth while stimulating economic development in parts of the country that have shared less fully in the economic boom. In my remarks today, I would like to offer a few thoughts on how China can continue to prosper and promote the economic welfare of its people.Economic progress: Markets and productivityEconomists agree that the most important determinant of living standards in a country is the average level of productivity, or output per worker. On this score as well, China's record in recent decades is excellent. Between 1978, when the Open Door policy reforms began, and 1989, output per employed person in China grew vigorously, at an estimated average rate of about 6-1/2 percent per year. However, from 1990 to 2005, productivity grew at an even more impressive rate of 9 percent per year.4 Many factors have contributed to this strong productivity performance, including high rates of capital investment, increasing openness to trade, and a strengthening of the educational system.5However, in my view, the single most important cause of the ongoing expansion in productivity is that China has moved, gradually but steadily, away from central planning and toward a greater reliance on markets. In 1978, almost no prices in China were determined by the market, and most production was controlled or directed by the state. Since then, the government has reduced its direct intervention in the economy and scaled back state-owned enterprises, in the process allowing more scope for market forces. By 1999, according to one estimate, about 95 percent of retail business, together with more than 80 percent of trade in agricultural commodities and producer goods, was conducted at market-determined prices.6 Substantial experience has shown that modern economies, including those in early stages of development, are too complex to be managed effectively on a centralized basis. Prices set in free and competitive markets serve several critical functions, among them aggregating disparate information about supply and demand conditions and the relative scarcities of specific goods and services; directing resources to their most productive uses; and providing incentives to engage in cost reduction, innovation, and entrepreneurial activities. A free market for labor is particularly critical for sustained economic development. China has made substantial progress in this area over the past few decades, most notably by reducing barriers to the movement of workers among regions, sectors, and firms and by allowing greater flexibility in the determination of employment and wages.7Indeed, the ongoing movement of workers from relatively low-productivity, low-wage jobs in agriculture to higher-productivity, higher-wage jobs in manufacturing and services has been a significant source of Chinese economic growth. The decline in the share of the population in rural areas, from more than 80 percent in 1970 to less than 60 percent in 2005, indicates the scale of the movement of labor out of agriculture in recent decades. Despite these shifts, differences in labor productivity among sectors remain large. For example, in 2005, estimated output per worker in agriculture and related sectors was about $800, whereas in industries such as manufacturing, utilities, and mining, output per worker was about $5,900, more than seven times as much.8Moreover, a considerable portion of China's labor force (specifically, in agriculture and in inefficient state-owned enterprises) remains underutilized. Thus, substantial additional gains in productivity for the economy as a whole might be realized through the further reallocation of the labor force to more productive and growing sectors. In particular, small- and medium-sized enterprises are emerging as an engine of job creation in China--as they are in the United States--even as they promote innovation and help to create a more dynamic and diversified economy. The government can support the process of reallocating labor to more productive uses by continuing to reduce barriers to labor mobility, helping workers obtain the education and training they need to be productive in new occupations, and encouraging entrepreneurship and small-business development. As significant as the reallocation of labor among sectors has been, more of the improvement in productivity in recent years has resulted from increasing efficiencies within the major sectors rather than from the reallocation of resources between sectors. Here again, markets and competition have played a vital role. In particular, the opening of the economy to international trade and investment, which has accelerated since China's accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001, has done much to harness market forces in the service of the country's development. Exposure to the competition of the global marketplace has forced Chinese producers--alone or in partnership with foreign firms--to increase their efficiency and improve the quality of their output. Notably, globally-engaged firms (or their affiliates) operating in China have helped to foster productivity growth in the country by introducing new technologies and managerial techniques, as well as by enhancing domestic competition. Although the expansion of the market-based portion of the economy has yielded impressive results, further gains could be achieved by allowing still greater scope for market forces. The energy sector presents one such opportunity. As you know, China's appetite for energy has grown rapidly: China's consumption of oil has risen by more than 50 percent since 2000, and the International Energy Agency estimates that Chinese oil usage has increased by about 400,000 barrels per day in 2006, representing nearly half of this year's growth in world oil demand. This rapid expansion in energy use reflects both overall economic growth and a relatively energy-intensive pattern of development. Greater use of market pricing in the energy sector, including the elimination of remaining price controls on fuels and the liberalization of electricity prices, would support cleaner, sustainable economic growth by promoting more-efficient use of energy by households and firms and by encouraging the development of new energy supplies.9 Significant benefits could also be obtained by allowing a larger role for market forces in guiding investment decisions. China's economic growth owes much to the extraordinary share of GDP that is devoted to investment in new capital, such as factories, equipment, and office buildings, which is partly financed by a very large amount of business saving.10However, the rapid pace of investment growth raises concerns about whether new capital is being deployed in the most productive ways. In particular, some analysts have questioned whether China is getting an adequate return on its investment. For example, from 1990 to 2001, fixed investment as a share of GDP in China averaged about 33 percent, and the economy grew at an annual rate of 10 percent. Between 2001 and 2005, fixed investment's share of GDP rose to about 40 percent, but the economy's average growth rate remained about the same, suggesting a lower return to the more recent investment. Comparisons can also be drawn to the rapid development phases of other Asian countries, such as South Korea and Japan. Average annual growth was between 9 and 10 percent in South Korea during the 1982-91 period and in Japan during the 1955-70 period; but for both countries during the relevant years investment's share of GDP was about 30 percent, lower than it is in China today. In a few Chinese industries, heavy investments have continued even as signs of excess capacity have begun to appear--another possible indication of capital misallocation. An example is the steel industry, in which excess capacity appears to have tripled between 2002 and 2005 to reach more than 115 million metric tons.11Allowing competitive financial markets to play a larger role in the allocation of capital would likely increase the returns to investment and reduce the risk that uneconomic investments could exacerbate the problem of nonperforming loans and contribute to future financial instability. Basing investment decisions on market signals also takes better account of the costs of inputs complementary to capital, such as labor (relatively abundant in China) and energy (relatively scarce).12 China has taken initial steps toward a greater reliance on markets for determining the allocation of investment--for example, by authorizing and beginning to liberalize the stock market. China has also strengthened its banking system by improving supervision, confronting the enormous problem of nonperforming loans, allowing domestic institutions to partner with foreign banks, and increasing the use of market-based criteria in bank lending. These trends are positive; however, a great deal more remains to be done, including broadening the range of financial instruments available to savers and borrowers; taking further steps to ensure that credit evaluation and extension are based on sound economic criteria; increasing competition in banking and finance; improving credit availability for consumers and smaller firms; removing the remaining controls on interest rates; and eliminating the use of quantitative and administrative measures to influence the amount and composition of capital investment. Finally, capital markets require an appropriate institutional foundation to function effectively: Well-defined property rights (including intellectual property rights), transparent accounting standards, good corporate governance, effective supervisory oversight of banks and markets, the consistent enforcement of contracts, and rules that allow for orderly bankruptcy proceedings for unprofitable firms all help to support efficient investment. China has made progress in developing these critical institutions, but continued focus on these areas would provide large economic benefits in the long run. Macroeconomic policyMoving from microeconomics to macroeconomics, I believe that China could benefit by improving its tools for managing the economy--notably, monetary and fiscal policies. Effective use of macroeconomic policy tools can help achieve low and stable inflation and increase economic stability by moderating the effects on growth of temporary fluctuations in global or domestic demand. Stable economic conditions reduce an important source of risk and consequently promote innovation and growth. As a central banker, I will focus my remarks on the development of monetary policy.13 The People's Bank of China (PBOC), the nation's central bank, is capable and well-respected around the world. However, monetary policy can work well only to the extent that financial markets are sufficiently developed to allow the monetary authorities' interest-rate decisions to affect economic activity in a reasonably predictable way. The development of a reliable "monetary transmission mechanism" is thus another reason to reform and strengthen China's banks and financial markets. The more interest-sensitive that borrowing and investment decisions are, the more monetary policy can affect investment and aggregate demand without the need for quantitative controls. Moreover, when funds are allocated on market principles, only those projects with an expected risk-adjusted return that is higher than the relevant market rate of interest will be undertaken. Thus, for example, if the central bank raises interest rates, the market will ensure that the resulting slowing of investment will be borne by the least promising projects, without the need for officials to make such judgments. The effectiveness of monetary policy would also be enhanced by greater flexibility in the exchange rate. To maintain the current close link of the renminbi (RMB) to the dollar in the presence of capital inflows (arising from China's trade surplus or from foreign purchases of RMB-denominated assets), the PBOC must intervene in the exchange market to buy dollars with RMB. Increases in the domestic money supply will result unless the central bank offsets the effects of these purchases on the money supply by selling bonds to investors, primarily commercial banks, in exchange for RMB--a procedure commonly referred to as "sterilization." If dollar purchases by the central bank were not routinely sterilized, the money supply might increase more than desired, possibly leading to an overheating of the economy and inflation. To date the PBOC has been largely successful in its sterilization operations, but if it continues to use this strategy it will eventually encounter problems. If the exchange rate and the domestic interest rate are maintained near their current levels, the incentives for capital inflows--and thus the need for continued intervention and sterilization--will remain undiminished. Accordingly, the value of outstanding sterilization bonds will continue to grow rapidly. These bonds could substitute for other assets that might be held by banks and private investors, potentially interfering with the growth and development of private financial markets. Further, the perception that the RMB is undervalued (a point to which I will return) has fueled additional capital inflows, as investors expect to earn capital gains when the RMB ultimately appreciates. However, these speculative inflows only increase the need for exchange-market intervention and sterilization. In the longer term, the continued growth and modernization of the Chinese economy will require a substantial loosening of current restrictions on the flow of financial capital into and out of the country. However, if fluctuations in the value of the RMB remain limited within a narrow range, permitting substantial capital mobility would almost entirely eliminate the PBOC's capacity to use monetary policy to stabilize the domestic economy, as any excess of Chinese over dollar interest rates, for example, would trigger large capital inflows. Further appreciation of the RMB, combined with a wider trading band and with the ultimate goal of a market-determined exchange rate, would allow an effective and independent monetary policy and thereby help to enhance China's future growth and stability. From an institutional perspective, China may find--as many countries have done-- that granting greater autonomy to the central bank, by insulating it to a degree from short-term political concerns, increases its ability to ensure price stability and support stable growth. Of course, central banks must remain accountable to governments over the longer term. Trade, capital flows, and the transition to domestically-led growthA central component of China's development strategy has been its openness to trade and capital inflows. For example, the value of goods exports and imports currently equals about two-thirds of China's GDP, a high level for a country of China's geographic size. China's accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) has been particularly effective in stimulating trade: Since joining the WTO in 2001, China has seen the dollar value of its exports grow at an average rate of about 30 percent per year, compared with annual growth of about 12-1/2 percent over the five years before gaining WTO membership. China currently accounts for about 7-1/2 percent of world exports, up from 1-1/2 percent in 1985. About half of China's trade is so-called processing trade; that is, components and materials are imported (mostly from other Asian countries), processing or assembly is done in China, and the finished product is re-exported. Much economic research has shown that openness to trade promotes growth.14Trade supports growth not only through the classical principle of comparative advantage, but also through the effects of trade on the intensity of market competition, transfers of technology and knowledge, and other factors. China has also proved successful in attracting capital inflows, particularly foreign direct investment (FDI). The flow of FDI into China increased from about $2 billion in 1986 to $72 billion in 2005, making the country the third largest recipient of FDI in the world, after the United Kingdom and the United States.15FDI benefits China's development by bringing with it new technologies, products, and business methods.16The flow of foreign investments in Chinese securities has also increased significantly, reaching $22 billion in 2005. As you know, China today is running substantial trade and current account surpluses. These external surpluses are caused in part by China's remarkably high saving rate.17Because China's national saving rate is even higher than its rate of domestic investment, the country has excess funds to lend in the global capital market; it follows from the balance-of-payments accounts that China's net lending abroad (or its acquisition of foreign assets) equals the country's current account surplus. A large portion of this lending finances foreigners' purchases of Chinese net exports (the trade surplus). High household saving and the corresponding low level of consumption in China contribute to the trade surplus by depressing the demand for imports and by forcing domestic firms to look abroad for markets. Together with the large trade and current account deficits of the United States, the Chinese external surpluses are contributing to the current pattern of global imbalances, which many economists and policymakers have argued are unsustainable in the long run. The Chinese leadership has recognized the importance of encouraging imports and achieving greater balance in China's international trade, having recently included these objectives in the Five-Year Plan for 2006-2010. In my view, not only would China's achieving smaller external balances contribute to global financial stability, it would also be in China's economic interest. Although China's extensive participation in the global trading and financial systems has been invaluable for the country's development, the ultimate purpose of economic growth is to improve living standards at home. Today, about half of China's GDP is devoted to investment and to producing net exports for the rest of the world, and thus only the remaining half is available for consumption, including government consumption. In particular, household consumption in China last year was only 38 percent of GDP, down from 45 percent in 2001. In comparison, household consumption was about 60 percent of GDP in India in 2004, according to the most recent available data. China's low share of consumption in GDP is, of course, the counterpart of its high national saving rate. Policies aimed at increasing household consumption would clearly benefit the Chinese people, notably by improving standards of living and allowing the fruits of economic development to be shared more widely. Such policies, by reducing saving and increasing imports, would also serve to reduce China's current account and trade surpluses.18Putting greater reliance on domestic demand rather than net exports to drive growth would also decrease China's vulnerability to fluctuations in global demand. How can China direct a greater share of its output to domestic consumption? Again, increased flexibility in the exchange rate could help. As the Chinese trade surplus has continued to widen, many analysts have concluded that the RMB is undervalued.19Indeed, the situation has likely worsened recently; because of the RMB's link to the dollar, its trade-weighted effective real exchange rate has fallen about 10 percent over the past five years.20Allowing the RMB to strengthen would make imports of consumer goods (as well as capital goods) into China less expensive. Greater scope for market forces to determine the value of the RMB would also reduce an important distortion in the Chinese economy, namely, the effective subsidy that an undervalued currency provides for Chinese firms that focus on exporting rather than producing for the domestic market. A decrease in this effective subsidy would induce more firms to gear production toward the home market, benefiting domestic consumers and firms. Reducing the implicit subsidy to exports could increase long-term financial stability as well: If China invests too heavily in export industries whose economic viability depends on undervaluation of the exchange rate, a future appreciation of the RMB could lead to excess capacity in those industries, resulting in low returns and an increase in nonperforming loans. Although more flexibility in the exchange rate would be helpful, the most direct and probably the most effective way to reduce the external surpluses and increase the welfare of Chinese households is to take measures to reduce domestic saving relative to domestic investment.21Why is domestic saving so high at present? The high saving rate of households, even very poor households, likely reflects the relatively thin "social safety net" in China. For example, only about 14 percent of the population is covered by health insurance, and pension plans (which, in any case, replace only about 20 percent of pre-retirement earnings) apply to only about 16 percent of the economically active population.22Combined expenditures by the central government and local governments on education, health, pensions and relief, and social security amount to only about 4 percent of GDP, lower than most other countries at similar income levels. In the absence of a stronger social safety net, Chinese households save at high rates to protect themselves against risks such as unexpected medical expenses and poverty in old age. A sustained program of expanding social services has the potential for reducing saving and raising living standards in China and, at the same time, moderating China's external surpluses. In particular, increased government spending on health, education, and other types of social services would raise both household consumption and government consumption, and thus reduce national saving. As one means of helping to fund the increase in social expenditures, state-owned enterprises could be required to pay larger dividends to the government, a measure which I understand to be currently under consideration. Financial reforms that increase the access of households to mortgages, private insurance, and other forms of consumer finance would also support higher rates of consumption. As I have noted, the Chinese leadership has made reducing the trade and current account surpluses an important policy objective. Further, recognizing that achieving these goals would be greatly facilitated by increases in consumption and in the social safety net, the government has instituted or proposed various reductions in taxes and increases in social spending. The government has also announced an effort to raise living standards in rural and inland areas. Obviously, it is too early to judge the success of these initiatives. However, these efforts are constructive and deserving of support. ConclusionAs I have discussed today, China has made remarkable economic progress since the reforms began in 1978. Greater use of markets, together with expanding trade and capital flows, has helped to increase growth in output and productivity, which in turn has increased living standards significantly. A still-greater reliance on markets, particularly for allocating capital investment, would contribute to a continuation of strong economic growth. Further development of macroeconomic policy tools would also support healthy growth by keeping inflation low and by increasing economic stability. China also faces some significant risks and imbalances. The principal risk arises from the likelihood that capital is not being allocated as efficiently as possible, the result of an undervalued exchange rate and of capital markets that, despite positive steps, remain distorted and underdeveloped. Misallocated capital will not pay the highest possible returns, leading potentially to slower growth and future financial stress. In addition, monetary policy may be constrained by the lack of a reliable monetary transmission mechanism and by the relative inflexibility of the exchange rate, which inhibit the central bank's ability to keep inflation low and to stabilize the economy. The principal imbalance lies in the composition of Chinese GDP, which is heavily tilted toward investment and net exports and away from domestic consumption and government provision of social services. A better balance would improve the welfare of the Chinese people (by increasing consumption and social services) and would increase global financial stability (by reducing China's current account and trade surpluses). The Chinese government has undertaken to reduce this imbalance by taking measures to expand domestic demand, especially household consumption, and I hope that these efforts will be successful. China's development and its opening up to the global economy have also benefited the United States in many ways. China is now the second-largest source of U.S. imports; these imports boost U.S. real incomes by allowing U.S. households to purchase consumption goods and U.S. firms to purchase intermediate inputs at lower cost. China is also a growing market for investment and exports by U.S. firms. Since China joined the WTO, U.S. exports to China have more than doubled. As China develops further, its households and firms will demand a greater variety of goods and services, enhancing opportunities for producers in industrial countries, including the United States. At the same time, trade--with all its benefits--does displace some workers and firms as patterns of production and consumption change. The policy challenge for the United States is to help those who are adversely affected by trade while preserving the broad gains that openness to trade provides for the economy as a whole. The economic relationship between China and the United States is of extraordinary importance, and both countries have much to gain from interactions with each other. Serious challenges exist as well, requiring both countries to address such areas as energy, the environment, intellectual property rights, and global imbalances. Regarding global imbalances, I have discussed means by which China can reduce its contribution to the imbalances while encouraging domestic consumption. The United States must also do its part, in particular by increasing its own rate of national saving and by avoiding protectionism. With greater integration come greater interdependence and greater responsibility. I hope that our countries will work together in a spirit of cooperation to address these shared challenges. References Anderson, Jonathan (2006). "The Complete RMB Handbook," 4th ed., UBS Investment Research, Asian Economic Perspectives, September. Bergsten, Fred C., Bates Gill, Nicholas R. Lardy, and Derek Mitchell (2006).China, The Balance Sheet: What the World Needs to Know Now about the Emerging Superpower. New York: PublicAffairs. Brooks, Ray (2004). "Labor Market Performance and Prospects," in Eswar Prasad, ed.,China's Growth and Integration into the World Economy: Prospects and Challenges. Washington: International Monetary Fund, pp. 51-61. Dunaway, Steven, Lamin Leigh, and Xiangming Li (2006). "How Robust are Estimates of Equilibrium Real Exchange Rates: The Case of China," IMF Working Paper 06/220. Washington: International Monetary Fund, October. Frankel, Jeffrey A., and David Romer (1999). "Does Trade Cause Growth?"American Economic Review, vol. 89 (June), pp. 379-99. Goldstein, Morris (2004). "Adjusting China's Exchange Rate Policies," paper presented at the International Monetary Fund's Seminar on China's Foreign Exchange System, held in Dalian, China, May 26-27. Goodfriend, Marvin, and Eswar Prasad (2006). "A Framework for Independent Monetary Policy in China," IMF Working Paper, 06/111. Washington: International Monetary Fund, May. Hoffman, Bert, and Louis Kuijs (2006). "Profits Drive China's Boom,"Far Eastern Economic Review, vol. 169 (October), pp. 39-43. Kuijs, Louis (2005). "Investment and Saving in China," World Bank Policy Research Paper 3633. Washington: World Bank, June. __________ (2006). "How Will China's Saving-Investment Balance Evolve?" World Bank Policy Research Paper 3958. Washington: World Bank, July. Lardy, Nicholas R. (2002).Integrating China into the Global Economy. Washington: Brookings Institution Press. ___________ (2006). "China: Toward a Consumption-Driven Growth Path," Policy Briefs in International Economics, P806-6. Washington: Institute for International Economics, October. National Bureau of Statistics of China(2006).China Statistical Yearbook, 25th ed., China Statistics Press. Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Andrew M. Warner (1995). "Economic Convergence and Economic Policies,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995:1, pp.1-95. Shan, Weijian (2006). "The World Bank's China Delusions,"Far Eastern Economic Review, vol. 169 (September), pp.29-32. Wacziarg, Romain (2001). "Measuring the Dynamic Gains from Trade,"World Bank Economic Review, vol. 15 (September), pp.393-429. World Bank (2006). "On-Line China Country Profile,"World Development Indicators, www.devdata.worldbank.org/wdi2006/contents/home.htm. Zebregs, Harm (2002). "Foreign Direct Investment and Output Growth," in Wanda Tseng and Markus Rodlauer, eds.,China: Competing in the Global Economy. Washington: International Monetary Fund, pp. 89-100. Footnotes 1.Bergsten and others ( 2006), p. 3.Return to text 2.World Bank (2006).Return to text 3.For example, according to 2005 data from the International Monetary Fund's World Economic Outlook database, China's per capita GDP is about one-sixth of that of the United States on a purchasing-power-parity basis and about one twenty-fifth that of the United States at current exchange rates.Return to text 4.Productivity growth rates are calculated by Federal Reserve Board staff using Chinese data on output and employment. Productivity can be difficult to measure, and so these figures should be treated as approximate. A new method for surveying employment was introduced in 1990, resulting in a break in the series in that year.Return to text 5.See, for example, chapter 2 of Bergsten and others (2006) for a discussion of why China has grown so rapidly.Return to text 6.Lardy (2002), p. 25.Return to text 7.Brooks (2004) provides details of some of the labor market developments in China in recent years.Return to text 8.Calculations use current exchange rates and are based on output and employment data from the National Bureau of Statistics of China and the Chinese State Statistical Office; most data from Chinese national sources are obtained from the CEIC database.Return to text 9.The adverse effects on poor households of eliminating price controls on fuels would best be dealt with through direct cash grants.Return to text 10.World Bank researchers have concluded that business saving now finances the majority of business investment in China (Kuijs, 2005). Some have questioned this (Shan, 2006). For a discussion of the issues involved in the debate, see Hoffman and Kuijs (2006).Return to text 11.Based on production and capacity data provided by the National Bureau of Statistics.Return to text 12.Market-based allocations of capital do not take into account environmental and other external effects, unless additional mechanisms such as tradable pollution permits are employed.Return to text 13.Goodfriend and Prasad (2006) provides a good description of the banking and financial systems of China and of issues regarding the implementation of monetary policy.Return to text 14.See, for example, Sachs and Warner (1995), Frankel and Romer (1999), and Wacziarg (2001).Return to text 15.In 2005, the United Kingdom surpassed both China and the United States as the largest recipient of FDI in the world. In 2004, China ranked second after the United States.Return to text 16.For a discussion of the relationship between FDI and economic growth in China, see Zebregs (2002).Return to text 17.China's national saving rate was 41 percent in 2003 and 47 percent in 2005, according to IMF figures. As of 2003, the latest date for which detailed data are available, households accounted for 42 percent of domestic saving, with firms (including state-owned enterprises) and government accounting for 36 percent and 22 percent of domestic saving, respectively (National Bureau of Statistics of China, 2006).Return to text 18.See Lardy (2006), for example, for a careful discussion of the need for reorientation of Chinese growth toward consumption.Return to text 19.See, for example, Goldstein (2004) and Anderson (2006). Dunaway and others (2006) provide a useful analysis of the sensitivity of the Chinese equilibrium real exchange rate to alternative approaches and assumptions commonly used.Return to text 20.The estimate is by Federal Reserve Board staff for the period from November 2001 to November 2006.Return to text 21.Kuijs (2006) documents the sources and composition of saving and investment in China.Return to text 22.Bergsten and others (2006), p.28.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Beijing, China The emergence of China as a global economic power is one of the most important developments of recent decades. For the past twenty years, the Chinese economy has achieved a growth rate averaging nearly 10 percent per year, resulting in a quintupling of output per person. In overall size, China's economy today ranks as the fourth largest in the world in terms of gross domestic product (GDP) at current exchange rates and the second largest when adjustments are made for the differences in the domestic purchasing power of national currencies. This strong economic performance has resulted in improved living standards for the Chinese people. By some estimates, about 200 million Chinese have been brought out of poverty since the reforms began in 1978.1Moreover, by 2004 life expectancy at birth in China had reached seventy-one years, the infant mortality rate had fallen to 26 per 1,000 live births, and the literacy rate of those aged fifteen or above had reached 90 percent.2These are remarkable accomplishments. Nonetheless, by most measures China remains a developing nation.3In particular, although life in some urban centers is typical of a modern, affluent society, average household incomes and consumption remain quite low in rural and inland areas. Thus, China faces the double challenge of sustaining a high and stable overall rate of economic growth while stimulating economic development in parts of the country that have shared less fully in the economic boom. In my remarks today, I would like to offer a few thoughts on how China can continue to prosper and promote the economic welfare of its people.Economic progress: Markets and productivityEconomists agree that the most important determinant of living standards in a country is the average level of productivity, or output per worker. On this score as well, China's record in recent decades is excellent. Between 1978, when the Open Door policy reforms began, and 1989, output per employed person in China grew vigorously, at an estimated average rate of about 6-1/2 percent per year. However, from 1990 to 2005, productivity grew at an even more impressive rate of 9 percent per year.4 Many factors have contributed to this strong productivity performance, including high rates of capital investment, increasing openness to trade, and a strengthening of the educational system.5However, in my view, the single most important cause of the ongoing expansion in productivity is that China has moved, gradually but steadily, away from central planning and toward a greater reliance on markets. In 1978, almost no prices in China were determined by the market, and most production was controlled or directed by the state. Since then, the government has reduced its direct intervention in the economy and scaled back state-owned enterprises, in the process allowing more scope for market forces. By 1999, according to one estimate, about 95 percent of retail business, together with more than 80 percent of trade in agricultural commodities and producer goods, was conducted at market-determined prices.6 Substantial experience has shown that modern economies, including those in early stages of development, are too complex to be managed effectively on a centralized basis. Prices set in free and competitive markets serve several critical functions, among them aggregating disparate information about supply and demand conditions and the relative scarcities of specific goods and services; directing resources to their most productive uses; and providing incentives to engage in cost reduction, innovation, and entrepreneurial activities. A free market for labor is particularly critical for sustained economic development. China has made substantial progress in this area over the past few decades, most notably by reducing barriers to the movement of workers among regions, sectors, and firms and by allowing greater flexibility in the determination of employment and wages.7Indeed, the ongoing movement of workers from relatively low-productivity, low-wage jobs in agriculture to higher-productivity, higher-wage jobs in manufacturing and services has been a significant source of Chinese economic growth. The decline in the share of the population in rural areas, from more than 80 percent in 1970 to less than 60 percent in 2005, indicates the scale of the movement of labor out of agriculture in recent decades. Despite these shifts, differences in labor productivity among sectors remain large. For example, in 2005, estimated output per worker in agriculture and related sectors was about $800, whereas in industries such as manufacturing, utilities, and mining, output per worker was about $5,900, more than seven times as much.8Moreover, a considerable portion of China's labor force (specifically, in agriculture and in inefficient state-owned enterprises) remains underutilized. Thus, substantial additional gains in productivity for the economy as a whole might be realized through the further reallocation of the labor force to more productive and growing sectors. In particular, small- and medium-sized enterprises are emerging as an engine of job creation in China--as they are in the United States--even as they promote innovation and help to create a more dynamic and diversified economy. The government can support the process of reallocating labor to more productive uses by continuing to reduce barriers to labor mobility, helping workers obtain the education and training they need to be productive in new occupations, and encouraging entrepreneurship and small-business development. As significant as the reallocation of labor among sectors has been, more of the improvement in productivity in recent years has resulted from increasing efficiencies within the major sectors rather than from the reallocation of resources between sectors. Here again, markets and competition have played a vital role. In particular, the opening of the economy to international trade and investment, which has accelerated since China's accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001, has done much to harness market forces in the service of the country's development. Exposure to the competition of the global marketplace has forced Chinese producers--alone or in partnership with foreign firms--to increase their efficiency and improve the quality of their output. Notably, globally-engaged firms (or their affiliates) operating in China have helped to foster productivity growth in the country by introducing new technologies and managerial techniques, as well as by enhancing domestic competition. Although the expansion of the market-based portion of the economy has yielded impressive results, further gains could be achieved by allowing still greater scope for market forces. The energy sector presents one such opportunity. As you know, China's appetite for energy has grown rapidly: China's consumption of oil has risen by more than 50 percent since 2000, and the International Energy Agency estimates that Chinese oil usage has increased by about 400,000 barrels per day in 2006, representing nearly half of this year's growth in world oil demand. This rapid expansion in energy use reflects both overall economic growth and a relatively energy-intensive pattern of development. Greater use of market pricing in the energy sector, including the elimination of remaining price controls on fuels and the liberalization of electricity prices, would support cleaner, sustainable economic growth by promoting more-efficient use of energy by households and firms and by encouraging the development of new energy supplies.9 Significant benefits could also be obtained by allowing a larger role for market forces in guiding investment decisions. China's economic growth owes much to the extraordinary share of GDP that is devoted to investment in new capital, such as factories, equipment, and office buildings, which is partly financed by a very large amount of business saving.10However, the rapid pace of investment growth raises concerns about whether new capital is being deployed in the most productive ways. In particular, some analysts have questioned whether China is getting an adequate return on its investment. For example, from 1990 to 2001, fixed investment as a share of GDP in China averaged about 33 percent, and the economy grew at an annual rate of 10 percent. Between 2001 and 2005, fixed investment's share of GDP rose to about 40 percent, but the economy's average growth rate remained about the same, suggesting a lower return to the more recent investment. Comparisons can also be drawn to the rapid development phases of other Asian countries, such as South Korea and Japan. Average annual growth was between 9 and 10 percent in South Korea during the 1982-91 period and in Japan during the 1955-70 period; but for both countries during the relevant years investment's share of GDP was about 30 percent, lower than it is in China today. In a few Chinese industries, heavy investments have continued even as signs of excess capacity have begun to appear--another possible indication of capital misallocation. An example is the steel industry, in which excess capacity appears to have tripled between 2002 and 2005 to reach more than 115 million metric tons.11Allowing competitive financial markets to play a larger role in the allocation of capital would likely increase the returns to investment and reduce the risk that uneconomic investments could exacerbate the problem of nonperforming loans and contribute to future financial instability. Basing investment decisions on market signals also takes better account of the costs of inputs complementary to capital, such as labor (relatively abundant in China) and energy (relatively scarce).12 China has taken initial steps toward a greater reliance on markets for determining the allocation of investment--for example, by authorizing and beginning to liberalize the stock market. China has also strengthened its banking system by improving supervision, confronting the enormous problem of nonperforming loans, allowing domestic institutions to partner with foreign banks, and increasing the use of market-based criteria in bank lending. These trends are positive; however, a great deal more remains to be done, including broadening the range of financial instruments available to savers and borrowers; taking further steps to ensure that credit evaluation and extension are based on sound economic criteria; increasing competition in banking and finance; improving credit availability for consumers and smaller firms; removing the remaining controls on interest rates; and eliminating the use of quantitative and administrative measures to influence the amount and composition of capital investment. Finally, capital markets require an appropriate institutional foundation to function effectively: Well-defined property rights (including intellectual property rights), transparent accounting standards, good corporate governance, effective supervisory oversight of banks and markets, the consistent enforcement of contracts, and rules that allow for orderly bankruptcy proceedings for unprofitable firms all help to support efficient investment. China has made progress in developing these critical institutions, but continued focus on these areas would provide large economic benefits in the long run. Macroeconomic policyMoving from microeconomics to macroeconomics, I believe that China could benefit by improving its tools for managing the economy--notably, monetary and fiscal policies. Effective use of macroeconomic policy tools can help achieve low and stable inflation and increase economic stability by moderating the effects on growth of temporary fluctuations in global or domestic demand. Stable economic conditions reduce an important source of risk and consequently promote innovation and growth. As a central banker, I will focus my remarks on the development of monetary policy.13 The People's Bank of China (PBOC), the nation's central bank, is capable and well-respected around the world. However, monetary policy can work well only to the extent that financial markets are sufficiently developed to allow the monetary authorities' interest-rate decisions to affect economic activity in a reasonably predictable way. The development of a reliable "monetary transmission mechanism" is thus another reason to reform and strengthen China's banks and financial markets. The more interest-sensitive that borrowing and investment decisions are, the more monetary policy can affect investment and aggregate demand without the need for quantitative controls. Moreover, when funds are allocated on market principles, only those projects with an expected risk-adjusted return that is higher than the relevant market rate of interest will be undertaken. Thus, for example, if the central bank raises interest rates, the market will ensure that the resulting slowing of investment will be borne by the least promising projects, without the need for officials to make such judgments. The effectiveness of monetary policy would also be enhanced by greater flexibility in the exchange rate. To maintain the current close link of the renminbi (RMB) to the dollar in the presence of capital inflows (arising from China's trade surplus or from foreign purchases of RMB-denominated assets), the PBOC must intervene in the exchange market to buy dollars with RMB. Increases in the domestic money supply will result unless the central bank offsets the effects of these purchases on the money supply by selling bonds to investors, primarily commercial banks, in exchange for RMB--a procedure commonly referred to as "sterilization." If dollar purchases by the central bank were not routinely sterilized, the money supply might increase more than desired, possibly leading to an overheating of the economy and inflation. To date the PBOC has been largely successful in its sterilization operations, but if it continues to use this strategy it will eventually encounter problems. If the exchange rate and the domestic interest rate are maintained near their current levels, the incentives for capital inflows--and thus the need for continued intervention and sterilization--will remain undiminished. Accordingly, the value of outstanding sterilization bonds will continue to grow rapidly. These bonds could substitute for other assets that might be held by banks and private investors, potentially interfering with the growth and development of private financial markets. Further, the perception that the RMB is undervalued (a point to which I will return) has fueled additional capital inflows, as investors expect to earn capital gains when the RMB ultimately appreciates. However, these speculative inflows only increase the need for exchange-market intervention and sterilization. In the longer term, the continued growth and modernization of the Chinese economy will require a substantial loosening of current restrictions on the flow of financial capital into and out of the country. However, if fluctuations in the value of the RMB remain limited within a narrow range, permitting substantial capital mobility would almost entirely eliminate the PBOC's capacity to use monetary policy to stabilize the domestic economy, as any excess of Chinese over dollar interest rates, for example, would trigger large capital inflows. Further appreciation of the RMB, combined with a wider trading band and with the ultimate goal of a market-determined exchange rate, would allow an effective and independent monetary policy and thereby help to enhance China's future growth and stability. From an institutional perspective, China may find--as many countries have done-- that granting greater autonomy to the central bank, by insulating it to a degree from short-term political concerns, increases its ability to ensure price stability and support stable growth. Of course, central banks must remain accountable to governments over the longer term. Trade, capital flows, and the transition to domestically-led growthA central component of China's development strategy has been its openness to trade and capital inflows. For example, the value of goods exports and imports currently equals about two-thirds of China's GDP, a high level for a country of China's geographic size. China's accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) has been particularly effective in stimulating trade: Since joining the WTO in 2001, China has seen the dollar value of its exports grow at an average rate of about 30 percent per year, compared with annual growth of about 12-1/2 percent over the five years before gaining WTO membership. China currently accounts for about 7-1/2 percent of world exports, up from 1-1/2 percent in 1985. About half of China's trade is so-called processing trade; that is, components and materials are imported (mostly from other Asian countries), processing or assembly is done in China, and the finished product is re-exported. Much economic research has shown that openness to trade promotes growth.14Trade supports growth not only through the classical principle of comparative advantage, but also through the effects of trade on the intensity of market competition, transfers of technology and knowledge, and other factors. China has also proved successful in attracting capital inflows, particularly foreign direct investment (FDI). The flow of FDI into China increased from about $2 billion in 1986 to $72 billion in 2005, making the country the third largest recipient of FDI in the world, after the United Kingdom and the United States.15FDI benefits China's development by bringing with it new technologies, products, and business methods.16The flow of foreign investments in Chinese securities has also increased significantly, reaching $22 billion in 2005. As you know, China today is running substantial trade and current account surpluses. These external surpluses are caused in part by China's remarkably high saving rate.17Because China's national saving rate is even higher than its rate of domestic investment, the country has excess funds to lend in the global capital market; it follows from the balance-of-payments accounts that China's net lending abroad (or its acquisition of foreign assets) equals the country's current account surplus. A large portion of this lending finances foreigners' purchases of Chinese net exports (the trade surplus). High household saving and the corresponding low level of consumption in China contribute to the trade surplus by depressing the demand for imports and by forcing domestic firms to look abroad for markets. Together with the large trade and current account deficits of the United States, the Chinese external surpluses are contributing to the current pattern of global imbalances, which many economists and policymakers have argued are unsustainable in the long run. The Chinese leadership has recognized the importance of encouraging imports and achieving greater balance in China's international trade, having recently included these objectives in the Five-Year Plan for 2006-2010. In my view, not only would China's achieving smaller external balances contribute to global financial stability, it would also be in China's economic interest. Although China's extensive participation in the global trading and financial systems has been invaluable for the country's development, the ultimate purpose of economic growth is to improve living standards at home. Today, about half of China's GDP is devoted to investment and to producing net exports for the rest of the world, and thus only the remaining half is available for consumption, including government consumption. In particular, household consumption in China last year was only 38 percent of GDP, down from 45 percent in 2001. In comparison, household consumption was about 60 percent of GDP in India in 2004, according to the most recent available data. China's low share of consumption in GDP is, of course, the counterpart of its high national saving rate. Policies aimed at increasing household consumption would clearly benefit the Chinese people, notably by improving standards of living and allowing the fruits of economic development to be shared more widely. Such policies, by reducing saving and increasing imports, would also serve to reduce China's current account and trade surpluses.18Putting greater reliance on domestic demand rather than net exports to drive growth would also decrease China's vulnerability to fluctuations in global demand. How can China direct a greater share of its output to domestic consumption? Again, increased flexibility in the exchange rate could help. As the Chinese trade surplus has continued to widen, many analysts have concluded that the RMB is undervalued.19Indeed, the situation has likely worsened recently; because of the RMB's link to the dollar, its trade-weighted effective real exchange rate has fallen about 10 percent over the past five years.20Allowing the RMB to strengthen would make imports of consumer goods (as well as capital goods) into China less expensive. Greater scope for market forces to determine the value of the RMB would also reduce an important distortion in the Chinese economy, namely, the effective subsidy that an undervalued currency provides for Chinese firms that focus on exporting rather than producing for the domestic market. A decrease in this effective subsidy would induce more firms to gear production toward the home market, benefiting domestic consumers and firms. Reducing the implicit subsidy to exports could increase long-term financial stability as well: If China invests too heavily in export industries whose economic viability depends on undervaluation of the exchange rate, a future appreciation of the RMB could lead to excess capacity in those industries, resulting in low returns and an increase in nonperforming loans. Although more flexibility in the exchange rate would be helpful, the most direct and probably the most effective way to reduce the external surpluses and increase the welfare of Chinese households is to take measures to reduce domestic saving relative to domestic investment.21Why is domestic saving so high at present? The high saving rate of households, even very poor households, likely reflects the relatively thin "social safety net" in China. For example, only about 14 percent of the population is covered by health insurance, and pension plans (which, in any case, replace only about 20 percent of pre-retirement earnings) apply to only about 16 percent of the economically active population.22Combined expenditures by the central government and local governments on education, health, pensions and relief, and social security amount to only about 4 percent of GDP, lower than most other countries at similar income levels. In the absence of a stronger social safety net, Chinese households save at high rates to protect themselves against risks such as unexpected medical expenses and poverty in old age. A sustained program of expanding social services has the potential for reducing saving and raising living standards in China and, at the same time, moderating China's external surpluses. In particular, increased government spending on health, education, and other types of social services would raise both household consumption and government consumption, and thus reduce national saving. As one means of helping to fund the increase in social expenditures, state-owned enterprises could be required to pay larger dividends to the government, a measure which I understand to be currently under consideration. Financial reforms that increase the access of households to mortgages, private insurance, and other forms of consumer finance would also support higher rates of consumption. As I have noted, the Chinese leadership has made reducing the trade and current account surpluses an important policy objective. Further, recognizing that achieving these goals would be greatly facilitated by increases in consumption and in the social safety net, the government has instituted or proposed various reductions in taxes and increases in social spending. The government has also announced an effort to raise living standards in rural and inland areas. Obviously, it is too early to judge the success of these initiatives. However, these efforts are constructive and deserving of support. ConclusionAs I have discussed today, China has made remarkable economic progress since the reforms began in 1978. Greater use of markets, together with expanding trade and capital flows, has helped to increase growth in output and productivity, which in turn has increased living standards significantly. A still-greater reliance on markets, particularly for allocating capital investment, would contribute to a continuation of strong economic growth. Further development of macroeconomic policy tools would also support healthy growth by keeping inflation low and by increasing economic stability. China also faces some significant risks and imbalances. The principal risk arises from the likelihood that capital is not being allocated as efficiently as possible, the result of an undervalued exchange rate and of capital markets that, despite positive steps, remain distorted and underdeveloped. Misallocated capital will not pay the highest possible returns, leading potentially to slower growth and future financial stress. In addition, monetary policy may be constrained by the lack of a reliable monetary transmission mechanism and by the relative inflexibility of the exchange rate, which inhibit the central bank's ability to keep inflation low and to stabilize the economy. The principal imbalance lies in the composition of Chinese GDP, which is heavily tilted toward investment and net exports and away from domestic consumption and government provision of social services. A better balance would improve the welfare of the Chinese people (by increasing consumption and social services) and would increase global financial stability (by reducing China's current account and trade surpluses). The Chinese government has undertaken to reduce this imbalance by taking measures to expand domestic demand, especially household consumption, and I hope that these efforts will be successful. China's development and its opening up to the global economy have also benefited the United States in many ways. China is now the second-largest source of U.S. imports; these imports boost U.S. real incomes by allowing U.S. households to purchase consumption goods and U.S. firms to purchase intermediate inputs at lower cost. China is also a growing market for investment and exports by U.S. firms. Since China joined the WTO, U.S. exports to China have more than doubled. As China develops further, its households and firms will demand a greater variety of goods and services, enhancing opportunities for producers in industrial countries, including the United States. At the same time, trade--with all its benefits--does displace some workers and firms as patterns of production and consumption change. The policy challenge for the United States is to help those who are adversely affected by trade while preserving the broad gains that openness to trade provides for the economy as a whole. The economic relationship between China and the United States is of extraordinary importance, and both countries have much to gain from interactions with each other. Serious challenges exist as well, requiring both countries to address such areas as energy, the environment, intellectual property rights, and global imbalances. Regarding global imbalances, I have discussed means by which China can reduce its contribution to the imbalances while encouraging domestic consumption. The United States must also do its part, in particular by increasing its own rate of national saving and by avoiding protectionism. With greater integration come greater interdependence and greater responsibility. I hope that our countries will work together in a spirit of cooperation to address these shared challenges. References Anderson, Jonathan (2006). "The Complete RMB Handbook," 4th ed., UBS Investment Research, Asian Economic Perspectives, September. Bergsten, Fred C., Bates Gill, Nicholas R. Lardy, and Derek Mitchell (2006).China, The Balance Sheet: What the World Needs to Know Now about the Emerging Superpower. New York: PublicAffairs. Brooks, Ray (2004). "Labor Market Performance and Prospects," in Eswar Prasad, ed.,China's Growth and Integration into the World Economy: Prospects and Challenges. Washington: International Monetary Fund, pp. 51-61. Dunaway, Steven, Lamin Leigh, and Xiangming Li (2006). "How Robust are Estimates of Equilibrium Real Exchange Rates: The Case of China," IMF Working Paper 06/220. Washington: International Monetary Fund, October. Frankel, Jeffrey A., and David Romer (1999). "Does Trade Cause Growth?"American Economic Review, vol. 89 (June), pp. 379-99. Goldstein, Morris (2004). "Adjusting China's Exchange Rate Policies," paper presented at the International Monetary Fund's Seminar on China's Foreign Exchange System, held in Dalian, China, May 26-27. Goodfriend, Marvin, and Eswar Prasad (2006). "A Framework for Independent Monetary Policy in China," IMF Working Paper, 06/111. Washington: International Monetary Fund, May. Hoffman, Bert, and Louis Kuijs (2006). "Profits Drive China's Boom,"Far Eastern Economic Review, vol. 169 (October), pp. 39-43. Kuijs, Louis (2005). "Investment and Saving in China," World Bank Policy Research Paper 3633. Washington: World Bank, June. __________ (2006). "How Will China's Saving-Investment Balance Evolve?" World Bank Policy Research Paper 3958. Washington: World Bank, July. Lardy, Nicholas R. (2002).Integrating China into the Global Economy. Washington: Brookings Institution Press. ___________ (2006). "China: Toward a Consumption-Driven Growth Path," Policy Briefs in International Economics, P806-6. Washington: Institute for International Economics, October. National Bureau of Statistics of China(2006).China Statistical Yearbook, 25th ed., China Statistics Press. Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Andrew M. Warner (1995). "Economic Convergence and Economic Policies,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995:1, pp.1-95. Shan, Weijian (2006). "The World Bank's China Delusions,"Far Eastern Economic Review, vol. 169 (September), pp.29-32. Wacziarg, Romain (2001). "Measuring the Dynamic Gains from Trade,"World Bank Economic Review, vol. 15 (September), pp.393-429. World Bank (2006). "On-Line China Country Profile,"World Development Indicators, www.devdata.worldbank.org/wdi2006/contents/home.htm. Zebregs, Harm (2002). "Foreign Direct Investment and Output Growth," in Wanda Tseng and Markus Rodlauer, eds.,China: Competing in the Global Economy. Washington: International Monetary Fund, pp. 89-100. Footnotes 1.Bergsten and others ( 2006), p. 3.Return to text 2.World Bank (2006).Return to text 3.For example, according to 2005 data from the International Monetary Fund's World Economic Outlook database, China's per capita GDP is about one-sixth of that of the United States on a purchasing-power-parity basis and about one twenty-fifth that of the United States at current exchange rates.Return to text 4.Productivity growth rates are calculated by Federal Reserve Board staff using Chinese data on output and employment. Productivity can be difficult to measure, and so these figures should be treated as approximate. A new method for surveying employment was introduced in 1990, resulting in a break in the series in that year.Return to text 5.See, for example, chapter 2 of Bergsten and others (2006) for a discussion of why China has grown so rapidly.Return to text 6.Lardy (2002), p. 25.Return to text 7.Brooks (2004) provides details of some of the labor market developments in China in recent years.Return to text 8.Calculations use current exchange rates and are based on output and employment data from the National Bureau of Statistics of China and the Chinese State Statistical Office; most data from Chinese national sources are obtained from the CEIC database.Return to text 9.The adverse effects on poor households of eliminating price controls on fuels would best be dealt with through direct cash grants.Return to text 10.World Bank researchers have concluded that business saving now finances the majority of business investment in China (Kuijs, 2005). Some have questioned this (Shan, 2006). For a discussion of the issues involved in the debate, see Hoffman and Kuijs (2006).Return to text 11.Based on production and capacity data provided by the National Bureau of Statistics.Return to text 12.Market-based allocations of capital do not take into account environmental and other external effects, unless additional mechanisms such as tradable pollution permits are employed.Return to text 13.Goodfriend and Prasad (2006) provides a good description of the banking and financial systems of China and of issues regarding the implementation of monetary policy.Return to text 14.See, for example, Sachs and Warner (1995), Frankel and Romer (1999), and Wacziarg (2001).Return to text 15.In 2005, the United Kingdom surpassed both China and the United States as the largest recipient of FDI in the world. In 2004, China ranked second after the United States.Return to text 16.For a discussion of the relationship between FDI and economic growth in China, see Zebregs (2002).Return to text 17.China's national saving rate was 41 percent in 2003 and 47 percent in 2005, according to IMF figures. As of 2003, the latest date for which detailed data are available, households accounted for 42 percent of domestic saving, with firms (including state-owned enterprises) and government accounting for 36 percent and 22 percent of domestic saving, respectively (National Bureau of Statistics of China, 2006).Return to text 18.See Lardy (2006), for example, for a careful discussion of the need for reorientation of Chinese growth toward consumption.Return to text 19.See, for example, Goldstein (2004) and Anderson (2006). Dunaway and others (2006) provide a useful analysis of the sensitivity of the Chinese equilibrium real exchange rate to alternative approaches and assumptions commonly used.Return to text 20.The estimate is by Federal Reserve Board staff for the period from November 2001 to November 2006.Return to text 21.Kuijs (2006) documents the sources and composition of saving and investment in China.Return to text 22.Bergsten and others (2006), p.28.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Beijing, China The emergence of China as a global economic power is one of the most important developments of recent decades. For the past twenty years, the Chinese economy has achieved a growth rate averaging nearly 10 percent per year, resulting in a quintupling of output per person. In overall size, China's economy today ranks as the fourth largest in the world in terms of gross domestic product (GDP) at current exchange rates and the second largest when adjustments are made for the differences in the domestic purchasing power of national currencies. This strong economic performance has resulted in improved living standards for the Chinese people. By some estimates, about 200 million Chinese have been brought out of poverty since the reforms began in 1978.1Moreover, by 2004 life expectancy at birth in China had reached seventy-one years, the infant mortality rate had fallen to 26 per 1,000 live births, and the literacy rate of those aged fifteen or above had reached 90 percent.2These are remarkable accomplishments. Nonetheless, by most measures China remains a developing nation.3In particular, although life in some urban centers is typical of a modern, affluent society, average household incomes and consumption remain quite low in rural and inland areas. Thus, China faces the double challenge of sustaining a high and stable overall rate of economic growth while stimulating economic development in parts of the country that have shared less fully in the economic boom. In my remarks today, I would like to offer a few thoughts on how China can continue to prosper and promote the economic welfare of its people.Economic progress: Markets and productivityEconomists agree that the most important determinant of living standards in a country is the average level of productivity, or output per worker. On this score as well, China's record in recent decades is excellent. Between 1978, when the Open Door policy reforms began, and 1989, output per employed person in China grew vigorously, at an estimated average rate of about 6-1/2 percent per year. However, from 1990 to 2005, productivity grew at an even more impressive rate of 9 percent per year.4 Many factors have contributed to this strong productivity performance, including high rates of capital investment, increasing openness to trade, and a strengthening of the educational system.5However, in my view, the single most important cause of the ongoing expansion in productivity is that China has moved, gradually but steadily, away from central planning and toward a greater reliance on markets. In 1978, almost no prices in China were determined by the market, and most production was controlled or directed by the state. Since then, the government has reduced its direct intervention in the economy and scaled back state-owned enterprises, in the process allowing more scope for market forces. By 1999, according to one estimate, about 95 percent of retail business, together with more than 80 percent of trade in agricultural commodities and producer goods, was conducted at market-determined prices.6 Substantial experience has shown that modern economies, including those in early stages of development, are too complex to be managed effectively on a centralized basis. Prices set in free and competitive markets serve several critical functions, among them aggregating disparate information about supply and demand conditions and the relative scarcities of specific goods and services; directing resources to their most productive uses; and providing incentives to engage in cost reduction, innovation, and entrepreneurial activities. A free market for labor is particularly critical for sustained economic development. China has made substantial progress in this area over the past few decades, most notably by reducing barriers to the movement of workers among regions, sectors, and firms and by allowing greater flexibility in the determination of employment and wages.7Indeed, the ongoing movement of workers from relatively low-productivity, low-wage jobs in agriculture to higher-productivity, higher-wage jobs in manufacturing and services has been a significant source of Chinese economic growth. The decline in the share of the population in rural areas, from more than 80 percent in 1970 to less than 60 percent in 2005, indicates the scale of the movement of labor out of agriculture in recent decades. Despite these shifts, differences in labor productivity among sectors remain large. For example, in 2005, estimated output per worker in agriculture and related sectors was about $800, whereas in industries such as manufacturing, utilities, and mining, output per worker was about $5,900, more than seven times as much.8Moreover, a considerable portion of China's labor force (specifically, in agriculture and in inefficient state-owned enterprises) remains underutilized. Thus, substantial additional gains in productivity for the economy as a whole might be realized through the further reallocation of the labor force to more productive and growing sectors. In particular, small- and medium-sized enterprises are emerging as an engine of job creation in China--as they are in the United States--even as they promote innovation and help to create a more dynamic and diversified economy. The government can support the process of reallocating labor to more productive uses by continuing to reduce barriers to labor mobility, helping workers obtain the education and training they need to be productive in new occupations, and encouraging entrepreneurship and small-business development. As significant as the reallocation of labor among sectors has been, more of the improvement in productivity in recent years has resulted from increasing efficiencies within the major sectors rather than from the reallocation of resources between sectors. Here again, markets and competition have played a vital role. In particular, the opening of the economy to international trade and investment, which has accelerated since China's accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001, has done much to harness market forces in the service of the country's development. Exposure to the competition of the global marketplace has forced Chinese producers--alone or in partnership with foreign firms--to increase their efficiency and improve the quality of their output. Notably, globally-engaged firms (or their affiliates) operating in China have helped to foster productivity growth in the country by introducing new technologies and managerial techniques, as well as by enhancing domestic competition. Although the expansion of the market-based portion of the economy has yielded impressive results, further gains could be achieved by allowing still greater scope for market forces. The energy sector presents one such opportunity. As you know, China's appetite for energy has grown rapidly: China's consumption of oil has risen by more than 50 percent since 2000, and the International Energy Agency estimates that Chinese oil usage has increased by about 400,000 barrels per day in 2006, representing nearly half of this year's growth in world oil demand. This rapid expansion in energy use reflects both overall economic growth and a relatively energy-intensive pattern of development. Greater use of market pricing in the energy sector, including the elimination of remaining price controls on fuels and the liberalization of electricity prices, would support cleaner, sustainable economic growth by promoting more-efficient use of energy by households and firms and by encouraging the development of new energy supplies.9 Significant benefits could also be obtained by allowing a larger role for market forces in guiding investment decisions. China's economic growth owes much to the extraordinary share of GDP that is devoted to investment in new capital, such as factories, equipment, and office buildings, which is partly financed by a very large amount of business saving.10However, the rapid pace of investment growth raises concerns about whether new capital is being deployed in the most productive ways. In particular, some analysts have questioned whether China is getting an adequate return on its investment. For example, from 1990 to 2001, fixed investment as a share of GDP in China averaged about 33 percent, and the economy grew at an annual rate of 10 percent. Between 2001 and 2005, fixed investment's share of GDP rose to about 40 percent, but the economy's average growth rate remained about the same, suggesting a lower return to the more recent investment. Comparisons can also be drawn to the rapid development phases of other Asian countries, such as South Korea and Japan. Average annual growth was between 9 and 10 percent in South Korea during the 1982-91 period and in Japan during the 1955-70 period; but for both countries during the relevant years investment's share of GDP was about 30 percent, lower than it is in China today. In a few Chinese industries, heavy investments have continued even as signs of excess capacity have begun to appear--another possible indication of capital misallocation. An example is the steel industry, in which excess capacity appears to have tripled between 2002 and 2005 to reach more than 115 million metric tons.11Allowing competitive financial markets to play a larger role in the allocation of capital would likely increase the returns to investment and reduce the risk that uneconomic investments could exacerbate the problem of nonperforming loans and contribute to future financial instability. Basing investment decisions on market signals also takes better account of the costs of inputs complementary to capital, such as labor (relatively abundant in China) and energy (relatively scarce).12 China has taken initial steps toward a greater reliance on markets for determining the allocation of investment--for example, by authorizing and beginning to liberalize the stock market. China has also strengthened its banking system by improving supervision, confronting the enormous problem of nonperforming loans, allowing domestic institutions to partner with foreign banks, and increasing the use of market-based criteria in bank lending. These trends are positive; however, a great deal more remains to be done, including broadening the range of financial instruments available to savers and borrowers; taking further steps to ensure that credit evaluation and extension are based on sound economic criteria; increasing competition in banking and finance; improving credit availability for consumers and smaller firms; removing the remaining controls on interest rates; and eliminating the use of quantitative and administrative measures to influence the amount and composition of capital investment. Finally, capital markets require an appropriate institutional foundation to function effectively: Well-defined property rights (including intellectual property rights), transparent accounting standards, good corporate governance, effective supervisory oversight of banks and markets, the consistent enforcement of contracts, and rules that allow for orderly bankruptcy proceedings for unprofitable firms all help to support efficient investment. China has made progress in developing these critical institutions, but continued focus on these areas would provide large economic benefits in the long run. Macroeconomic policyMoving from microeconomics to macroeconomics, I believe that China could benefit by improving its tools for managing the economy--notably, monetary and fiscal policies. Effective use of macroeconomic policy tools can help achieve low and stable inflation and increase economic stability by moderating the effects on growth of temporary fluctuations in global or domestic demand. Stable economic conditions reduce an important source of risk and consequently promote innovation and growth. As a central banker, I will focus my remarks on the development of monetary policy.13 The People's Bank of China (PBOC), the nation's central bank, is capable and well-respected around the world. However, monetary policy can work well only to the extent that financial markets are sufficiently developed to allow the monetary authorities' interest-rate decisions to affect economic activity in a reasonably predictable way. The development of a reliable "monetary transmission mechanism" is thus another reason to reform and strengthen China's banks and financial markets. The more interest-sensitive that borrowing and investment decisions are, the more monetary policy can affect investment and aggregate demand without the need for quantitative controls. Moreover, when funds are allocated on market principles, only those projects with an expected risk-adjusted return that is higher than the relevant market rate of interest will be undertaken. Thus, for example, if the central bank raises interest rates, the market will ensure that the resulting slowing of investment will be borne by the least promising projects, without the need for officials to make such judgments. The effectiveness of monetary policy would also be enhanced by greater flexibility in the exchange rate. To maintain the current close link of the renminbi (RMB) to the dollar in the presence of capital inflows (arising from China's trade surplus or from foreign purchases of RMB-denominated assets), the PBOC must intervene in the exchange market to buy dollars with RMB. Increases in the domestic money supply will result unless the central bank offsets the effects of these purchases on the money supply by selling bonds to investors, primarily commercial banks, in exchange for RMB--a procedure commonly referred to as "sterilization." If dollar purchases by the central bank were not routinely sterilized, the money supply might increase more than desired, possibly leading to an overheating of the economy and inflation. To date the PBOC has been largely successful in its sterilization operations, but if it continues to use this strategy it will eventually encounter problems. If the exchange rate and the domestic interest rate are maintained near their current levels, the incentives for capital inflows--and thus the need for continued intervention and sterilization--will remain undiminished. Accordingly, the value of outstanding sterilization bonds will continue to grow rapidly. These bonds could substitute for other assets that might be held by banks and private investors, potentially interfering with the growth and development of private financial markets. Further, the perception that the RMB is undervalued (a point to which I will return) has fueled additional capital inflows, as investors expect to earn capital gains when the RMB ultimately appreciates. However, these speculative inflows only increase the need for exchange-market intervention and sterilization. In the longer term, the continued growth and modernization of the Chinese economy will require a substantial loosening of current restrictions on the flow of financial capital into and out of the country. However, if fluctuations in the value of the RMB remain limited within a narrow range, permitting substantial capital mobility would almost entirely eliminate the PBOC's capacity to use monetary policy to stabilize the domestic economy, as any excess of Chinese over dollar interest rates, for example, would trigger large capital inflows. Further appreciation of the RMB, combined with a wider trading band and with the ultimate goal of a market-determined exchange rate, would allow an effective and independent monetary policy and thereby help to enhance China's future growth and stability. From an institutional perspective, China may find--as many countries have done-- that granting greater autonomy to the central bank, by insulating it to a degree from short-term political concerns, increases its ability to ensure price stability and support stable growth. Of course, central banks must remain accountable to governments over the longer term. Trade, capital flows, and the transition to domestically-led growthA central component of China's development strategy has been its openness to trade and capital inflows. For example, the value of goods exports and imports currently equals about two-thirds of China's GDP, a high level for a country of China's geographic size. China's accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) has been particularly effective in stimulating trade: Since joining the WTO in 2001, China has seen the dollar value of its exports grow at an average rate of about 30 percent per year, compared with annual growth of about 12-1/2 percent over the five years before gaining WTO membership. China currently accounts for about 7-1/2 percent of world exports, up from 1-1/2 percent in 1985. About half of China's trade is so-called processing trade; that is, components and materials are imported (mostly from other Asian countries), processing or assembly is done in China, and the finished product is re-exported. Much economic research has shown that openness to trade promotes growth.14Trade supports growth not only through the classical principle of comparative advantage, but also through the effects of trade on the intensity of market competition, transfers of technology and knowledge, and other factors. China has also proved successful in attracting capital inflows, particularly foreign direct investment (FDI). The flow of FDI into China increased from about $2 billion in 1986 to $72 billion in 2005, making the country the third largest recipient of FDI in the world, after the United Kingdom and the United States.15FDI benefits China's development by bringing with it new technologies, products, and business methods.16The flow of foreign investments in Chinese securities has also increased significantly, reaching $22 billion in 2005. As you know, China today is running substantial trade and current account surpluses. These external surpluses are caused in part by China's remarkably high saving rate.17Because China's national saving rate is even higher than its rate of domestic investment, the country has excess funds to lend in the global capital market; it follows from the balance-of-payments accounts that China's net lending abroad (or its acquisition of foreign assets) equals the country's current account surplus. A large portion of this lending finances foreigners' purchases of Chinese net exports (the trade surplus). High household saving and the corresponding low level of consumption in China contribute to the trade surplus by depressing the demand for imports and by forcing domestic firms to look abroad for markets. Together with the large trade and current account deficits of the United States, the Chinese external surpluses are contributing to the current pattern of global imbalances, which many economists and policymakers have argued are unsustainable in the long run. The Chinese leadership has recognized the importance of encouraging imports and achieving greater balance in China's international trade, having recently included these objectives in the Five-Year Plan for 2006-2010. In my view, not only would China's achieving smaller external balances contribute to global financial stability, it would also be in China's economic interest. Although China's extensive participation in the global trading and financial systems has been invaluable for the country's development, the ultimate purpose of economic growth is to improve living standards at home. Today, about half of China's GDP is devoted to investment and to producing net exports for the rest of the world, and thus only the remaining half is available for consumption, including government consumption. In particular, household consumption in China last year was only 38 percent of GDP, down from 45 percent in 2001. In comparison, household consumption was about 60 percent of GDP in India in 2004, according to the most recent available data. China's low share of consumption in GDP is, of course, the counterpart of its high national saving rate. Policies aimed at increasing household consumption would clearly benefit the Chinese people, notably by improving standards of living and allowing the fruits of economic development to be shared more widely. Such policies, by reducing saving and increasing imports, would also serve to reduce China's current account and trade surpluses.18Putting greater reliance on domestic demand rather than net exports to drive growth would also decrease China's vulnerability to fluctuations in global demand. How can China direct a greater share of its output to domestic consumption? Again, increased flexibility in the exchange rate could help. As the Chinese trade surplus has continued to widen, many analysts have concluded that the RMB is undervalued.19Indeed, the situation has likely worsened recently; because of the RMB's link to the dollar, its trade-weighted effective real exchange rate has fallen about 10 percent over the past five years.20Allowing the RMB to strengthen would make imports of consumer goods (as well as capital goods) into China less expensive. Greater scope for market forces to determine the value of the RMB would also reduce an important distortion in the Chinese economy, namely, the effective subsidy that an undervalued currency provides for Chinese firms that focus on exporting rather than producing for the domestic market. A decrease in this effective subsidy would induce more firms to gear production toward the home market, benefiting domestic consumers and firms. Reducing the implicit subsidy to exports could increase long-term financial stability as well: If China invests too heavily in export industries whose economic viability depends on undervaluation of the exchange rate, a future appreciation of the RMB could lead to excess capacity in those industries, resulting in low returns and an increase in nonperforming loans. Although more flexibility in the exchange rate would be helpful, the most direct and probably the most effective way to reduce the external surpluses and increase the welfare of Chinese households is to take measures to reduce domestic saving relative to domestic investment.21Why is domestic saving so high at present? The high saving rate of households, even very poor households, likely reflects the relatively thin "social safety net" in China. For example, only about 14 percent of the population is covered by health insurance, and pension plans (which, in any case, replace only about 20 percent of pre-retirement earnings) apply to only about 16 percent of the economically active population.22Combined expenditures by the central government and local governments on education, health, pensions and relief, and social security amount to only about 4 percent of GDP, lower than most other countries at similar income levels. In the absence of a stronger social safety net, Chinese households save at high rates to protect themselves against risks such as unexpected medical expenses and poverty in old age. A sustained program of expanding social services has the potential for reducing saving and raising living standards in China and, at the same time, moderating China's external surpluses. In particular, increased government spending on health, education, and other types of social services would raise both household consumption and government consumption, and thus reduce national saving. As one means of helping to fund the increase in social expenditures, state-owned enterprises could be required to pay larger dividends to the government, a measure which I understand to be currently under consideration. Financial reforms that increase the access of households to mortgages, private insurance, and other forms of consumer finance would also support higher rates of consumption. As I have noted, the Chinese leadership has made reducing the trade and current account surpluses an important policy objective. Further, recognizing that achieving these goals would be greatly facilitated by increases in consumption and in the social safety net, the government has instituted or proposed various reductions in taxes and increases in social spending. The government has also announced an effort to raise living standards in rural and inland areas. Obviously, it is too early to judge the success of these initiatives. However, these efforts are constructive and deserving of support. ConclusionAs I have discussed today, China has made remarkable economic progress since the reforms began in 1978. Greater use of markets, together with expanding trade and capital flows, has helped to increase growth in output and productivity, which in turn has increased living standards significantly. A still-greater reliance on markets, particularly for allocating capital investment, would contribute to a continuation of strong economic growth. Further development of macroeconomic policy tools would also support healthy growth by keeping inflation low and by increasing economic stability. China also faces some significant risks and imbalances. The principal risk arises from the likelihood that capital is not being allocated as efficiently as possible, the result of an undervalued exchange rate and of capital markets that, despite positive steps, remain distorted and underdeveloped. Misallocated capital will not pay the highest possible returns, leading potentially to slower growth and future financial stress. In addition, monetary policy may be constrained by the lack of a reliable monetary transmission mechanism and by the relative inflexibility of the exchange rate, which inhibit the central bank's ability to keep inflation low and to stabilize the economy. The principal imbalance lies in the composition of Chinese GDP, which is heavily tilted toward investment and net exports and away from domestic consumption and government provision of social services. A better balance would improve the welfare of the Chinese people (by increasing consumption and social services) and would increase global financial stability (by reducing China's current account and trade surpluses). The Chinese government has undertaken to reduce this imbalance by taking measures to expand domestic demand, especially household consumption, and I hope that these efforts will be successful. China's development and its opening up to the global economy have also benefited the United States in many ways. China is now the second-largest source of U.S. imports; these imports boost U.S. real incomes by allowing U.S. households to purchase consumption goods and U.S. firms to purchase intermediate inputs at lower cost. China is also a growing market for investment and exports by U.S. firms. Since China joined the WTO, U.S. exports to China have more than doubled. As China develops further, its households and firms will demand a greater variety of goods and services, enhancing opportunities for producers in industrial countries, including the United States. At the same time, trade--with all its benefits--does displace some workers and firms as patterns of production and consumption change. The policy challenge for the United States is to help those who are adversely affected by trade while preserving the broad gains that openness to trade provides for the economy as a whole. The economic relationship between China and the United States is of extraordinary importance, and both countries have much to gain from interactions with each other. Serious challenges exist as well, requiring both countries to address such areas as energy, the environment, intellectual property rights, and global imbalances. Regarding global imbalances, I have discussed means by which China can reduce its contribution to the imbalances while encouraging domestic consumption. The United States must also do its part, in particular by increasing its own rate of national saving and by avoiding protectionism. With greater integration come greater interdependence and greater responsibility. I hope that our countries will work together in a spirit of cooperation to address these shared challenges. References Anderson, Jonathan (2006). "The Complete RMB Handbook," 4th ed., UBS Investment Research, Asian Economic Perspectives, September. Bergsten, Fred C., Bates Gill, Nicholas R. Lardy, and Derek Mitchell (2006).China, The Balance Sheet: What the World Needs to Know Now about the Emerging Superpower. New York: PublicAffairs. Brooks, Ray (2004). "Labor Market Performance and Prospects," in Eswar Prasad, ed.,China's Growth and Integration into the World Economy: Prospects and Challenges. Washington: International Monetary Fund, pp. 51-61. Dunaway, Steven, Lamin Leigh, and Xiangming Li (2006). "How Robust are Estimates of Equilibrium Real Exchange Rates: The Case of China," IMF Working Paper 06/220. Washington: International Monetary Fund, October. Frankel, Jeffrey A., and David Romer (1999). "Does Trade Cause Growth?"American Economic Review, vol. 89 (June), pp. 379-99. Goldstein, Morris (2004). "Adjusting China's Exchange Rate Policies," paper presented at the International Monetary Fund's Seminar on China's Foreign Exchange System, held in Dalian, China, May 26-27. Goodfriend, Marvin, and Eswar Prasad (2006). "A Framework for Independent Monetary Policy in China," IMF Working Paper, 06/111. Washington: International Monetary Fund, May. Hoffman, Bert, and Louis Kuijs (2006). "Profits Drive China's Boom,"Far Eastern Economic Review, vol. 169 (October), pp. 39-43. Kuijs, Louis (2005). "Investment and Saving in China," World Bank Policy Research Paper 3633. Washington: World Bank, June. __________ (2006). "How Will China's Saving-Investment Balance Evolve?" World Bank Policy Research Paper 3958. Washington: World Bank, July. Lardy, Nicholas R. (2002).Integrating China into the Global Economy. Washington: Brookings Institution Press. ___________ (2006). "China: Toward a Consumption-Driven Growth Path," Policy Briefs in International Economics, P806-6. Washington: Institute for International Economics, October. National Bureau of Statistics of China(2006).China Statistical Yearbook, 25th ed., China Statistics Press. Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Andrew M. Warner (1995). "Economic Convergence and Economic Policies,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995:1, pp.1-95. Shan, Weijian (2006). "The World Bank's China Delusions,"Far Eastern Economic Review, vol. 169 (September), pp.29-32. Wacziarg, Romain (2001). "Measuring the Dynamic Gains from Trade,"World Bank Economic Review, vol. 15 (September), pp.393-429. World Bank (2006). "On-Line China Country Profile,"World Development Indicators, www.devdata.worldbank.org/wdi2006/contents/home.htm. Zebregs, Harm (2002). "Foreign Direct Investment and Output Growth," in Wanda Tseng and Markus Rodlauer, eds.,China: Competing in the Global Economy. Washington: International Monetary Fund, pp. 89-100. Footnotes 1.Bergsten and others ( 2006), p. 3.Return to text 2.World Bank (2006).Return to text 3.For example, according to 2005 data from the International Monetary Fund's World Economic Outlook database, China's per capita GDP is about one-sixth of that of the United States on a purchasing-power-parity basis and about one twenty-fifth that of the United States at current exchange rates.Return to text 4.Productivity growth rates are calculated by Federal Reserve Board staff using Chinese data on output and employment. Productivity can be difficult to measure, and so these figures should be treated as approximate. A new method for surveying employment was introduced in 1990, resulting in a break in the series in that year.Return to text 5.See, for example, chapter 2 of Bergsten and others (2006) for a discussion of why China has grown so rapidly.Return to text 6.Lardy (2002), p. 25.Return to text 7.Brooks (2004) provides details of some of the labor market developments in China in recent years.Return to text 8.Calculations use current exchange rates and are based on output and employment data from the National Bureau of Statistics of China and the Chinese State Statistical Office; most data from Chinese national sources are obtained from the CEIC database.Return to text 9.The adverse effects on poor households of eliminating price controls on fuels would best be dealt with through direct cash grants.Return to text 10.World Bank researchers have concluded that business saving now finances the majority of business investment in China (Kuijs, 2005). Some have questioned this (Shan, 2006). For a discussion of the issues involved in the debate, see Hoffman and Kuijs (2006).Return to text 11.Based on production and capacity data provided by the National Bureau of Statistics.Return to text 12.Market-based allocations of capital do not take into account environmental and other external effects, unless additional mechanisms such as tradable pollution permits are employed.Return to text 13.Goodfriend and Prasad (2006) provides a good description of the banking and financial systems of China and of issues regarding the implementation of monetary policy.Return to text 14.See, for example, Sachs and Warner (1995), Frankel and Romer (1999), and Wacziarg (2001).Return to text 15.In 2005, the United Kingdom surpassed both China and the United States as the largest recipient of FDI in the world. In 2004, China ranked second after the United States.Return to text 16.For a discussion of the relationship between FDI and economic growth in China, see Zebregs (2002).Return to text 17.China's national saving rate was 41 percent in 2003 and 47 percent in 2005, according to IMF figures. As of 2003, the latest date for which detailed data are available, households accounted for 42 percent of domestic saving, with firms (including state-owned enterprises) and government accounting for 36 percent and 22 percent of domestic saving, respectively (National Bureau of Statistics of China, 2006).Return to text 18.See Lardy (2006), for example, for a careful discussion of the need for reorientation of Chinese growth toward consumption.Return to text 19.See, for example, Goldstein (2004) and Anderson (2006). Dunaway and others (2006) provide a useful analysis of the sensitivity of the Chinese equilibrium real exchange rate to alternative approaches and assumptions commonly used.Return to text 20.The estimate is by Federal Reserve Board staff for the period from November 2001 to November 2006.Return to text 21.Kuijs (2006) documents the sources and composition of saving and investment in China.Return to text 22.Bergsten and others (2006), p.28.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Fourth Conference of the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Washington, D.C. Vice President Papademos, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to welcome you to the fourth conference of the International Research Forum for Monetary Policy. The forum is one outgrowth of the increased interaction between central banks and academic institutions that, in my opinion, benefits both groups. It is a true joint effort involving the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve Board, the BMW Institute for German and European Studies at Georgetown University, and the Centre for Financial Studies at Goethe University in Frankfurt. You have a veryfull agendafor the next two days. The topics represent a good mix of theoretical work as well as empirical work based on both calibration and econometric estimation. You are beginning with two papers that emphasize the importance of inflation expectations. Other papers examine such topics as the application of search theory, the functioning of mortgage markets, the theoretical analysis of optimal monetary policy, and empirical research on price-setting. There is a lot of intellectual food on the table. Bon appetit!
The Federal Reserve Board and the New York State Banking Department on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Habib Bank Limited, Karachi, Pakistan; the bank's branch in New York, New York; the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; and the New York State Banking Department. The Written Agreement addresses Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money laundering compliance at Habib Bank Limited's New York branch, including policies and practices relating to the provision of correspondent banking services. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.