Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the Institute for International Bankers Seminar on the Impact of Basel II on Financial Markets and Business Strategies, New York, New York Good afternoon. Thank you for the invitation to participate in this seminar. We at the Federal Reserve welcome all opportunities to discuss current regulatory proposals and to hear the banking industry's comments about them. Today I plan to provide an overview of developments in the United States relating to Basel II and the Market Risk Amendment, as well as offer some thoughts about cross-border implementation of the New Accord. The Role of Regulatory CapitalBanking is, and should be, a business in which banks take and manage risks. Bankers implicitly accept risk as a consequence of providing services to customers and also take explicit risk positions that offer profitable returns relative to their risk appetites. One of the most important jobs of bank supervisors is to ensure that banks maintain an adequate capital cushion against losses, especially during times of financial instability or stress. Minimum capital requirements are a major tool for ensuring an adequate cushion. When developing minimum capital requirements, supervisors should continue to promote approaches that minimize the negative consequences of risk taking by financial institutions, particularly those institutions that could affect global financial stability. That is what we are doing with the Basel II framework. The Federal Reserve's main reason for pursuing the advanced approaches of Basel II is the growing inadequacy of current Basel I regulatory capital rules for the large, internationally active banks that are offering ever more complex and sophisticated products and services. We need a more risk-sensitive capital framework for these particular banks, and Basel II is such a framework. In addition, Basel II promotes risk-measurement and risk-management enhancements and improves market discipline, while giving supervisors a more conceptually consistent and more transparent framework for evaluating systemic risk, particularly through credit cycles. Basel II should establish a more coherent relationship between regulatory measures of capital adequacy and day-to-day risk-focused supervision of banks, enabling examiners to better evaluate whether banks are holding prudent levels of capital given their risk profiles. For similar reasons, U.S. supervisors support the recent Basel/IOSCO revisions to the 1996 Market Risk Amendment (MRA). Since adoption of the MRA, banks' trading activities have become more sophisticated and have given rise to a wider range of risks that are not easily captured in their existing value-at-risk models. For example, more products related to credit risk, such as credit default swaps and tranches of collateralized debt obligations, are now included in the trading book. These products can create default risks that are not captured well in methodologies required by the current rule specifying a ten-day holding period and a 99 percent confidence interval--thereby creating potential arbitrage opportunities between the banking book and the trading book. Recent U.S. DevelopmentsAs most of you know, over two months ago the U.S. banking agencies issued a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) relating to Basel II. Concurrently, the agencies issued an NPR on revisions to the MRA. Notably, in the United States the Basel II NPR and the revised market-risk NPR may or may not necessarily apply to the same set of institutions. The proposed market risk NPR will continue to apply only to banks with significant trading activity, whether they are on Basel I as amended or moved to Basel II. The U.S. banking agencies are eagerly awaiting comments on both proposals and expect the dialogue with all interested parties to expand as we explore whether the proposals meet our stated objectives and how the proposals can be improved. Specifically, I want to emphasize that you should not wait until the end of the comment period to submit comments; our staffs are working diligently to review them even now so that we will be ready to proceed in the development of a final rule. Therefore, even if you might have additional comments later, it is still helpful to submit now any you may currently have. We especially appreciate very detailed comments. Furthermore, it would be especially helpful to us if in your comments you could differentiate between those that are relevant during the Basel II transition period versus those that relate to features of the proposed framework that are more permanent in nature. In addition to the written comments, the comment period has afforded us more frequent interaction with industry groups, such as the Institute of International Bankers, which has been very helpful and informative. For our part, the agencies hope to issue a set of proposed supervisory guidance relating to Basel II soon that should be helpful as banks move forward with implementation. We at the Fed hope that everyone who reviews our proposals relating to Basel II and the MRA revisions understands that they are intended to promote the stability of the U.S. financial system by ensuring the safety and soundness of the largest U.S. banks. Thus, as Chairman Bernanke has noted, the ability of Basel II to promote safety and soundness is the first criterion by which these regulatory capital proposals should be judged. A key aspect of Basel II implementation in the United States relates to scope of application. In the United States, Basel II is expected to apply to only a handful of large, complex organizations, which is the principal reason why the U.S. agencies are proposing only the advanced approaches (A-IRB for credit risk and AMA for operational risk). Perhaps the main difference between the implementation of Basel II in the United States and the implementation in most other countries is that the U.S. banking agencies plan to retain a revised form of the existing Basel I-based capital rules for the vast majority of U.S. banks; most other countries are replacing Basel I entirely and will apply Basel II to the entire banking system. Notably, the initial U.S. Basel II proposals, issued in an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) in August 2003, suggested that only the advanced approaches be used in the United States; comments on the Basel II ANPR did not indicate any opposition to the agencies' proposed approaches. It should also be noted that, based on the latest information, apparently none of the large, complex organizations in other Basel-member countries plan to adopt the standardized approach for credit risk. Therefore, our proposal that large, complex U.S. banking organizations use the advanced approaches of Basel II seems generally consistent with approaches to be used by large, complex organizations in other countries. The U.S. agencies remain open to considering the full set of possibilities for Basel II, so the Basel II NPR specifically seeks comment on whether some form of the Basel II standardized approach for credit risk should be adopted in the United States. When deciding whether our large, internationally active banks should have access to a standardized approach, the agencies will need to consider a number of important issues: whether such an approach would accommodate the risks those banks take, now and in the future; whether it would provide adequate risk sensitivity; whether it would be useful to have a transition period in order to give some banks more time to prepare to use the advanced approaches, and whether other transition arrangements are available; whether taking the time needed to develop an appropriate U.S. version of the standardized approach would unduly delay the Basel II implementation process; and, finally, whether the marketplace would find such an option for those banks meaningful and acceptable. In developing U.S. proposals for Basel II implementation, the agencies did not think it would be appropriate to replace the existing Basel I capital rules for small, noncomplex banks in this country with the Basel II standardized rules. The agencies concluded, based in significant part on input from small community banking organizations, that the implementation costs of such an overhaul generally would exceed its regulatory benefit. Instead, the agencies intend to propose, through a notice of proposed rulemaking, a simpler, more modest set of revisions to our existing Basel I-based capital rules for smaller U.S. banks--revisions known as Basel IA. Basel IAAs noted, we anticipate that only one to two dozen institutions would move to the U.S. version of Basel II in the near term, meaning that the vast majority of U.S. institutions would continue to operate under Basel I-based rules. The U.S. Basel I framework has already been amended more than twenty-five times since its introduction, in response to changes in banking products and the financial services marketplace. In October 2005, the agencies issued an ANPR for Basel IA, which discussed possible changes to increase the risk sensitivity of the U.S. Basel I rules and to mitigate competitive distortions that might be created by introducing Basel II. We have reviewed comments on the ANPR and are working on a notice of proposed rulemaking, which we hope to have out very soon. In drafting all of these regulatory capital proposals, we continue to consider the balance between risk sensitivity and regulatory burden, since more risk-sensitive capital requirements generally imply greater burden. Thus, we are mindful that amendments to the Basel I rules should not be too complex or too burdensome for the large number of small- and mid-sized institutions to which the revised rules might apply. Indeed, a number of those commenting on the ANPR advocated leaving existing rules unchanged. As noted, the agencies are taking into account potential competitive effects that Basel II might create between those institutions that would adopt Basel II and those that would not. Indeed, we recognize that many of the thousands of depository institutions that would remain under the current capital rules may be concerned about the potential uncertainty surrounding Basel II. As part of our efforts to analyze and address these concerns, the Federal Reserve published a series of research papers focused on potential competitive effects in areas such as small business lending, mergers and acquisitions, and residential mortgage markets. The agencies have been taking into account the issues raised in those papers in drafting the Basel IA NPR. With regard to both the Basel II proposals and the proposed Basel I amendments, we understand the need for full transparency. For that reason, we expect the comment periods for the Basel II NPR and the NPR for the proposed Basel I amendments to have some overlap so that all interested parties may have adequate time to compare, contrast, and comment on both proposals. Accordingly, either of our proposals could change as a result of comments received or new information gathered. And as I stated earlier, we encourage you to submit your comments early rather than waiting until the end of the comment period. Implementing Basel II Across CountriesHaving covered the status of U.S. Basel II proposals, I now want to offer a few thoughts about the implementation of Basel II around the globe. As you know, the U.S. agencies participate with other national supervisors in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and in other groups to identify differences in implementation and discuss possible ways to harmonize rules and thereby reduce burden on cross-border banking organizations. At the recent Accord Implementation Group meeting, there was a very fruitful exchange of ideas and dialogue among the member nations, as well as the EU and Committee of European Banking Supervisors, on approaches that countries are considering to address capital adequacy beyond regulatory minimums. Of course, we recognize that the national discretion allowed under Basel II means that there will be adoption of different approaches to Basel II by various countries. We recognize that this may create challenges for banking organizations that operate in multiple jurisdictions and are working to try to minimize both the differences and the difficulties wherever possible. But it is good to remember that cross-border banking has always raised specific challenges, even before Basel II, and supervisors from various countries have worked hard to address and mitigate those difficulties. Let me assure all bankers here that the Federal Reserve is aware that the process of adopting national versions of Basel II has heightened concerns about home-host issues. We are committed to working with other international supervisors in resolving home-host issues. Indeed, the Federal Reserve and other U.S. agencies have, for many years, worked with international counterparts to limit the difficulty and burden that have arisen as foreign banks have entered U.S. markets and as U.S. banks have established operations in other jurisdictions. Throughout the Basel II process, we have been engaged in dialogue with our international counterparts through various avenues such as supervisory working colleges to share ideas and tackle specific issues as they arise. Some of these issues are very institution- and country-specific, and are therefore better addressed through individual conversations with an institution and their relevant supervisors. The Federal Reserve continues to be an active participant in supervisory working groups for all large U.S. and foreign banking organizations in the U.S. and we are encouraged by the level of cooperation and pragmatism coming out of these efforts. For example, supervisory planning efforts for U.S.-based banking organizations for the upcoming year are reviewed with foreign supervisory authorities to ensure that, regardless of Basel II timing issues, information pertaining to ongoing supervisory judgments of risk management practices is available. We have also been encouraged by the dialogue with our foreign colleagues regarding their desire to provide flexibility in transitional arrangements. I would add that we have benefited from the numerous meetings and exchanges we have had with groups such as yours to help us identify the most critical areas to examine for further convergence globally. We will be evaluating all of that input closely as a part of our rulemaking process. As always, we encourage bankers who have questions and concerns about home-host issues to communicate promptly with their regulators in all jurisdictions so that the issues can be addressed. Another key point, when talking about differences across countries, relates to findings from recent Basel II quantitative impact studies (QIS4 and QIS5). Interestingly, the two exercises identified a number of similar issues, some in areas in which institutions were not able to provide adequate data (especially for downturn scenarios). In the United States, QIS4 was conducted before the release of the Basel II NPR, while in Europe, QIS5 was conducted only after the passage of EU legislation implementing Basel II. Therefore, much of what was learned by U.S. supervisors in QIS4 is included in the NPR, such as the supervisory mapping function for downturn estimates of loss given default. European supervisors, on the other hand, did not have the benefit of information from QIS5 when they were drafting their rules. While I cannot speak for my European counterparts, no doubt some of the issues raised in QIS5 will be addressed during implementation in Europe. It is possible that differences in Basel II implementation may mean that the U.S. version of Basel II is in some aspects more conservative than other countries' versions. In other areas, the U.S. proposals may be less conservative. But, as I noted, national differences in capital regulation are not unique to the Basel II capital regime. Over the years, the U.S. agencies have consciously chosen to maintain a more conservative stance in some aspects of Basel I, as applied in the United States, compared with versions of Basel I adopted by other countries. For example, the U.S. banking agencies currently impose a supplemental leverage ratio, and risk-based capital is linked to our prompt-corrective-action framework. However, we do not believe that elements of conservatism in existing U.S. capital rules, relative to other countries' rules, have been a barrier to the financial success of our banks, nor have they constrained foreign banks from participating in our markets. On the contrary, we believe that capital strength and the resilience it demonstrates offer some competitive advantages and instill market confidence. That is a key reason that most of the world's largest banks hold capital in excess of minimum regulatory standards. Creditors and counterparties will always consider capitalization when assessing the risks associated with these banks. Indeed, many factors other than minimum regulatory capital requirements--including domestic and international tax policies, economies of scale and scope, risk-management skills, and the ability to innovate--also affect competition and profitability. On balance, the Federal Reserve believes that an appropriately conservative approach to capital adequacy serves the United States' interest in maintaining the safety, soundness, and resiliency of our banking system. However, we also recognize the impact that differences among countries can have and that it is worthwhile to minimize them whenever possible. As Chairman Bernanke noted earlier this fall, before issuing a final rule we intend to review all international differences to assess whether the benefits of rules specific to the United States outweigh the costs. Of course, that will include a review of whether U.S.-specific rules are having an adverse impact on the competitiveness of U.S. banks vis-à-vis foreign counterparts. ConclusionI believe that forums such as this one are very useful places to discuss actual and potential differences in capital requirements across countries. As supervisors, we must always strive to minimize these differences and reduce burden on bankers as they conduct business across national borders. However, bankers must also realize that national boundaries still matter, and that some differences in capital requirements across countries will remain. While there may be opportunities here and there to reduce burden through broad policy changes, generally the most productive way to address cross-border issues is on a case-by-case basis. In most cases, blanket assurances are neither feasible nor realistic. Therefore, I continue to encourage bankers to present issues to their supervisors so that the issues can be raised in bilateral or multilateral discussions of specific topics--the process by which issues have been addressed in the past.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of a final rule regarding consumer authorization requirements when a person, such as a merchant, seeks to electronically collect a fee for checks or other items that are returned unpaid. The final rule clarifies that the requirement to obtain the consumer's authorization applies to the person seeking to electronically collect the returned item fee. The rule contains additional provisions related to the consumer's authorization and the content of notices that must be given to the consumer. The amendments addressing the electronic collection of returned item fees are being made to Regulation E, which implements the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, and to the official staff commentary, which interprets the requirements of Regulation E. The effective date of the final rule is January 1, 2007, consistent with a previously issued January 2006 final rule; however, certain provisions regarding the content of notices that must be provided to consumers in point-of-sale transactions will have a delayed compliance date of January 1, 2008. In a separate action, the Board requested public comment on a proposed rule to except transactions of $15 or less from Regulation E's requirement that receipts be made available to consumers for transactions initiated at an electronic terminal. The proposed exception is intended to facilitate the ability of consumers to use debit cards in retail environments where the receipt requirement may not be practical or cost-effective. The Board requests comment on the proposed rule within sixty days after publication in the Federal Register. BothFederal Registernotices are attached. Final rule87 KB PDF|TEXTProposed rule72 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the proposal by Capital One Financial Corporation, McLean, Virginia, to acquire North Fork Bancorporation, Inc., Melville, and its subsidiaries, North Fork Bank, Mattituck, both of New York, and Superior Savings of New England, National Association, Branford, Connecticut. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the appointment of the chairmen and deputy chairmen of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks for 2007. Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors. The Board of Governors in Washington appoints three of these directors and each year designates one of its appointees as chairman and a second as deputy chairman. Following are the names of the chairmen and deputy chairmen appointed by the Board for 2007: BostonLisa M. Lynch, William L. Clayton Professor of International Economic Affairs, The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts, named Chairman. Henri A. Termeer, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Genzyme Corporation, Cambridge, Massachusetts, named Deputy Chairman.New YorkJerry I. Speyer, President and Chief Executive Officer, Tishman Speyer, New York, New York, named Chairman.Denis M. Hughes, President, New York State AFL-CIO, New York, New York, named Deputy Chairman.PhiladelphiaDoris M. Damm, President and Chief Executive Officer, ACCU Staffing Services, Cherry Hill, New Jersey, renamed Chairman.William F. Hecht, Retired Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, PPL Corporation, Allentown, Pennsylvania, renamed Deputy Chairman.ClevelandTanny B. Crane, President and Chief Executive Officer, Crane Group Company, Columbus, Ohio, named Chairman.Alfred M. Rankin, Jr., Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, NACCO Industries, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio, named Deputy Chairman.RichmondThomas J. Mackell, Jr., Warrenton, Virginia, renamed Chairman.Theresa M. Stone, President (retired), Lincoln Financial Media, Greensboro, North Carolina, renamed Deputy Chairman.AtlantaV. Larkin Martin, Managing Partner, Martin Farm, Courtland, Alabama, named Chairman.D. Scott Davis, Chief Financial Officer, United Parcel Service, Atlanta, Georgia, named Deputy Chairman.ChicagoMiles D. White, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Abbott, Abbott Park, Illinois, renamed Chairman.John A. Canning, Jr., Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Madison Dearborn Partners, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chairman.St. LouisIrl F. Engelhardt, Chairman, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Missouri, named Chairman.Cynthia J. Brinkley, President, AT&T Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chairman.MinneapolisFrank L. Sims, Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., Wayzata, Minnesota, renamed Chairman.James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. New YorkJerry I. Speyer, President and Chief Executive Officer, Tishman Speyer, New York, New York, named Chairman.Denis M. Hughes, President, New York State AFL-CIO, New York, New York, named Deputy Chairman.PhiladelphiaDoris M. Damm, President and Chief Executive Officer, ACCU Staffing Services, Cherry Hill, New Jersey, renamed Chairman.William F. Hecht, Retired Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, PPL Corporation, Allentown, Pennsylvania, renamed Deputy Chairman.ClevelandTanny B. Crane, President and Chief Executive Officer, Crane Group Company, Columbus, Ohio, named Chairman.Alfred M. Rankin, Jr., Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, NACCO Industries, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio, named Deputy Chairman.RichmondThomas J. Mackell, Jr., Warrenton, Virginia, renamed Chairman.Theresa M. Stone, President (retired), Lincoln Financial Media, Greensboro, North Carolina, renamed Deputy Chairman.AtlantaV. Larkin Martin, Managing Partner, Martin Farm, Courtland, Alabama, named Chairman.D. Scott Davis, Chief Financial Officer, United Parcel Service, Atlanta, Georgia, named Deputy Chairman.ChicagoMiles D. White, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Abbott, Abbott Park, Illinois, renamed Chairman.John A. Canning, Jr., Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Madison Dearborn Partners, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chairman.St. LouisIrl F. Engelhardt, Chairman, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Missouri, named Chairman.Cynthia J. Brinkley, President, AT&T Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chairman.MinneapolisFrank L. Sims, Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., Wayzata, Minnesota, renamed Chairman.James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. Denis M. Hughes, President, New York State AFL-CIO, New York, New York, named Deputy Chairman.PhiladelphiaDoris M. Damm, President and Chief Executive Officer, ACCU Staffing Services, Cherry Hill, New Jersey, renamed Chairman.William F. Hecht, Retired Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, PPL Corporation, Allentown, Pennsylvania, renamed Deputy Chairman.ClevelandTanny B. Crane, President and Chief Executive Officer, Crane Group Company, Columbus, Ohio, named Chairman.Alfred M. Rankin, Jr., Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, NACCO Industries, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio, named Deputy Chairman.RichmondThomas J. Mackell, Jr., Warrenton, Virginia, renamed Chairman.Theresa M. Stone, President (retired), Lincoln Financial Media, Greensboro, North Carolina, renamed Deputy Chairman.AtlantaV. Larkin Martin, Managing Partner, Martin Farm, Courtland, Alabama, named Chairman.D. Scott Davis, Chief Financial Officer, United Parcel Service, Atlanta, Georgia, named Deputy Chairman.ChicagoMiles D. White, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Abbott, Abbott Park, Illinois, renamed Chairman.John A. Canning, Jr., Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Madison Dearborn Partners, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chairman.St. LouisIrl F. Engelhardt, Chairman, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Missouri, named Chairman.Cynthia J. Brinkley, President, AT&T Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chairman.MinneapolisFrank L. Sims, Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., Wayzata, Minnesota, renamed Chairman.James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. PhiladelphiaDoris M. Damm, President and Chief Executive Officer, ACCU Staffing Services, Cherry Hill, New Jersey, renamed Chairman.William F. Hecht, Retired Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, PPL Corporation, Allentown, Pennsylvania, renamed Deputy Chairman.ClevelandTanny B. Crane, President and Chief Executive Officer, Crane Group Company, Columbus, Ohio, named Chairman.Alfred M. Rankin, Jr., Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, NACCO Industries, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio, named Deputy Chairman.RichmondThomas J. Mackell, Jr., Warrenton, Virginia, renamed Chairman.Theresa M. Stone, President (retired), Lincoln Financial Media, Greensboro, North Carolina, renamed Deputy Chairman.AtlantaV. Larkin Martin, Managing Partner, Martin Farm, Courtland, Alabama, named Chairman.D. Scott Davis, Chief Financial Officer, United Parcel Service, Atlanta, Georgia, named Deputy Chairman.ChicagoMiles D. White, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Abbott, Abbott Park, Illinois, renamed Chairman.John A. Canning, Jr., Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Madison Dearborn Partners, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chairman.St. LouisIrl F. Engelhardt, Chairman, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Missouri, named Chairman.Cynthia J. Brinkley, President, AT&T Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chairman.MinneapolisFrank L. Sims, Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., Wayzata, Minnesota, renamed Chairman.James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. William F. Hecht, Retired Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, PPL Corporation, Allentown, Pennsylvania, renamed Deputy Chairman.ClevelandTanny B. Crane, President and Chief Executive Officer, Crane Group Company, Columbus, Ohio, named Chairman.Alfred M. Rankin, Jr., Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, NACCO Industries, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio, named Deputy Chairman.RichmondThomas J. Mackell, Jr., Warrenton, Virginia, renamed Chairman.Theresa M. Stone, President (retired), Lincoln Financial Media, Greensboro, North Carolina, renamed Deputy Chairman.AtlantaV. Larkin Martin, Managing Partner, Martin Farm, Courtland, Alabama, named Chairman.D. Scott Davis, Chief Financial Officer, United Parcel Service, Atlanta, Georgia, named Deputy Chairman.ChicagoMiles D. White, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Abbott, Abbott Park, Illinois, renamed Chairman.John A. Canning, Jr., Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Madison Dearborn Partners, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chairman.St. LouisIrl F. Engelhardt, Chairman, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Missouri, named Chairman.Cynthia J. Brinkley, President, AT&T Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chairman.MinneapolisFrank L. Sims, Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., Wayzata, Minnesota, renamed Chairman.James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. ClevelandTanny B. Crane, President and Chief Executive Officer, Crane Group Company, Columbus, Ohio, named Chairman.Alfred M. Rankin, Jr., Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, NACCO Industries, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio, named Deputy Chairman.RichmondThomas J. Mackell, Jr., Warrenton, Virginia, renamed Chairman.Theresa M. Stone, President (retired), Lincoln Financial Media, Greensboro, North Carolina, renamed Deputy Chairman.AtlantaV. Larkin Martin, Managing Partner, Martin Farm, Courtland, Alabama, named Chairman.D. Scott Davis, Chief Financial Officer, United Parcel Service, Atlanta, Georgia, named Deputy Chairman.ChicagoMiles D. White, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Abbott, Abbott Park, Illinois, renamed Chairman.John A. Canning, Jr., Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Madison Dearborn Partners, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chairman.St. LouisIrl F. Engelhardt, Chairman, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Missouri, named Chairman.Cynthia J. Brinkley, President, AT&T Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chairman.MinneapolisFrank L. Sims, Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., Wayzata, Minnesota, renamed Chairman.James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. Alfred M. Rankin, Jr., Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, NACCO Industries, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio, named Deputy Chairman.RichmondThomas J. Mackell, Jr., Warrenton, Virginia, renamed Chairman.Theresa M. Stone, President (retired), Lincoln Financial Media, Greensboro, North Carolina, renamed Deputy Chairman.AtlantaV. Larkin Martin, Managing Partner, Martin Farm, Courtland, Alabama, named Chairman.D. Scott Davis, Chief Financial Officer, United Parcel Service, Atlanta, Georgia, named Deputy Chairman.ChicagoMiles D. White, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Abbott, Abbott Park, Illinois, renamed Chairman.John A. Canning, Jr., Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Madison Dearborn Partners, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chairman.St. LouisIrl F. Engelhardt, Chairman, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Missouri, named Chairman.Cynthia J. Brinkley, President, AT&T Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chairman.MinneapolisFrank L. Sims, Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., Wayzata, Minnesota, renamed Chairman.James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. RichmondThomas J. Mackell, Jr., Warrenton, Virginia, renamed Chairman.Theresa M. Stone, President (retired), Lincoln Financial Media, Greensboro, North Carolina, renamed Deputy Chairman.AtlantaV. Larkin Martin, Managing Partner, Martin Farm, Courtland, Alabama, named Chairman.D. Scott Davis, Chief Financial Officer, United Parcel Service, Atlanta, Georgia, named Deputy Chairman.ChicagoMiles D. White, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Abbott, Abbott Park, Illinois, renamed Chairman.John A. Canning, Jr., Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Madison Dearborn Partners, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chairman.St. LouisIrl F. Engelhardt, Chairman, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Missouri, named Chairman.Cynthia J. Brinkley, President, AT&T Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chairman.MinneapolisFrank L. Sims, Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., Wayzata, Minnesota, renamed Chairman.James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. Theresa M. Stone, President (retired), Lincoln Financial Media, Greensboro, North Carolina, renamed Deputy Chairman.AtlantaV. Larkin Martin, Managing Partner, Martin Farm, Courtland, Alabama, named Chairman.D. Scott Davis, Chief Financial Officer, United Parcel Service, Atlanta, Georgia, named Deputy Chairman.ChicagoMiles D. White, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Abbott, Abbott Park, Illinois, renamed Chairman.John A. Canning, Jr., Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Madison Dearborn Partners, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chairman.St. LouisIrl F. Engelhardt, Chairman, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Missouri, named Chairman.Cynthia J. Brinkley, President, AT&T Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chairman.MinneapolisFrank L. Sims, Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., Wayzata, Minnesota, renamed Chairman.James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. AtlantaV. Larkin Martin, Managing Partner, Martin Farm, Courtland, Alabama, named Chairman.D. Scott Davis, Chief Financial Officer, United Parcel Service, Atlanta, Georgia, named Deputy Chairman.ChicagoMiles D. White, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Abbott, Abbott Park, Illinois, renamed Chairman.John A. Canning, Jr., Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Madison Dearborn Partners, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chairman.St. LouisIrl F. Engelhardt, Chairman, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Missouri, named Chairman.Cynthia J. Brinkley, President, AT&T Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chairman.MinneapolisFrank L. Sims, Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., Wayzata, Minnesota, renamed Chairman.James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. D. Scott Davis, Chief Financial Officer, United Parcel Service, Atlanta, Georgia, named Deputy Chairman.ChicagoMiles D. White, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Abbott, Abbott Park, Illinois, renamed Chairman.John A. Canning, Jr., Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Madison Dearborn Partners, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chairman.St. LouisIrl F. Engelhardt, Chairman, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Missouri, named Chairman.Cynthia J. Brinkley, President, AT&T Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chairman.MinneapolisFrank L. Sims, Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., Wayzata, Minnesota, renamed Chairman.James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. ChicagoMiles D. White, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Abbott, Abbott Park, Illinois, renamed Chairman.John A. Canning, Jr., Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Madison Dearborn Partners, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chairman.St. LouisIrl F. Engelhardt, Chairman, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Missouri, named Chairman.Cynthia J. Brinkley, President, AT&T Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chairman.MinneapolisFrank L. Sims, Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., Wayzata, Minnesota, renamed Chairman.James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. John A. Canning, Jr., Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Madison Dearborn Partners, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chairman.St. LouisIrl F. Engelhardt, Chairman, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Missouri, named Chairman.Cynthia J. Brinkley, President, AT&T Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chairman.MinneapolisFrank L. Sims, Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., Wayzata, Minnesota, renamed Chairman.James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. St. LouisIrl F. Engelhardt, Chairman, Peabody Energy, St. Louis, Missouri, named Chairman.Cynthia J. Brinkley, President, AT&T Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chairman.MinneapolisFrank L. Sims, Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., Wayzata, Minnesota, renamed Chairman.James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. Cynthia J. Brinkley, President, AT&T Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chairman.MinneapolisFrank L. Sims, Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., Wayzata, Minnesota, renamed Chairman.James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. MinneapolisFrank L. Sims, Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., Wayzata, Minnesota, renamed Chairman.James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. James J. Hynes, Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service Association, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chairman.Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. Kansas CityRobert A. Funk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Express Personnel Services, International Headquarters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, renamed Chairman.Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. Lu M. Cordova, CEO, Corlund Industries and Chairman, CTEK Angels, Boulder, Colorado, renamed Deputy Chairman.DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. DallasJames T. Hackett, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas, named Chairman.Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. Anthony R. Chase, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chairman.San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. San FranciscoDavid K.Y. Tang, Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington, renamed Chairman.T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman. T. Gary Rogers, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chairman.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday approved fee schedules for Federal Reserve Bank payment services for depository institutions (priced services), effective January 2, 2007. Since the mid-1990s, there has been a national trend away from the use of checks and toward the use of more efficient electronic payment alternatives. In response, the Reserve Banks have undertaken a number of initiatives to improve operational efficiency and reduce costs, making significant changes to their payments infrastructure. In particular, the Reserve Banks have been adapting their physical check processing infrastructure, reducing the number of Federal Reserve check processing locations from forty-five in 2003 to twenty-two in 2006, and modernizing their check-processing platform. In addition, the Reserve Banks began modifying their product offerings to encourage depository institutions to move to a more electronic check- processing environment. As a result, the Reserve Banks project that they will recover 101.5 percent of all their priced services costs in 2007 and achieve full cost recovery for the third consecutive year. Overall, the price level for Federal Reserve priced services will increase about 1 percent in 2007. This increase reflects an approximately 6 percent rise in paper check service fees combined with a 0.1 percent increase in fees for the Reserve Banks' electronic payment services. In 2007, the Reserve Banks will continue to encourage the movement to a more electronic check-processing environment by offering depository institutions incentives to receive their checks electronically through Check 21 and by lowering the price on Check 21 deposits destined to electronic recipients by 12.5 percent. The 2007 fee schedule for each of the priced services, except the check service, is included in the attached Federal Register notice. Fee schedules for all priced services are available on the Federal Reserve Banks' financial services web site athttp://www.frbservices.org/. From 1996 to 2005, the Reserve Banks recovered 98.4 percent of priced services costs, including operating costs, imputed costs, and targeted return on equity (or net income). Net income during this ten-year period totaled about $700 million. The Reserve Banks estimate that they will recover 108.2 percent of their priced services costs in 2006 before recognizing the effects of a standard recently issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board on employers' accounting for defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans (FAS 158). Recognizing the deferred benefit plan losses on the balance sheet, as required by FAS 158, will reduce cost recovery in 2006 to an estimated 77.2 percent. The deferred items could be significant gains or losses in any given year; therefore, recognizing them could cause cost recovery to vary significantly above or below 100 percent. To avoid volatility in priced-services fees, the Reserve Banks will not consider the deferred gains or losses when they set prices each year. The Reserve Banks will, however, continue to factor such gains or losses into the fee-setting process to the extent that they are recognized in expenses through the systematic approach required by generally accepted accounting principles. Furthermore, in light of the recent adoption of FAS 158, the Board plans to continue to study how incorporating FAS 158 affects our assessment of the Federal Reserve's compliance with the Monetary Control Act's long-run cost recovery requirement. In addition, the Board approved the 2007 private-sector adjustment factor (PSAF) for Reserve Bank priced services of $132.5 million. The PSAF is an allowance for income taxes and other imputed expenses that would have to be paid and profits that would have to be earned if the Reserve Banks' priced services were provided by a private business. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires that the Federal Reserve establish fees to recover the costs of providing priced services, including the PSAF, over the long run, to promote competition between the Reserve Banks and private-sector service providers. The Board's notice is attached. Attachment (143 KB PDF)|Screen reader version
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Opportunity Finance Network’s Annual Conference, Washington, D.C. Good afternoon and thank you for inviting me to speak to your annual conference. Since I assumed my new responsibilities earlier this year, as well as during my earlier stint at the Federal Reserve as a member of the Board of Governors, I have met numerous times with community development leaders to discuss both their achievements and the challenges they face. In visiting some underserved communities, I have seen first-hand the effects of various development initiatives. I have also regularly attended the meetings of the Board’s Consumer Advisory Council, which brings together community representatives and lenders to discuss a range of consumer and community development issues. These experiences have helped me appreciate the many ways that community development financial institutions (CDFIs) work to strengthen communities and improve the lives of lower-income people. Ensuring that every American has the chance to improve his or her economic circumstances through hard work, saving, entrepreneurship, and other productive activities is essential for building healthy communities and achieving sustainable economic growth. The Federal Reserve and the CDFI community share a common interest in increasing economic opportunity for all Americans. The Federal Reserve supports local economic development, for example, through its active engagement in financial literacy programs, through its community outreach efforts, through aspects of its role in regulating banking and financial markets, and by its research in regional economics. But the Fed’s central mission--to help maintain a financial and macroeconomic environment that fosters price stability and maximum sustainable employment--is of necessity focused on the economic performance of the nation as a whole. Monetary policy is a blunt tool that cannot target industries, population groups, or regions. In contrast, as you know, CDFIs operate primarily at the microeconomic level, community by community. Using techniques such as financial counseling, local market research, and specialized lending, CDFIs work with partners in both the public and the private sectors to help unlock the economic potential of lower-income and underserved communities. The theme of my remarks today is our shared goal of increasing economic opportunity. I will first discuss some of the progress that has been made in recent years in the economic situations of lower-income households and communities as well as some of the important challenges that remain. I will also offer my perspective on how CDFIs and their partners can help to meet those challenges. Improvements in Economic Opportunity and Some ChallengesIn the past decade or so, U.S. households overall have experienced notable gains in terms of some key indicators of economic opportunity. Three such indicators that I will briefly discuss are access to credit, rates of homeownership, and small business development. Moreover, as measured by these indicators, recent improvements in traditionally underserved markets appear to have been as great as or greater than those in middle- and upper-income households and communities. At the same time, however, the gaps between lower-income households and other households with respect to these measures of opportunity remain wide. Access to CreditAccess to credit is an important element of economic opportunity and community economic development: It supports homeownership and small-business creation and provides greater financial flexibility for households. In recent years, advances in information and communication technologies, improved methods of risk measurement and risk assessment, the availability of more-comprehensive information about individuals’ credit histories, and an increased ability of retail lenders to obtain funds from capital markets have led to what has been called the “democratization” of credit. As the pricing of credit risk has become more sophisticated and more consistent, as scale economies have reduced costs, and as funding sources have increased, lenders have been able to extend credit to households and businesses that might previously have been considered uncreditworthy. The growth of subprime mortgage lending is one indication of the extent to which access to credit has increased for all households, including those with lower incomes. In 1994, fewer than 5 percent of mortgage originations were in the subprime market, but by 2005 about 20 percent of new mortgage loans were subprime.1Indeed, the expansion of subprime lending has contributed importantly to the substantial increase in the overall use of mortgage credit. From 1995 to 2004, the share of households with mortgage debt increased 17 percent, and in the lowest income quintile, the share of households with mortgage debt rose 53 percent.2 Although the emergence of risk-based pricing has increased access to credit for all households, it has also raised some concerns and questions, which are magnified in the case of lower-income borrowers. For example, although subprime lending has grown substantially, are prime credit products sufficiently available and do lenders effectively compete in all communities, including historically underserved communities? How well are lower-income borrowers matched with credit products and loan terms that fit their circumstances? Are borrowers aware of the terms and conditions of their loans, and more generally, are consumers sufficiently well informed to be wary of potentially misleading marketing tactics and to shop effectively among lenders? Some evidence, including recent Federal Reserve research on consumers holding adjustable-rate mortgages, suggests that awareness could be improved, particularly among borrowers with lower incomes and education levels.3This research suggests the need for greater financial literacy and increased access to financial counseling, a point to which I will return. The release this year and last of mortgage price data gathered under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) has highlighted a different, but potentially related, concern about access to credit on equal terms. The data show that blacks and Hispanics are considerably more likely than other borrowers to receive higher-priced loans.4This finding has several possible--and not mutually exclusive--explanations, ranging from illegal discrimination to the effects of legitimate pricing factors not captured in the HMDA data, such as loan-to-value ratios and borrower credit history. Of course, as an agency committed to the rigorous enforcement of the fair lending laws, our job is to distinguish legitimate from illegitimate sources of pricing differentials among the banking institutions we supervise. In our enforcement efforts, we analyze the HMDA price disparities in conjunction with other information, such as the adequacy of the lender’s fair lending controls and the presence of business practices that may put lenders at risk for pricing discrimination. For example, a lender might offer its loan officers financial incentives that have the effect of inducing them to charge some applicants higher interest rates or to “steer” them to higher-priced loan products. Lenders at risk for pricing discrimination receive targeted reviews of their pricing to ensure that they are complying with fair lending laws. Loan price disparities, however, are not just a legal and supervisory issue. They also raise important social and policy concerns. The questions I raised earlier about access to prime products, lender competition, and borrower awareness and financial literacy may well be relevant to understanding the price disparities we observe. Further research to explore these questions and their possible connection to disparities in lending to members of minority groups would be highly worthwhile. In fact, the Federal Reserve’s upcoming Community Affairs Research Conference will feature several papers that explore these issues.5 HomeownershipThe important issue of loan pricing aside, expanded access to mortgage credit has helped fuel substantial growth in homeownership. The national rate of homeownership increased from 1995 through mid-2006, reaching nearly 69 percent of all households this year.6All major racial and ethnic groups have made gains in homeownership, but in percentage terms the largest increases have been made by minority households. In particular, since 1995 the homeownership rate has increased 7 percent among white households, 11 percent among black households, and 19 percent among Hispanic households. However, despite the relatively more rapid growth in minority homeownership, significant differences persist: For example, the homeownership rate for blacks and Hispanics remains about two-thirds the rate for non-Hispanic whites. As for homeownership in lower-income areas, the Federal Reserve’s Survey of Consumer Finances indicates that, from 1995 to 2004, census tracts in all income groupings experienced gains in homeownership, with rates in lower-income areas growing somewhat faster than those in higher-income areas.7But, again, important gaps remain. For example, in 2004, the rate of homeownership in lower-income areas was roughly 47 percent, compared to 72 percent in middle-income areas. Small BusinessesAnother area in which progress has been made both generally and in lower-income communities is small business development. Small businesses are essential to the economic well-being and vibrancy of local communities and of the U.S. economy as a whole. The U.S. Small Business Administration estimates that small businesses account for about half of private-sector output and employ more than half of private-sector workers.8Moreover, because small businesses sometimes become big ones, small-business ownership can be a significant stepping stone for economic advancement, particularly in traditionally underserved populations. Between 1997 and 2002, the number of businesses owned by Asians, blacks, Hispanics, and women grew more than 20 percent for each group--more than twice the national rate of increase for all businesses.9Nevertheless, small businesses face continual challenges. Each year, about half a million firms close, in some cases because of difficulties obtaining credit.10Interestingly, the data do not indicate that experiences in obtaining credit differ greatly across neighborhoods of different income levels. According to the Federal Reserve’s Survey of Small Business Finances, for example, the proportions of businesses that were either denied credit or did not apply for fear of being turned down were similar across neighborhood income groups.11 CDFIs as a Solution to Market FailuresMany factors have contributed to the economic gains that I have cited, including broad macroeconomic forces and advances in the delivery of financial services. CDFIs have also played a valuable role by analyzing the economic potential of lower-income markets and developing strategies and marshaling resources to tap that potential. As CDFI leaders, you are keenly aware of the economic challenges that you work to overcome each day. Economists find it useful to think about these challenges in the context of the economics of market failure. Standard economic analysis tells us that when competitive conditions prevail in a market, the resulting prices induce firms and individuals to allocate resources in a manner that tends to maximize social welfare.12However, economists also recognize that various deviations from idealized market conditions, termed market failures, can inhibit the efficient allocation of resources.13In one type of market failure, called a neighborhood externality, the actions of one person affect the well-being or economic welfare of others in the local area, but the individual taking the action neither bears the full costs of nor reaps the full benefits from those actions. Because the individual does not bear the full consequences of the actions taken, he or she may act in a way that is not in the best economic interest of the neighborhood as a whole. For example, the failure of some owners to maintain their properties can lower the value of well-maintained properties in the same neighborhood. Ultimately, such spillover effects from neglected properties can lead to underinvestment in the whole community, potentially harming all neighborhood residents and businesses. A related type of market failure studied by economists is known as an information externality. An information externality may arise when information about economic opportunities in an area has the potential to benefit many investors but is costly to gather. As a result, no single potential investor may find obtaining the data to be profitable. For example, on average, lower-income areas have fewer owner-occupied homes and record fewer home-purchase loans than higher-income areas do.14Lower transaction activity makes accurately gauging property values and evaluating credit risks in those areas more difficult, which may inhibit the extension of credit.15Alternatively, lower-income people may have shorter and more-irregular credit histories, making an evaluation of their individual creditworthiness more difficult and costly. Because a potential investor who bears the costs of obtaining data about underserved neighborhoods may be able to obtain only a portion of the full economic benefits, these data may remain uncollected.16 One purpose of CDFIs is to help overcome these and other market failures that inhibit local economic development. For example, by facilitating larger-scale property development projects, coordinating public and private investment efforts, and working to improve amenities and services in a local area, CDFIs may help to solve collective action problems and reduce neighborhood externalities. CDFIs can counter information externalities by assuming the cost of learning about their local communities and developing specialized financial products and services that better fit local needs. In general, CDFIs provide coordinated development activities and community-specific information that the market may not supply on its own. Among other benefits, the familiarity with each community that CDFIs develop can help to gauge and control risk.17For example, the use by CDFIs of appraisers who specialize in evaluating properties in a particular community produces more-reliable estimates of the value of the loan collateral. Likewise, CDFIs structure loans and use public and private credit enhancements both to increase borrowers’ ability to qualify for loans and to spread the associated credit risk among a mix of private creditors and other providers of funds. Although these specialized techniques can reduce credit risk, they are labor-intensive and, consequently, expensive. Most private lending institutions reduce costs by adopting processes that are highly standardized and automated. Such systems are not necessarily compatible with lending to borrowers who require substantial screening, counseling, and monitoring or with acquiring specialized information about community development lending. Part of the explicit mission of CDFIs is to assume the costs of conducting such research and analyses in underserved communities. CDFIs have also developed techniques and strategies--such as flexible underwriting criteria, specialized loan products, and intensive financial education programs--to meet the financial circumstances of their communities. Moreover, in recent years, CDFIs have been working to expand their role as information brokers beyond the local communities they serve. Through national initiatives to collect industry-wide data and to securitize community development loan portfolios, CDFIs are working to expand access to credit and capital in lower-income markets. In short, knowledge and expertise--together with the ability to build new relationships--are the principal contributions that CDFIs bring to the marketplace and to underserved communities. Is Community Development Lending Profitable?Can private-market participants profit from community development lending? Data based on Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) examinations tell us much about the volume of such loans but less about their performance and profitability. However, a Federal Reserve survey found that nearly all banks reported that their community development activities were profitable, at least to some degree.18About two-thirds of the banks also reported receiving some benefit from their lending unrelated to loan profitability, such as an improved image in the community. Since the Federal Reserve report, studies undertaken by the CDFI Data Project show that, for 2004, charge-off rates for CDFI portfolios were similar to those for the banking industry as a whole.19These studies and market data suggest that banks and other private organizations may become an increasingly significant source of competition for CDFIs. That is good news, not bad news. Indeed, the surest sign of a CDFI’s success is that private investors see viable investment opportunities in the neighborhoods in which the CDFI has been operating. The Continuing Relevance of CDFIsAlthough in some sense the mission of CDFIs is to make themselves unnecessary, I expect that the knowledge and good will that they have accumulated in local communities will continue to make them relevant. For example, I mentioned earlier the loan pricing disadvantages faced by members of minority groups that have appeared in the HMDA data. CDFIs may be able to help reduce those discrepancies by using their local knowledge and financial expertise to offer alternatives to conventional subprime lending. The Opportunity Finance Network, for instance, will be competing with subprime lenders via a mortgage-credit platform that centralizes some CDFI lending processes and directly links counseling and lending services. At the same time, CDFIs continue to expand their ability to attract private investment funds, for example, through increasing transparency and developing the means of providing objective evaluations of their financial and mission-related effectiveness. These efforts demonstrate the ability of CDFIs to adapt their business strategies to evolving markets, as indeed they have done throughout their thirty-year history. I expect that the local knowledge and specialized financial expertise that CDFIs provide will continue to add significant economic value and complement market forces in the support of community economic development. Thus, CDFIs are likely to contribute to our shared goal of expanding economic opportunity for many years to come. Footnotes 1.Estimates are based on information from Inside Mortgage Finance Publications (2005 and earlier years),Mortgage Market Statistical Annual(Bethesda, Md.: IMFP),www.imfpubs.comReturn to text 2.Calculations by Federal Reserve Board staff from the Federal Reserve Board’s Survey of Consumer Finances, 1995 and 2004. Further information on the Survey of Consumer Finances is in Arthur B. Kennickell, Martha Starr-McCluer, and Annika E. Sunden (1997),“Family Finances in the U.S.: Recent Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances,”Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 83 (January), pp. 1-24; and Brian K. Bucks, Arthur B. Kennickell, and Kevin B. Moore (2006),“Recent Changes in U.S. Family Finances: Evidence from the 2001 and 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances,” (444 KB PDF)Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 91 (Winter), pp. A1-A38, www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2006/financesurvey.pdf.Return to text 3.Brian Bucks and Karen Pence (2006),“Do Homeowners Know Their House Values and Mortgage Terms,”Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2006-03 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March).Return to text 4.Robert B. Avery, Kenneth P. Brevoort, and Glenn B. Canner (2006), “Higher-Priced Home Lending and the 2005 HMDA Data,”Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 92 (September),www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2006/hmda/bull06hmda.pdf (580 KB PDF).Return to text 5.Federal Reserve System Community Affairs Research Conference, “Financing Community Development: Learning from the Past, Looking to the Future”, March 29-30, 2007,http://www.philadelphiafed.org/econ/conf/financingcd/callforpapers-ca-research2007.pdf.Return to text 6.www.huduser.org/periodicals/ushmc.htmlReturn to text 7.Calculations by Federal Reserve Board staff from the Federal Reserve Board’s Survey of Consumer Finances, 1995 and 2004,www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/oss/oss2/scfindex.html.Return to text 8.U.S. Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy,www.sba.gov/advo/stats/sbfaq.pdf (91 KB PDF).Return to text 9.U.S. Census Bureau, Survey of Business Owners,www.census.gov/csd/sbo/.Return to text 10.U.S. Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy,www.sba.gov/advo/stats/sbfaq.pdf (91 KB PDF).Return to text 11.Calculations by Federal Reserve staff from the Federal Reserve Board’s 2003 Survey of Small Business Finances. For further information, seewww.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2006/smallbusiness/smallbusiness.pdf (178 KB PDF).Return to text 12.Kenneth J. Arrow (1951), “An Extension of the Basic Theorems of Classical Welfare Economics,” in J. Neyman (ed.),Proceedings of the Second Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press), pp. 507-32.Return to text 13.Paul Milgrom and John Roberts (1992),Economics, Organization, and Management(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall).Return to text 14.The decennial census and annual HMDA data indicate, for example, that the average number of owner-occupied properties and home purchase loans in lower-income areas is less than half the average number in higher-income areas.Return to text 15.This argument is developed in detail in William W. Lang and Leonard I. Nakamura (1993),“A Model of Redlining,”Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 33 (March), pp. 223-34.Return to text 16.A detailed model of this phenomenon is in William C. Gruben, Jonathan A. Neuberger, and Ronald H. Schmidt (1990),“Imperfect Information and the Community Reinvestment Act,” (2.7 MB PDF)Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,Economic Review, vol. 3 (Summer), pp. 27-46.Return to text 17.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1993),Report to the Congress on Community Development Lending by Depository Institutions(Washington: Board of Governors, October).Return to text 18.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2000),The Performance and Profitability of CRA-Related Lending, Report to the Congress submitted pursuant to section 713 of the Gramm-Leach Bliley Act of 1999 (Washington: Board of Governors, July),www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/surveys/craloansurvey/default.htm.Return to text 19.CDFI Coalition, CDFI Data Project, 2004,www.cdfi.org/cdfiproj.asp#fy; and Elizabeth C. Klee and Gretchen C. Weinbach (2006), “Profit and Balance Sheet Developments at U.S. Commercial Banks in 2005,”Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 92 (June)www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2006/bankprofits/0606bankprofit.pdf (221 KB PDF).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced an extension of the comment period on a consultation paper that is intended to help the Board obtain broader information on intraday liquidity management issues and to lay the groundwork for discussions about the long-term evolution of its Payment System Risk (PSR) Policy. The comment period will be extended for ninety days to March 15, 2007. The extension is granted to give the public additional time to comment on the consultation paper. The consultation paper seeks information from the financial industry and other interested parties on their experience in managing intraday liquidity, credit, and operational risks associated with Fedwire funds transfers and associated transactions, especially late-day transfers. In particular, the paper requests views on potential changes in market practices, depository institution and Federal Reserve Bank operations, and the Board’s PSR Policy that could reduce one or more of these risks, while maintaining or improving the efficiency of the payments system over the long run. The Board's Federal Register notice is attached.
Governor Kevin Warsh At the New York Stock Exchange, New York, New York Thank you for inviting me to speak about the role of financial markets and market discipline in Federal Reserve policymaking. As chief financial officers and business leaders, you work assiduously to incorporate real-time information about your companies--and about the competitive and economic landscape--into your decisionmaking. Similarly, financial market participants quickly assimilate publicly available information to help judge the market clearing price for securities that you issue. Indeed, this process is what makes the venue for today's discussion--the New York Stock Exchange, home of the world's deepest equities market--so appropriate. The NYSE provides a platform for real-time, information-rich assessments of leading global companies, incorporating both an evaluation of the overall economic outlook and firm-specific considerations. It is also fitting to be speaking today before members of the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, who trade in these markets daily. The Federal Reserve, too, relies on multiple sources of data to help achieve our dual mandate: ensuring price stability and achieving maximum employment. Some of the data upon which we draw--statistical indicators of activity and prices in the real economy--tend to be backward-looking and subject to considerable revision. Other information we use is drawn from financial market prices; although subject to rapid change and "noisy" market signals, this information can be considerably more timely and forward looking. In its role as a bank regulator and supervisor, the Federal Reserve also often looks to market prices to help assess the safety and soundness of financial institutions. Today, I will discuss the role of financial markets in effective monetary, regulatory, and supervisory policy making by the Federal Reserve. In particular, I will discuss the potential for markets to inform the Fed's policy judgments--even as our policies also affect markets. I will also describe the important role of markets in disciplining private entities. Of course, the views I will express are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1 My remarks will cover three points. First, financial markets can inform and, in some cases, complement the actions of the Federal Reserve by providing timely information about the outlook for economic activity, inflation, and the health of individual financial institutions. Second, the Federal Reserve confronts many challenges when trying to extract relevant information from financial market prices--not least because these prices reflect the market's interpretation of our outlook as well as its independent assessments. Third, the market's disciplining of private entities is an important complement to the Federal Reserve's supervisory and regulatory functions, and the Fed can enhance market discipline by improving the flow of information from these regulated entities to the markets. I will begin with a discussion of how markets, in my judgment, inform the monetary policy process, and then turn to the role of markets in the supervisory and regulatory process. Financial Markets and Monetary PolicyMarkets affect monetary policy predominantly through the information provided by asset prices. The available menu of prices is extensive, including those of Treasury securities (nominal and real), corporate debt, equities, and derivatives. These prices embed investors' expectations of the future paths of economic growth, inflation, and financial conditions. At least as important, these prices also can provide some insight into the uncertainty surrounding likely outcomes. Monetary policy makers can use economic models and statistical techniques to extract the views of market participants about these key macroeconomic variables. Let me cite a few simple examples of how we interpret asset prices. Through open market operations, the FOMC sets the target federal funds rate, which is the overnight rate at which depositories lend to each other the balances they hold at the Federal Reserve. Interest rates for periods extending beyond that very short horizon, however, are established by market participants rather than the FOMC, although members of the Committee may be able to influence these longer-term rates somewhat through what is affectionately described as "open mouth operations." In this way, market-based interest rates reflect primarily the path investors expect for monetary policy. That expected path is of keen interest to us as policymakers. The market's view of very near term policy is reflected in futures contracts on federal funds. Futures on Eurodollars provide information on expectations for the period beyond the next six months or so. For longer time horizons, investors' views can be determined from yields on medium- and long-term Treasury securities. This determination is based on two estimates incorporated in the yield on a nominal Treasury security, such as the ten-year note. The first estimate is essentially a weighted average of the current one-year rate and a sequence of forward rates that contain information about the one-year spot rates expected to prevail over the next nine years. The second estimate is the term premium at each horizon, or the compensation investors require for holding securities an additional period. As might be expected, imprecision about our estimates of these pieces may well increase with the forecast horizon. Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS) are financial market assets that provide a judgment on forward-looking views about inflation. The gap between nominal Treasury yields and yields on TIPS of comparable maturities is called the breakeven inflation rate. The breakeven rate incorporates the market's expectation of inflation and the risk premium for uncertainty about these expectations. It also reflects liquidity differences between the two types of securities, which now are smaller than during the period immediately after TIPS were introduced in 1997. Today, breakeven rates implied by forward prices on TIPS indicate longer-run consumer price index inflation compensation of about 2-1/2 percent, in the middle of the range of the past several years. This is an example of information that may provide monetary policy makers with a reasonable source of market insight and may importantly complement an inflation outlook developed from economic models, survey responses, and other sources. Properly measuring inflation expectations is critically important to the Fed in its formulation of policy. Markets for corporate equity and debt represent other important sources of information for the Fed. In addition to providing expected interest rates and inflation rates, equity prices incorporate investors' views about the growth of corporate earnings. Corporate bond prices embed expected default and recovery risks. Moreover, derivatives prices can provide other valuable information, and we can learn much by understanding the linkages between primary and derivatives markets. Let me underscore the role of market signals by discussing monetary policy in the current economic environment. Recent aggregate data indicate that overall economic activity slowed noticeably during the first nine months of the year. In spite of a series of shocks, the economy has proven to be remarkably resilient in recent years, and I expect it to remain so in the period ahead. A sharp pullback in the housing markets is likely to restrain aggregate activity as we move into next year. But as housing markets stabilize, I would expect overall economic performance to strengthen from the levels indicated by preliminary estimates of gross domestic product in the third quarter to a pace more consistent with the economy's long-term trend growth rate. Inflation, though down somewhat from its level earlier this year, remains uncomfortably elevated. Financial market prices imply that inflation will continue its gradual but persistent downward track during the forecast period. There remain, I believe, clear upside risks to that inflation outlook. Prices on federal funds futures and Eurodollar futures suggest that market participants expect the FOMC to cut the target federal funds rate about 50 basis points during 2007, a view consistent with expectations of a "soft landing." At the same time, market-based options prices on these interest rate futures indicate that implied volatilities are quite low, suggesting a surprising degree of certainty regarding policy expectations. Taken at face value, market participants appear to be reasonably certain of a benign outcome for both economic growth and inflation. In contrast, my own judgmental forecast includes a wider range of possible outcomes than is implicit in these market-based measures. I am a strong advocate of incorporating forward-looking information from asset prices into the Fed's decision process, but we should not take market readings as determinative of policy. While we should look to financial markets for information, just as market participants look to the Fed for its policymaking views, distilling conclusions from markets is an imprecise exercise. Why can't market prices be more assuredly relied upon? Asset prices contain term premiums, credit risk premiums, and liquidity premiums that vary over time and are themselves related to market expectations and uncertainty. Consequently, it can be difficult to determine whether movements in asset prices reflect a change in expectations, in uncertainty, or in some combination of premiums. As an example, consider the changes in Treasury yields since the FOMC initiated the most recent tightening cycle. From mid-2004 to today, the period during which the FOMC raised the target federal funds rate from 1 percent to 5-1/4 percent, the ten-year rate has scarcely changed, on net, and now stands not much above 4-1/2 percent. Whether this configuration is a result of changes in expected rates or term premiums is an important issue for policymakers. Alternative explanations have markedly different implications for policy. If these changes reflect increased strength in underlying demand for longer-term Treasury securities, including from emerging economies, the decline should be reflected in a decline in term premiums. In such a case, all else equal, a tighter monetary policy might be preferred. On the other hand, if the decline reflects investors' views of a weaker path for the economy--the more typical interpretation of a flat or inverted yield curve--policymakers might prefer a more accommodative monetary policy.Given the complexity of the signal-extraction problem, we should approach our task with considerable humility. We recognize that financial assets prices reflect the collective views of market participants. They may reflect not only changes in expected paths and uncertainty about those paths but also shifting relationships, changes in investor risk preferences, and developments in the structure of various securities markets. Thus, we use market prices alongside many other economic indicators, including statistical releases and large amounts of qualitative evidence.We can enhance the role of markets by improving the availability of high-quality data for example, about corporate financial conditions and by working to improve our ability to extract signals from market data. The most significant challenge in this setting is, however, perhaps endemic to the task: Our own policies and actions affect market prices. As a result, when we look to financial markets for information, the information we seek may be shaped in part by our own views. The more that "market information" reflects our own actions, the less it is useful as a source of independent information to inform our policy judgments.We need to be alert to this "mirror problem," in which markets can cease to provide independent information on current and prospective financial and economic developments. In the extreme case, financial markets keenly follow the Federal Reserve, the Federal Reserve is equally attuned to the latest financial quotes, and fundamentals of the economy are obscured. Under such circumstances, asset prices might teach us only about our skills as communicators. Fortunately, the prospect for profits--the critical underpinning of all markets--mitigates this problem. Investors have strong financial incentives to analyze information about inflation and the macroeconomy to better predict the path of monetary policy. After all, Fed communications and forecasts are fallible. The anticipated dispersion of investors' views implies a distribution of returns with substantial rewards for those who get it right.Market-based information is surely important in determining good monetary policy. This does not mean, however, that the Fed's goal is to align its views with those of the markets or that it wants the markets' views to match its own. Instead, policymakers benefit greatly by listening to views expressed in markets that are at least somewhat independent of FOMC communications. We can further enhance the role of markets by enriching our understanding of the interplay between communication policies of central banks and market prices. Good communication by the Fed should help members of the FOMC interpret market prices. Unnecessary market uncertainty or misinterpretation of our assessments will only muddy the waters.Financial Markets and Financial Supervision and RegulationIn addition to making monetary policy decisions, the Federal Reserve maintains supervisory and regulatory authority over a wide range of financial institutions and activities. The Fed supervises and regulates banks and bank holding companies that together control about 96 percent of commercial banking assets in the United States.Let us consider the role of market discipline in financial supervision and regulation. First, market prices provide an independent assessment of the current and prospective financial condition of large financial firms. Second, markets can discipline the behavior of firms by adjusting the concomitant funding costs of firms as risks change.Market discipline, however, may not always be fully effective in this context. The development of the federal safety net--deposit insurance, the discount window, and access to Fedwire and daylight overdrafts--has inevitably impeded the workings of market discipline in the regulatory arena. That is, the various elements of the safety net provide depository institutions and financial market participants with a level of safety, liquidity, and solvency that was far less prevalent before the advent of the Federal Reserve and the subsequent establishment of federal deposit insurance. By deterring liquidity panics, the safety net shields the overall economy from some of the worst effects of instability in the financial system. These benefits, however, are not without costs. The prospect of government intervention distorts market prices and may also engender excessive risk-taking.The Federal Reserve works to reduce these distortions by enhancing market discipline and limiting expectations of government intervention. Market discipline can improve financial stability by aligning risks and rewards more closely. When risks are both known and measured, they are reflected in asset prices. To this end, bank regulators must continue to strive to develop risk-based capital measures that better reflect underlying risks. At least as important as getting capital levels right, however, are new capital frameworks to provide financial markets with better information on risk-taking by banks. In particular, by leading the development of new capital adequacy regimes, the Fed is actively working to improve the flow of information about financial institutions to market participants.2As a consequence of improved flows of information, market participants can better evaluate risks, price securities, and impose their own discipline on firms. These capital and disclosure reforms are aimed at improving the standardization of risk metrics and providing financial markets with meaningful disclosures for risk. Market forces can thus strengthen the incentives for banks to behave more as they would if there were no safety net at all.For market discipline to work optimally, securities prices for the largest financial firms should reflect investor evaluations of financial risks--credit, market, and operational. Securities prices informed in this way should translate into higher funding costs when greater risks are undertaken, facilitate the appropriate level of monitoring for the effective management of counterparty risk, and help bank supervisors judge the financial condition of firms.Asset prices, however, will reflect risks only if uninsured creditors perceive that they are at risk of loss. Thus, investors should understand that the resolution procedure for bank failures does not require that all uninsured creditors be made whole. Rather, resolution requires only that uninsured creditors be made no worse off than they would have been if the bank had been liquidated in the marketplace. The ten largest U.S. banking organizations fund less than half their worldwide banking assets with deposits--insured, uninsured, and foreign. Thus, the role for market discipline is substantial: Uninsured creditors must do their own homework because protecting them is not the bank supervisor's job.Prices for financial firms are not "pure plays" on their expected financial conditions. Rather, the prices also incorporate the value of expected supervisory and regulatory actions should their financial condition deteriorate. These perceptions and levels of government guarantee vary substantially across firms. For example, the corrective actions used by bank supervisors to deal with undercapitalized banks are intended to encourage market discipline and to deter the expectation of regulatory forbearance. In addition, encouraging the issuance of financial market instruments, such as subordinated debt, can provide an important antidote to conjectures of government guarantees and to the misperception that some institutions are "too big to fail." The threat of prohibited payments on the subordinated debt of an institution that becomes undercapitalized should be useful in ensuring vigilance by debt investors. As a result, capital adequacy becomes not the job solely of the regulator, but of market participants as well.The Federal Reserve also works to enhance the role of market discipline in the broader financial system. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is working with dealers to improve the settlement and clearing practices of the credit derivatives industry. Reliable recordkeeping is crucial in times of stability; otherwise, it will not be available in times of distress. The Federal Reserve has also highlighted the systemic risks associated with the large portfolios of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. The inherent lack of counterparty discipline is a significant problem associated with the regulation of these government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs). Currently, this lack of market discipline, which is a consequence of conjectural federal government guarantees, is self-perpetuating: It has engendered a cost of capital for the GSEs that is nearly comparable to that of the federal government. It should be no surprise, then, that the GSE portfolios have grown dramatically since the early 1990s. Their growth rates have subsided more recently in light of recent accounting, regulatory, and governance problems, but without significant improvements in market discipline, it is likely that the rapid growth of GSE portfolios will resume.Market information is not a panacea in the formulation of monetary policy and, likewise, it is not one in the context of supervision and regulation. First, market information is unavailable for many banks, often because they issue public debt only infrequently. Second, market discipline for banks is somewhat dependent on the Federal Reserve's policies and actions, and thus it has a "mirror problem" of its own. That is, through a "certification effect," bank supervision can potentially create significant moral hazard in that investors may believe that governmental regulation supersedes their need to assess the firms' financial condition. Third, the objectives of financial markets and the Federal Reserve are not perfectly aligned. For example, equity holders of a failing institution may have an incentive to "bet the bank" and thereby maximize the value of the put option the institution believes it holds from the deposit insurer.The onus continues to rest with the Federal Reserve and other financial regulators to harness the forces of market discipline as a necessary complement to more traditional modes of supervision and regulation.ConclusionIn summary, markets inform and, in some cases, complement the monetary, supervisory, and regulatory actions of the Federal Reserve. As I hope that I have made clear, the interaction of market signals and policy is neither simple nor straightforward. You watch us and react to our actions, while simultaneously we monitor you and respond as best we can to the signals you provide about evolving economic and financial conditions. To do our part in preventing the signals from getting crossed, I believe that we at the Federal Reserve should continue our efforts to make our communications and intentions as clear as possible. That may be a tall order, but it is one worthy of our efforts.Footnotes1.Nellie Liang, Wayne Passmore,Daniel Covitz, andDiana Hancock, of the Board's staff, contributed to these remarks.Return to text2.The U.S. banking agencies recently asked for public comment on a notice of proposed rulemaking for implementing Basel II. Pillar three of Basel II is particularly intended to strengthen market discipline.Return to text Given the complexity of the signal-extraction problem, we should approach our task with considerable humility. We recognize that financial assets prices reflect the collective views of market participants. They may reflect not only changes in expected paths and uncertainty about those paths but also shifting relationships, changes in investor risk preferences, and developments in the structure of various securities markets. Thus, we use market prices alongside many other economic indicators, including statistical releases and large amounts of qualitative evidence. We can enhance the role of markets by improving the availability of high-quality data for example, about corporate financial conditions and by working to improve our ability to extract signals from market data. The most significant challenge in this setting is, however, perhaps endemic to the task: Our own policies and actions affect market prices. As a result, when we look to financial markets for information, the information we seek may be shaped in part by our own views. The more that "market information" reflects our own actions, the less it is useful as a source of independent information to inform our policy judgments. We need to be alert to this "mirror problem," in which markets can cease to provide independent information on current and prospective financial and economic developments. In the extreme case, financial markets keenly follow the Federal Reserve, the Federal Reserve is equally attuned to the latest financial quotes, and fundamentals of the economy are obscured. Under such circumstances, asset prices might teach us only about our skills as communicators. Fortunately, the prospect for profits--the critical underpinning of all markets--mitigates this problem. Investors have strong financial incentives to analyze information about inflation and the macroeconomy to better predict the path of monetary policy. After all, Fed communications and forecasts are fallible. The anticipated dispersion of investors' views implies a distribution of returns with substantial rewards for those who get it right. Market-based information is surely important in determining good monetary policy. This does not mean, however, that the Fed's goal is to align its views with those of the markets or that it wants the markets' views to match its own. Instead, policymakers benefit greatly by listening to views expressed in markets that are at least somewhat independent of FOMC communications. We can further enhance the role of markets by enriching our understanding of the interplay between communication policies of central banks and market prices. Good communication by the Fed should help members of the FOMC interpret market prices. Unnecessary market uncertainty or misinterpretation of our assessments will only muddy the waters. Financial Markets and Financial Supervision and RegulationIn addition to making monetary policy decisions, the Federal Reserve maintains supervisory and regulatory authority over a wide range of financial institutions and activities. The Fed supervises and regulates banks and bank holding companies that together control about 96 percent of commercial banking assets in the United States. Let us consider the role of market discipline in financial supervision and regulation. First, market prices provide an independent assessment of the current and prospective financial condition of large financial firms. Second, markets can discipline the behavior of firms by adjusting the concomitant funding costs of firms as risks change. Market discipline, however, may not always be fully effective in this context. The development of the federal safety net--deposit insurance, the discount window, and access to Fedwire and daylight overdrafts--has inevitably impeded the workings of market discipline in the regulatory arena. That is, the various elements of the safety net provide depository institutions and financial market participants with a level of safety, liquidity, and solvency that was far less prevalent before the advent of the Federal Reserve and the subsequent establishment of federal deposit insurance. By deterring liquidity panics, the safety net shields the overall economy from some of the worst effects of instability in the financial system. These benefits, however, are not without costs. The prospect of government intervention distorts market prices and may also engender excessive risk-taking. The Federal Reserve works to reduce these distortions by enhancing market discipline and limiting expectations of government intervention. Market discipline can improve financial stability by aligning risks and rewards more closely. When risks are both known and measured, they are reflected in asset prices. To this end, bank regulators must continue to strive to develop risk-based capital measures that better reflect underlying risks. At least as important as getting capital levels right, however, are new capital frameworks to provide financial markets with better information on risk-taking by banks. In particular, by leading the development of new capital adequacy regimes, the Fed is actively working to improve the flow of information about financial institutions to market participants.2As a consequence of improved flows of information, market participants can better evaluate risks, price securities, and impose their own discipline on firms. These capital and disclosure reforms are aimed at improving the standardization of risk metrics and providing financial markets with meaningful disclosures for risk. Market forces can thus strengthen the incentives for banks to behave more as they would if there were no safety net at all. For market discipline to work optimally, securities prices for the largest financial firms should reflect investor evaluations of financial risks--credit, market, and operational. Securities prices informed in this way should translate into higher funding costs when greater risks are undertaken, facilitate the appropriate level of monitoring for the effective management of counterparty risk, and help bank supervisors judge the financial condition of firms. Asset prices, however, will reflect risks only if uninsured creditors perceive that they are at risk of loss. Thus, investors should understand that the resolution procedure for bank failures does not require that all uninsured creditors be made whole. Rather, resolution requires only that uninsured creditors be made no worse off than they would have been if the bank had been liquidated in the marketplace. The ten largest U.S. banking organizations fund less than half their worldwide banking assets with deposits--insured, uninsured, and foreign. Thus, the role for market discipline is substantial: Uninsured creditors must do their own homework because protecting them is not the bank supervisor's job. Prices for financial firms are not "pure plays" on their expected financial conditions. Rather, the prices also incorporate the value of expected supervisory and regulatory actions should their financial condition deteriorate. These perceptions and levels of government guarantee vary substantially across firms. For example, the corrective actions used by bank supervisors to deal with undercapitalized banks are intended to encourage market discipline and to deter the expectation of regulatory forbearance. In addition, encouraging the issuance of financial market instruments, such as subordinated debt, can provide an important antidote to conjectures of government guarantees and to the misperception that some institutions are "too big to fail." The threat of prohibited payments on the subordinated debt of an institution that becomes undercapitalized should be useful in ensuring vigilance by debt investors. As a result, capital adequacy becomes not the job solely of the regulator, but of market participants as well. The Federal Reserve also works to enhance the role of market discipline in the broader financial system. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is working with dealers to improve the settlement and clearing practices of the credit derivatives industry. Reliable recordkeeping is crucial in times of stability; otherwise, it will not be available in times of distress. The Federal Reserve has also highlighted the systemic risks associated with the large portfolios of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. The inherent lack of counterparty discipline is a significant problem associated with the regulation of these government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs). Currently, this lack of market discipline, which is a consequence of conjectural federal government guarantees, is self-perpetuating: It has engendered a cost of capital for the GSEs that is nearly comparable to that of the federal government. It should be no surprise, then, that the GSE portfolios have grown dramatically since the early 1990s. Their growth rates have subsided more recently in light of recent accounting, regulatory, and governance problems, but without significant improvements in market discipline, it is likely that the rapid growth of GSE portfolios will resume. Market information is not a panacea in the formulation of monetary policy and, likewise, it is not one in the context of supervision and regulation. First, market information is unavailable for many banks, often because they issue public debt only infrequently. Second, market discipline for banks is somewhat dependent on the Federal Reserve's policies and actions, and thus it has a "mirror problem" of its own. That is, through a "certification effect," bank supervision can potentially create significant moral hazard in that investors may believe that governmental regulation supersedes their need to assess the firms' financial condition. Third, the objectives of financial markets and the Federal Reserve are not perfectly aligned. For example, equity holders of a failing institution may have an incentive to "bet the bank" and thereby maximize the value of the put option the institution believes it holds from the deposit insurer. The onus continues to rest with the Federal Reserve and other financial regulators to harness the forces of market discipline as a necessary complement to more traditional modes of supervision and regulation. ConclusionIn summary, markets inform and, in some cases, complement the monetary, supervisory, and regulatory actions of the Federal Reserve. As I hope that I have made clear, the interaction of market signals and policy is neither simple nor straightforward. You watch us and react to our actions, while simultaneously we monitor you and respond as best we can to the signals you provide about evolving economic and financial conditions. To do our part in preventing the signals from getting crossed, I believe that we at the Federal Reserve should continue our efforts to make our communications and intentions as clear as possible. That may be a tall order, but it is one worthy of our efforts. Footnotes 1.Nellie Liang, Wayne Passmore,Daniel Covitz, andDiana Hancock, of the Board's staff, contributed to these remarks.Return to text 2.The U.S. banking agencies recently asked for public comment on a notice of proposed rulemaking for implementing Basel II. Pillar three of Basel II is particularly intended to strengthen market discipline.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the names of five new members of its Thrift Institutions Advisory Council (TIAC) and designated a new President and Vice President of the council for 2007. TIAC is an advisory group made up of twelve representatives from thrift institutions. The council was established by the Board in 1980 and includes members from savings and loan associations, savings banks, and credit unions. It meets three times each year with the Board of Governors to discuss developments relating to thrift institutions, the housing industry, mortgage finance, and regulatory issues. David Russell Taylor, President and CEO, Rahway Savings Institution, Rahway, New Jersey, will serve as President of TIAC in 2007. F. Weller Meyer, President and CEO, Acacia Federal Savings Bank, Falls Church, Virginia, will serve as Vice President. The five new members, named for two-year terms beginning January 1, 2007, are: Robert M. ClementsChairman and CEOEverBank Financial CorpJacksonville, Florida Kerry KillingerChairman, President, and CEOWashington Mutual, Inc.Seattle, Washington Harriet MayPresident and CEOGovernment Employees Credit UnionEl Paso, Texas Tom C. MeuserChairman and CEOEl Dorado Savings BankPlacerville, California F. Weller MeyerPresident and CEOAcacia Federal Savings BankFalls Church, Virginia TIAC members whose terms continue through 2007 are: Frank E. BerrishPresident and CEOVisions Federal Credit UnionEndicott, New York A. Thomas HoodPresident and CEOFirst Federal Savings and Loan AssociationCharleston, South Carolina Kenneth KorandaPresidentMid America BankDowners Grove, Illinois Arkadi KuhlmannChairman, President, and CEOING DIRECT USAWilmington, Delaware David E. PoulsenPresident and CEOAmerican Express Centurion BankSalt Lake City, Utah Steven J. SwiontekChairman, President, and CEOGate City BankFargo, North Dakota David Russell TaylorPresident and CEORahway Savings InstitutionRahway, New Jersey
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from October 10 through October 23, 2006.The minutes are attached.Attachment The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on October 24-25, 2006. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The summary description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's web site atwww.federalreserve.gov/fomc. Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, October 24-25, 2006
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Fourth ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt, Germany My topic today is the role of monetary aggregates in economic analysis and monetary policymaking at the Federal Reserve. I will take a historical perspective, which will set the stage for a brief discussion of recent practice. The Federal Reserve’s responsibility for managing the money supply was established at its founding in 1913, as the first sentence of the Federal Reserve Act directed the nation’s new central bank "to furnish an elastic currency."1However, the Federal Reserve met this mandate principally by issuing currency as needed to damp seasonal fluctuations in interest rates, and during its early years the Federal Reserve did not monitor the money stock or even collect monetary data in a systematic way.2,3 The Federal Reserve’s first fifteen years were a period of relative prosperity, but the crash of 1929 ushered in a decade of global financial instability and economic depression. Subsequent scholarship, notably the classic monetary history by Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz (1963), argued that the Federal Reserve’s failure to stabilize the money supply was an important cause of the Great Depression. That view today commands considerable support among economists, although I note that the sources of the Federal Reserve’s policy errors during the Depression went much deeper than a failure to understand the role of money in the economy or the lack of reliable monetary statistics. Policymakers of the 1930s observed the correlates of the monetary contraction, such as deflation and bank failures. However, they questioned not only their own capacity to reverse those developments but also the desirability of doing so. Their hesitancy to act reflected the prevailing view that some purging of the excesses of the 1920s, painful though it might be, was both necessary and inevitable. In any case, the Federal Reserve began to pay more attention to money in the latter part of the 1930s. Central to these efforts was the Harvard economist Lauchlin Currie, whose 1934 treatise,The Supply and Control of Money in the United States, was among the first to provide a practical empirical definition of money. His definition, which included currency and demand deposits, corresponded closely to what we now call M1. Currie argued that collection of monetary data was necessary for the Federal Reserve to control the money supply, which in turn would facilitate the stabilization of the price level and of the economy more generally.4In 1934, Marriner Eccles asked Currie to join the Treasury Department, and later that year, when Eccles was appointed to head the Federal Reserve, he took Currie with him. Currie’s tenure at the Federal Reserve helped to spark new interest in monetary statistics. In 1939, the Federal Reserve began a project to bring together the available historical data on banking and money. This effort culminated in 1943 with the publication ofBanking and Monetary Statistics, which included annual figures on demand and time deposits from 1892 and on currency from 1860. Academic interest in monetary aggregates increased after World War II. Milton Friedman’s volumeStudies in the Quantity Theory of Money, which contained Phillip Cagan’s work on money and hyperinflation, appeared in 1956, followed in 1960 by Friedman’sA Program for Monetary Stability, which advocated that monetary policy engineer a constant growth rate for the money stock. Measurement efforts also flourished. In 1960, William J. Abbott of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis led a project that resulted in a revamping of the Fed’s money supply statistics, which were subsequently published semimonthly.5Even in those early years, however, financial innovation posed problems for monetary measurement, as banks introduced new types of accounts that blurred the distinction between transaction deposits and other types of deposits. To accommodate these innovations, alternative definitions of money were created; by 1971, the Federal Reserve published data for five definitions of money, denoted M1 through M5.6 During the early years of monetary measurement, policymakers groped for ways to use the new data.7However, during the 1960s and 1970s, as researchers and policymakers struggled to understand the sharp increase in inflation, the view that nominal aggregates (including credit as well as monetary aggregates) are closely linked to spending growth and inflation gained ground. In 1966, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) began to add a proviso to its policy directives that bank credit growth should not deviate significantly from projections; a similar proviso about money growth was added in 1970. In 1974, the FOMC began to specify "ranges of tolerance" for the growth of M1 and for the broader M2 monetary aggregate over the period that extended to the next meeting of the Committee.8 In response to House Concurrent Resolution 133 in 1975, the Federal Reserve began to report annual target growth ranges, 2 to 3 percentage points wide, for M1, M2, a still broader aggregate M3, and bank credit in semiannual testimony before the Congress. In an amendment to the Federal Reserve Act in 1977, the Congress formalized the Federal Reserve’s reporting of monetary targets by directing the Board to "maintain long run growth of monetary and credit aggregates … so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates."9In practice, however, the adoption of targets for money and credit growth was evidently not effective in constraining policy or in reducing inflation, in part because the target was not routinely achieved.10 The closest the Federal Reserve came to a "monetarist experiment" began in October 1979, when the FOMC under Chairman Paul Volcker adopted an operating procedure based on the management of non-borrowed reserves.11The intent was to focus policy on controlling the growth of M1 and M2 and thereby to reduce inflation, which had been running at double-digit rates. As you know, the disinflation effort was successful and ushered in the low-inflation regime that the United States has enjoyed since. However, the Federal Reserve discontinued the procedure based on non-borrowed reserves in 1982. It would be fair to say that monetary and credit aggregates have not played a central role in the formulation of U.S. monetary policy since that time, although policymakers continue to use monetary data as a source of information about the state of the economy. Why have monetary aggregates not been more influential in U.S. monetary policymaking, despite the strong theoretical presumption that money growth should be linked to growth in nominal aggregates and to inflation? In practice, the difficulty has been that, in the United States, deregulation, financial innovation, and other factors have led to recurrent instability in the relationships between various monetary aggregates and other nominal variables. For example, in the mid-1970s, just when the FOMC began to specify money growth targets, econometric estimates of M1 money demand relationships began to break down, predicting faster money growth than was actually observed. This breakdown--dubbed "the case of the missing money" by Princeton economist Stephen Goldfeld (1976)--significantly complicated the selection of appropriate targets for money growth. Similar problems arose in the early 1980s--the period of the Volcker experiment--when the introduction of new types of bank accounts again made M1 money demand difficult to predict.12Attempts to find stable relationships between M1 growth and growth in other nominal quantities were unsuccessful, and formal growth rate targets for M1 were discontinued in 1987. Problems with the narrow monetary aggregate M1 in the 1970s and 1980s led to increased interest at the Federal Reserve in the 1980s in broader aggregates such as M2. Econometric methods were also refined to improve estimation and to accommodate more-complex dynamics in money demand equations. For example, at a 1988 conference at the Federal Reserve Board, George Moore, Richard Porter, and David Small presented a new set of M2 money demand models based on an "error-correction" specification, which allowed for transitory deviations from stable long-run relationships (Moore, Porter, and Small, 1990). One of these models, known as the "conference aggregate" model, remains in use at the Board today. About the same time, Board staff developed the so-calledP* (P-star) model, based on M2, which used the quantity theory of money and estimates of long-run potential output and velocity (the ratio of nominal income to money) to predict long-run inflation trends. TheP* model received considerable attention both within and outside the System; indeed, a description of the model was featured in a front-page article in theNew York Times.13 Unfortunately, over the years the stability of the economic relationships based on the M2 monetary aggregate has also come into question. One such episode occurred in the early 1990s, when M2 grew much more slowly than the models predicted. Indeed, the discrepancy between actual and predicted money growth was sufficiently large that theP* model, if not subjected to judgmental adjustments, would have predicted deflation for 1991 and 1992. Experiences like this one led the FOMC to discontinue setting target ranges for M2 and other aggregates after the statutory requirement for reporting such ranges lapsed in 2000. As I have already suggested, the rapid pace of financial innovation in the United States has been an important reason for the instability of the relationships between monetary aggregates and other macroeconomic variables.14In response to regulatory changes and technological progress, U.S. banks have created new kinds of accounts and added features to existing accounts. More broadly, payments technologies and practices have changed substantially over the past few decades, and innovations (such as Internet banking) continue. As a result, patterns of usage of different types of transactions accounts have at times shifted rapidly and unpredictably. Various special factors have also contributed to the observed instability. For example, between one-half and two-thirds of U.S. currency is held abroad. As a consequence, cross-border currency flows, which can be estimated only imprecisely, may lead to sharp changes in currency outstanding and in the monetary base that are largely unrelated to domestic conditions.15,16 The Board staff continues to devote considerable effort to modeling and forecasting velocity and money demand. The standard model of money demand, which relates money held to measures of income and opportunity cost, has been extended to include alternative measures of money and its determinants, to accommodate special factors and structural breaks, and to allow for complex dynamic behavior of the money stock.17Forecasts of money growth are based on expert judgment with input from various estimated models and with knowledge of special factors that are expected to be relevant. Unfortunately, forecast errors for money growth are often significant, and the empirical relationship between money growth and variables such as inflation and nominal output growth has continued to be unstable at times.18 Despite these difficulties, the Federal Reserve will continue to monitor and analyze the behavior of money. Although a heavy reliance on monetary aggregates as a guide to policy would seem to be unwise in the U.S. context, money growth may still contain important information about future economic developments. Attention to money growth is thus sensible as part of the eclectic modeling and forecasting framework used by the U.S. central bank.ReferencesAnderson, Richard G. and Kenneth A. Kavajecz (1994). "A Historical Perspective on the Federal Reserve’s Monetary Aggregates: Definition, Construction and Targeting (PDF 7.4 MB),"Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, March/April, pp. 1-31.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1943).Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914-1941. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.---------- (1960). "A New Measure of the Money Supply,"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 46 (October), pp.. 102-23.---------- (1976).Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1941-1970. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.----- (1998).Federal Reserve Act and Other Statutory Provisions Affecting the Federal Reserve System. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Bremner, Robert P. (2004).Chairman of the Fed: William McChesney Martin Jr. and the Creation of the American Financial System. New Haven: Yale University Press.Carpenter, Seth and Joe Lange (2003). "Money Demand and Equity Markets."Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series,2003-3. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February.Currie, Lauchlin (1935).The Supply and Control of Money in the United States, 2nded.Cambridge: Harvard University Press.-----------, ed. (1956).Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money.Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Friedman, Milton (1960).A Program for Monetary Stability. New York: Fordham University Press.Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. (1963).A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960.Princeton: Princeton University Press.Goldfeld, Stephen M. (1976). "The Case of the Missing Money."Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,3:1976, pp. 683-739.Hallman, Jeffrey J., Richard D. Porter and David H. Small (1991). "Is the Price Level Tied to the M2 Monetary Aggregate in the Long Run?"American Economic Review, 81(September), pp. 841-858.Humphrey, Thomas M. (1986). "The Real Bills Doctrine (PDF 1.2 MB)," in Thomas M. Humphrey,Essays on Inflation. Richmond: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.Judson, Ruth and Seth Carpenter (2006). "Modeling Demand for M2: A Practical Approach," unpublished manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Monetary Affairs, October.Kilborn, Peter T. (1989). "Can Inflation Be Predicted? Federal Reserve Sees a Way,"New York Times, June 13.Mankiw, N. Gregory and Jeffrey A. Miron (1986). "The Changing Behavior of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(2), pp. 211-228.Meltzer, Allan H. (2003).A History of the Federal Reserve. Volume 1: 1913-1951.Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Moore, George R., Richard D. Porter, and David H. Small (1990). "Modeling the Disaggregated Demands for M2 and M1: The U.S. Experience in the 1980s," in Peter Hooper et. al., eds.,Financial Sectors in Open Economies: Empirical Analysis and Policy Issues. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, pp. 21-105.O’Brien, Yueh-Yun C. (2005). "The Effects of Mortgage Prepayments on M2."Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series,2005-43.U.S. Department of the Treasury (2006).The Use and Counterfeiting of United States Currency Abroad, Part 3 (PDF 601 KB). Washington: Department of the Treasury.Footnotes1.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1998), 1-001. In his recent history of the Federal Reserve, Allan Meltzer (2003, p. 66) notes of some of the Act’s proponents that: "[o]ne of their principal aims was to increase the seasonal response, or elasticity, of the note issue by eliminating the provisions of the National Banking Act that tied the amount of currency to the stock of government bonds."Return to text2.See Mankiw and Miron (1986) for a discussion of the Fed’s seasonal interest-rate smoothing. The Federal Reserve did publish data on the issuance of Federal Reserve notes from its inception. Federal Reserve notes were only part of total currency in circulation, however, the remainder being made up of national bank notes, United States notes, Treasury notes, gold and silver certificates, and gold and silver coin. Beginning in 1915, theFederal Reserve Bulletinincluded data on currency that had been collected by the Treasury and data on total bank deposits that had been collected by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency as a byproduct of its regulatory role, but publication was irregular.Return to text3.Indeed, the Federal Reserve’s adherence to the real bills doctrine--which counseled against active monetary management in favor of supplying money only as required to meet "the needs of trade"--gave the new institution little reason to pay attention to changes in the money stock. See Humphrey (1986) for a history of the real bills doctrine. The constraints of the gold standard also restricted (without entirely precluding) active monetary management by the Federal Reserve.Return to text4.In the second edition of his book, Currie (1935) wrote: "The achievement of desirable objectives … rests entirely upon the effectiveness of control. The achievement, for example, of the objective of a price level varying inversely with the productive efficiency of society demands a highly energetic central banking policy and a high degree of effectiveness of monetary control… Even for the achievement of the more modest objective of lessening business fluctuations by monetary means, the degree of control of the central bank is of paramount importance." (pp. 3-4).Return to text5.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1960).Return to text6.In 1971, M1 was currency and demand deposits at commercial banks. M2 was M1 plus commercial bank savings and small time deposits, and M3 was M2 plus deposits at mutual savings banks, savings and loans, and credit unions; data from the latter type of institution were available only monthly. M4 was M2 plus large time deposits, and M5 was M3 plus large time deposits. Changes in definitions make it difficult to track the historical development of the various monetary aggregates. Approximately, the 2006 definition of M1 is equivalent to this older definition, the 2006 definition of M2 is equivalent to the older definition of M3, and the definition of M3 at its date of last publication was equivalent to the older definition of M5. M4 and M5 were dropped in a 1980 redefinition of the monetary aggregates. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1976), pp. 10-11 and Anderson and Kavajecz (1994).Return to text7.For instance, in late 1959 and early 1960, money growth declined as other economic indicators rose. The minutes of the December 1959 FOMC meeting report Chairman Martin as saying, "I am unable to make heads or tails of the money supply," but those of the February 1960 meeting record his comment that "the System ought to be looking at the growth of the money supply." For further discussion, see Bremner (2004), pp. 141-142.Return to text8.M2 now includes currency and demand deposits (the components of M1) plus time deposits, savings deposits, and non-institutional money market funds.Return to text9.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1998), 1-017Return to text10.Monetarists criticized the use of multiple targets, rather than a single objective. Another object of criticism was "base drift," a set of practices that had the effect of re-setting the base from which money growth targets were calculated when the growth of one or more monetary aggregates exceeded the upper end of the Federal Reserve’s target range.Return to text11.Whether the Federal Reserve’s policies under Chairman Volcker were "truly" monetarist was a much-debated question at the time.Return to text12.The new accounts included negotiable-order-of-withdrawal (NOW) accounts and money market deposit accounts.Return to text13.Hallman, Porter, and Small (1991) and Kilborn (1989).Return to text14.Another possible explanation for this instability is the Goodhart-Lucas law, which says that any empirical relationship that is exploited for policy purposes will tend to break down. This law probably has less applicability in the United States than in some other countries, as the Federal Reserve has not systematically exploited the relationships of money to output or inflation, except perhaps to a degree in 1979-82.Return to text15.For a recent summary, see U.S. Department of the Treasury (2006).Return to text16.As another example, U.S. regulations require servicers of mortgage-backed securities to hold mortgage prepayments in deposits counted as part of M2 before disbursing the funds to investors. A wave of mortgage refinancing and the resulting prepayments can thus have significant effects on M2 growth that are only weakly related to overall economic activity. See O’Brien (2005) for more discussion.Return to text17.See Judson and Carpenter (2006) for a summary. A special factor that helps to explain some episodes of variable money demand is stock market volatility (Carpenter and Lange, 2003).Return to text18.A recent example of instability occurred in the fourth quarter of 2003, when M2 shrank at the most rapid rate since the beginning of modern data collection in 1959 without any evident effects on prices or nominal spending. Subsequent analysis has explained part of the decline in M2 (the transfer of liquid funds into a recovering stock market was one possible cause), and data revisions have eliminated an additional portion of the decline, but much of the drop remains unexplained even well after the fact.Return to text References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1943).Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914-1941. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.---------- (1960). "A New Measure of the Money Supply,"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 46 (October), pp.. 102-23.---------- (1976).Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1941-1970. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.----- (1998).Federal Reserve Act and Other Statutory Provisions Affecting the Federal Reserve System. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Bremner, Robert P. (2004).Chairman of the Fed: William McChesney Martin Jr. and the Creation of the American Financial System. New Haven: Yale University Press.Carpenter, Seth and Joe Lange (2003). "Money Demand and Equity Markets."Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series,2003-3. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February.Currie, Lauchlin (1935).The Supply and Control of Money in the United States, 2nded.Cambridge: Harvard University Press.-----------, ed. (1956).Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money.Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Friedman, Milton (1960).A Program for Monetary Stability. New York: Fordham University Press.Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. (1963).A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960.Princeton: Princeton University Press.Goldfeld, Stephen M. (1976). "The Case of the Missing Money."Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,3:1976, pp. 683-739.Hallman, Jeffrey J., Richard D. Porter and David H. Small (1991). "Is the Price Level Tied to the M2 Monetary Aggregate in the Long Run?"American Economic Review, 81(September), pp. 841-858.Humphrey, Thomas M. (1986). "The Real Bills Doctrine (PDF 1.2 MB)," in Thomas M. Humphrey,Essays on Inflation. Richmond: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.Judson, Ruth and Seth Carpenter (2006). "Modeling Demand for M2: A Practical Approach," unpublished manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Monetary Affairs, October.Kilborn, Peter T. (1989). "Can Inflation Be Predicted? Federal Reserve Sees a Way,"New York Times, June 13.Mankiw, N. Gregory and Jeffrey A. Miron (1986). "The Changing Behavior of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(2), pp. 211-228.Meltzer, Allan H. (2003).A History of the Federal Reserve. Volume 1: 1913-1951.Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Moore, George R., Richard D. Porter, and David H. Small (1990). "Modeling the Disaggregated Demands for M2 and M1: The U.S. Experience in the 1980s," in Peter Hooper et. al., eds.,Financial Sectors in Open Economies: Empirical Analysis and Policy Issues. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, pp. 21-105.O’Brien, Yueh-Yun C. (2005). "The Effects of Mortgage Prepayments on M2."Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series,2005-43.U.S. Department of the Treasury (2006).The Use and Counterfeiting of United States Currency Abroad, Part 3 (PDF 601 KB). Washington: Department of the Treasury.Footnotes1.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1998), 1-001. In his recent history of the Federal Reserve, Allan Meltzer (2003, p. 66) notes of some of the Act’s proponents that: "[o]ne of their principal aims was to increase the seasonal response, or elasticity, of the note issue by eliminating the provisions of the National Banking Act that tied the amount of currency to the stock of government bonds."Return to text2.See Mankiw and Miron (1986) for a discussion of the Fed’s seasonal interest-rate smoothing. The Federal Reserve did publish data on the issuance of Federal Reserve notes from its inception. Federal Reserve notes were only part of total currency in circulation, however, the remainder being made up of national bank notes, United States notes, Treasury notes, gold and silver certificates, and gold and silver coin. Beginning in 1915, theFederal Reserve Bulletinincluded data on currency that had been collected by the Treasury and data on total bank deposits that had been collected by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency as a byproduct of its regulatory role, but publication was irregular.Return to text3.Indeed, the Federal Reserve’s adherence to the real bills doctrine--which counseled against active monetary management in favor of supplying money only as required to meet "the needs of trade"--gave the new institution little reason to pay attention to changes in the money stock. See Humphrey (1986) for a history of the real bills doctrine. The constraints of the gold standard also restricted (without entirely precluding) active monetary management by the Federal Reserve.Return to text4.In the second edition of his book, Currie (1935) wrote: "The achievement of desirable objectives … rests entirely upon the effectiveness of control. The achievement, for example, of the objective of a price level varying inversely with the productive efficiency of society demands a highly energetic central banking policy and a high degree of effectiveness of monetary control… Even for the achievement of the more modest objective of lessening business fluctuations by monetary means, the degree of control of the central bank is of paramount importance." (pp. 3-4).Return to text5.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1960).Return to text6.In 1971, M1 was currency and demand deposits at commercial banks. M2 was M1 plus commercial bank savings and small time deposits, and M3 was M2 plus deposits at mutual savings banks, savings and loans, and credit unions; data from the latter type of institution were available only monthly. M4 was M2 plus large time deposits, and M5 was M3 plus large time deposits. Changes in definitions make it difficult to track the historical development of the various monetary aggregates. Approximately, the 2006 definition of M1 is equivalent to this older definition, the 2006 definition of M2 is equivalent to the older definition of M3, and the definition of M3 at its date of last publication was equivalent to the older definition of M5. M4 and M5 were dropped in a 1980 redefinition of the monetary aggregates. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1976), pp. 10-11 and Anderson and Kavajecz (1994).Return to text7.For instance, in late 1959 and early 1960, money growth declined as other economic indicators rose. The minutes of the December 1959 FOMC meeting report Chairman Martin as saying, "I am unable to make heads or tails of the money supply," but those of the February 1960 meeting record his comment that "the System ought to be looking at the growth of the money supply." For further discussion, see Bremner (2004), pp. 141-142.Return to text8.M2 now includes currency and demand deposits (the components of M1) plus time deposits, savings deposits, and non-institutional money market funds.Return to text9.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1998), 1-017Return to text10.Monetarists criticized the use of multiple targets, rather than a single objective. Another object of criticism was "base drift," a set of practices that had the effect of re-setting the base from which money growth targets were calculated when the growth of one or more monetary aggregates exceeded the upper end of the Federal Reserve’s target range.Return to text11.Whether the Federal Reserve’s policies under Chairman Volcker were "truly" monetarist was a much-debated question at the time.Return to text12.The new accounts included negotiable-order-of-withdrawal (NOW) accounts and money market deposit accounts.Return to text13.Hallman, Porter, and Small (1991) and Kilborn (1989).Return to text14.Another possible explanation for this instability is the Goodhart-Lucas law, which says that any empirical relationship that is exploited for policy purposes will tend to break down. This law probably has less applicability in the United States than in some other countries, as the Federal Reserve has not systematically exploited the relationships of money to output or inflation, except perhaps to a degree in 1979-82.Return to text15.For a recent summary, see U.S. Department of the Treasury (2006).Return to text16.As another example, U.S. regulations require servicers of mortgage-backed securities to hold mortgage prepayments in deposits counted as part of M2 before disbursing the funds to investors. A wave of mortgage refinancing and the resulting prepayments can thus have significant effects on M2 growth that are only weakly related to overall economic activity. See O’Brien (2005) for more discussion.Return to text17.See Judson and Carpenter (2006) for a summary. A special factor that helps to explain some episodes of variable money demand is stock market volatility (Carpenter and Lange, 2003).Return to text18.A recent example of instability occurred in the fourth quarter of 2003, when M2 shrank at the most rapid rate since the beginning of modern data collection in 1959 without any evident effects on prices or nominal spending. Subsequent analysis has explained part of the decline in M2 (the transfer of liquid funds into a recovering stock market was one possible cause), and data revisions have eliminated an additional portion of the decline, but much of the drop remains unexplained even well after the fact.Return to text Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1943).Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914-1941. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. ---------- (1960). "A New Measure of the Money Supply,"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 46 (October), pp.. 102-23. ---------- (1976).Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1941-1970. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. ----- (1998).Federal Reserve Act and Other Statutory Provisions Affecting the Federal Reserve System. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Bremner, Robert P. (2004).Chairman of the Fed: William McChesney Martin Jr. and the Creation of the American Financial System. New Haven: Yale University Press. Carpenter, Seth and Joe Lange (2003). "Money Demand and Equity Markets."Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series,2003-3. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Currie, Lauchlin (1935).The Supply and Control of Money in the United States, 2nded.Cambridge: Harvard University Press. -----------, ed. (1956).Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money.Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Friedman, Milton (1960).A Program for Monetary Stability. New York: Fordham University Press. Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. (1963).A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960.Princeton: Princeton University Press. Goldfeld, Stephen M. (1976). "The Case of the Missing Money."Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,3:1976, pp. 683-739. Hallman, Jeffrey J., Richard D. Porter and David H. Small (1991). "Is the Price Level Tied to the M2 Monetary Aggregate in the Long Run?"American Economic Review, 81(September), pp. 841-858. Humphrey, Thomas M. (1986). "The Real Bills Doctrine (PDF 1.2 MB)," in Thomas M. Humphrey,Essays on Inflation. Richmond: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. Judson, Ruth and Seth Carpenter (2006). "Modeling Demand for M2: A Practical Approach," unpublished manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Monetary Affairs, October. Kilborn, Peter T. (1989). "Can Inflation Be Predicted? Federal Reserve Sees a Way,"New York Times, June 13. Mankiw, N. Gregory and Jeffrey A. Miron (1986). "The Changing Behavior of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(2), pp. 211-228. Meltzer, Allan H. (2003).A History of the Federal Reserve. Volume 1: 1913-1951.Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Moore, George R., Richard D. Porter, and David H. Small (1990). "Modeling the Disaggregated Demands for M2 and M1: The U.S. Experience in the 1980s," in Peter Hooper et. al., eds.,Financial Sectors in Open Economies: Empirical Analysis and Policy Issues. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, pp. 21-105. O’Brien, Yueh-Yun C. (2005). "The Effects of Mortgage Prepayments on M2."Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series,2005-43. U.S. Department of the Treasury (2006).The Use and Counterfeiting of United States Currency Abroad, Part 3 (PDF 601 KB). Washington: Department of the Treasury. Footnotes1.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1998), 1-001. In his recent history of the Federal Reserve, Allan Meltzer (2003, p. 66) notes of some of the Act’s proponents that: "[o]ne of their principal aims was to increase the seasonal response, or elasticity, of the note issue by eliminating the provisions of the National Banking Act that tied the amount of currency to the stock of government bonds."Return to text2.See Mankiw and Miron (1986) for a discussion of the Fed’s seasonal interest-rate smoothing. The Federal Reserve did publish data on the issuance of Federal Reserve notes from its inception. Federal Reserve notes were only part of total currency in circulation, however, the remainder being made up of national bank notes, United States notes, Treasury notes, gold and silver certificates, and gold and silver coin. Beginning in 1915, theFederal Reserve Bulletinincluded data on currency that had been collected by the Treasury and data on total bank deposits that had been collected by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency as a byproduct of its regulatory role, but publication was irregular.Return to text3.Indeed, the Federal Reserve’s adherence to the real bills doctrine--which counseled against active monetary management in favor of supplying money only as required to meet "the needs of trade"--gave the new institution little reason to pay attention to changes in the money stock. See Humphrey (1986) for a history of the real bills doctrine. The constraints of the gold standard also restricted (without entirely precluding) active monetary management by the Federal Reserve.Return to text4.In the second edition of his book, Currie (1935) wrote: "The achievement of desirable objectives … rests entirely upon the effectiveness of control. The achievement, for example, of the objective of a price level varying inversely with the productive efficiency of society demands a highly energetic central banking policy and a high degree of effectiveness of monetary control… Even for the achievement of the more modest objective of lessening business fluctuations by monetary means, the degree of control of the central bank is of paramount importance." (pp. 3-4).Return to text5.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1960).Return to text6.In 1971, M1 was currency and demand deposits at commercial banks. M2 was M1 plus commercial bank savings and small time deposits, and M3 was M2 plus deposits at mutual savings banks, savings and loans, and credit unions; data from the latter type of institution were available only monthly. M4 was M2 plus large time deposits, and M5 was M3 plus large time deposits. Changes in definitions make it difficult to track the historical development of the various monetary aggregates. Approximately, the 2006 definition of M1 is equivalent to this older definition, the 2006 definition of M2 is equivalent to the older definition of M3, and the definition of M3 at its date of last publication was equivalent to the older definition of M5. M4 and M5 were dropped in a 1980 redefinition of the monetary aggregates. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1976), pp. 10-11 and Anderson and Kavajecz (1994).Return to text7.For instance, in late 1959 and early 1960, money growth declined as other economic indicators rose. The minutes of the December 1959 FOMC meeting report Chairman Martin as saying, "I am unable to make heads or tails of the money supply," but those of the February 1960 meeting record his comment that "the System ought to be looking at the growth of the money supply." For further discussion, see Bremner (2004), pp. 141-142.Return to text8.M2 now includes currency and demand deposits (the components of M1) plus time deposits, savings deposits, and non-institutional money market funds.Return to text9.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1998), 1-017Return to text10.Monetarists criticized the use of multiple targets, rather than a single objective. Another object of criticism was "base drift," a set of practices that had the effect of re-setting the base from which money growth targets were calculated when the growth of one or more monetary aggregates exceeded the upper end of the Federal Reserve’s target range.Return to text11.Whether the Federal Reserve’s policies under Chairman Volcker were "truly" monetarist was a much-debated question at the time.Return to text12.The new accounts included negotiable-order-of-withdrawal (NOW) accounts and money market deposit accounts.Return to text13.Hallman, Porter, and Small (1991) and Kilborn (1989).Return to text14.Another possible explanation for this instability is the Goodhart-Lucas law, which says that any empirical relationship that is exploited for policy purposes will tend to break down. This law probably has less applicability in the United States than in some other countries, as the Federal Reserve has not systematically exploited the relationships of money to output or inflation, except perhaps to a degree in 1979-82.Return to text15.For a recent summary, see U.S. Department of the Treasury (2006).Return to text16.As another example, U.S. regulations require servicers of mortgage-backed securities to hold mortgage prepayments in deposits counted as part of M2 before disbursing the funds to investors. A wave of mortgage refinancing and the resulting prepayments can thus have significant effects on M2 growth that are only weakly related to overall economic activity. See O’Brien (2005) for more discussion.Return to text17.See Judson and Carpenter (2006) for a summary. A special factor that helps to explain some episodes of variable money demand is stock market volatility (Carpenter and Lange, 2003).Return to text18.A recent example of instability occurred in the fourth quarter of 2003, when M2 shrank at the most rapid rate since the beginning of modern data collection in 1959 without any evident effects on prices or nominal spending. Subsequent analysis has explained part of the decline in M2 (the transfer of liquid funds into a recovering stock market was one possible cause), and data revisions have eliminated an additional portion of the decline, but much of the drop remains unexplained even well after the fact.Return to text Footnotes1.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1998), 1-001. In his recent history of the Federal Reserve, Allan Meltzer (2003, p. 66) notes of some of the Act’s proponents that: "[o]ne of their principal aims was to increase the seasonal response, or elasticity, of the note issue by eliminating the provisions of the National Banking Act that tied the amount of currency to the stock of government bonds."Return to text2.See Mankiw and Miron (1986) for a discussion of the Fed’s seasonal interest-rate smoothing. The Federal Reserve did publish data on the issuance of Federal Reserve notes from its inception. Federal Reserve notes were only part of total currency in circulation, however, the remainder being made up of national bank notes, United States notes, Treasury notes, gold and silver certificates, and gold and silver coin. Beginning in 1915, theFederal Reserve Bulletinincluded data on currency that had been collected by the Treasury and data on total bank deposits that had been collected by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency as a byproduct of its regulatory role, but publication was irregular.Return to text3.Indeed, the Federal Reserve’s adherence to the real bills doctrine--which counseled against active monetary management in favor of supplying money only as required to meet "the needs of trade"--gave the new institution little reason to pay attention to changes in the money stock. See Humphrey (1986) for a history of the real bills doctrine. The constraints of the gold standard also restricted (without entirely precluding) active monetary management by the Federal Reserve.Return to text4.In the second edition of his book, Currie (1935) wrote: "The achievement of desirable objectives … rests entirely upon the effectiveness of control. The achievement, for example, of the objective of a price level varying inversely with the productive efficiency of society demands a highly energetic central banking policy and a high degree of effectiveness of monetary control… Even for the achievement of the more modest objective of lessening business fluctuations by monetary means, the degree of control of the central bank is of paramount importance." (pp. 3-4).Return to text5.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1960).Return to text6.In 1971, M1 was currency and demand deposits at commercial banks. M2 was M1 plus commercial bank savings and small time deposits, and M3 was M2 plus deposits at mutual savings banks, savings and loans, and credit unions; data from the latter type of institution were available only monthly. M4 was M2 plus large time deposits, and M5 was M3 plus large time deposits. Changes in definitions make it difficult to track the historical development of the various monetary aggregates. Approximately, the 2006 definition of M1 is equivalent to this older definition, the 2006 definition of M2 is equivalent to the older definition of M3, and the definition of M3 at its date of last publication was equivalent to the older definition of M5. M4 and M5 were dropped in a 1980 redefinition of the monetary aggregates. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1976), pp. 10-11 and Anderson and Kavajecz (1994).Return to text7.For instance, in late 1959 and early 1960, money growth declined as other economic indicators rose. The minutes of the December 1959 FOMC meeting report Chairman Martin as saying, "I am unable to make heads or tails of the money supply," but those of the February 1960 meeting record his comment that "the System ought to be looking at the growth of the money supply." For further discussion, see Bremner (2004), pp. 141-142.Return to text8.M2 now includes currency and demand deposits (the components of M1) plus time deposits, savings deposits, and non-institutional money market funds.Return to text9.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1998), 1-017Return to text10.Monetarists criticized the use of multiple targets, rather than a single objective. Another object of criticism was "base drift," a set of practices that had the effect of re-setting the base from which money growth targets were calculated when the growth of one or more monetary aggregates exceeded the upper end of the Federal Reserve’s target range.Return to text11.Whether the Federal Reserve’s policies under Chairman Volcker were "truly" monetarist was a much-debated question at the time.Return to text12.The new accounts included negotiable-order-of-withdrawal (NOW) accounts and money market deposit accounts.Return to text13.Hallman, Porter, and Small (1991) and Kilborn (1989).Return to text14.Another possible explanation for this instability is the Goodhart-Lucas law, which says that any empirical relationship that is exploited for policy purposes will tend to break down. This law probably has less applicability in the United States than in some other countries, as the Federal Reserve has not systematically exploited the relationships of money to output or inflation, except perhaps to a degree in 1979-82.Return to text15.For a recent summary, see U.S. Department of the Treasury (2006).Return to text16.As another example, U.S. regulations require servicers of mortgage-backed securities to hold mortgage prepayments in deposits counted as part of M2 before disbursing the funds to investors. A wave of mortgage refinancing and the resulting prepayments can thus have significant effects on M2 growth that are only weakly related to overall economic activity. See O’Brien (2005) for more discussion.Return to text17.See Judson and Carpenter (2006) for a summary. A special factor that helps to explain some episodes of variable money demand is stock market volatility (Carpenter and Lange, 2003).Return to text18.A recent example of instability occurred in the fourth quarter of 2003, when M2 shrank at the most rapid rate since the beginning of modern data collection in 1959 without any evident effects on prices or nominal spending. Subsequent analysis has explained part of the decline in M2 (the transfer of liquid funds into a recovering stock market was one possible cause), and data revisions have eliminated an additional portion of the decline, but much of the drop remains unexplained even well after the fact.Return to text Footnotes 1.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1998), 1-001. In his recent history of the Federal Reserve, Allan Meltzer (2003, p. 66) notes of some of the Act’s proponents that: "[o]ne of their principal aims was to increase the seasonal response, or elasticity, of the note issue by eliminating the provisions of the National Banking Act that tied the amount of currency to the stock of government bonds."Return to text 2.See Mankiw and Miron (1986) for a discussion of the Fed’s seasonal interest-rate smoothing. The Federal Reserve did publish data on the issuance of Federal Reserve notes from its inception. Federal Reserve notes were only part of total currency in circulation, however, the remainder being made up of national bank notes, United States notes, Treasury notes, gold and silver certificates, and gold and silver coin. Beginning in 1915, theFederal Reserve Bulletinincluded data on currency that had been collected by the Treasury and data on total bank deposits that had been collected by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency as a byproduct of its regulatory role, but publication was irregular.Return to text 3.Indeed, the Federal Reserve’s adherence to the real bills doctrine--which counseled against active monetary management in favor of supplying money only as required to meet "the needs of trade"--gave the new institution little reason to pay attention to changes in the money stock. See Humphrey (1986) for a history of the real bills doctrine. The constraints of the gold standard also restricted (without entirely precluding) active monetary management by the Federal Reserve.Return to text 4.In the second edition of his book, Currie (1935) wrote: "The achievement of desirable objectives … rests entirely upon the effectiveness of control. The achievement, for example, of the objective of a price level varying inversely with the productive efficiency of society demands a highly energetic central banking policy and a high degree of effectiveness of monetary control… Even for the achievement of the more modest objective of lessening business fluctuations by monetary means, the degree of control of the central bank is of paramount importance." (pp. 3-4).Return to text 5.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1960).Return to text 6.In 1971, M1 was currency and demand deposits at commercial banks. M2 was M1 plus commercial bank savings and small time deposits, and M3 was M2 plus deposits at mutual savings banks, savings and loans, and credit unions; data from the latter type of institution were available only monthly. M4 was M2 plus large time deposits, and M5 was M3 plus large time deposits. Changes in definitions make it difficult to track the historical development of the various monetary aggregates. Approximately, the 2006 definition of M1 is equivalent to this older definition, the 2006 definition of M2 is equivalent to the older definition of M3, and the definition of M3 at its date of last publication was equivalent to the older definition of M5. M4 and M5 were dropped in a 1980 redefinition of the monetary aggregates. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1976), pp. 10-11 and Anderson and Kavajecz (1994).Return to text 7.For instance, in late 1959 and early 1960, money growth declined as other economic indicators rose. The minutes of the December 1959 FOMC meeting report Chairman Martin as saying, "I am unable to make heads or tails of the money supply," but those of the February 1960 meeting record his comment that "the System ought to be looking at the growth of the money supply." For further discussion, see Bremner (2004), pp. 141-142.Return to text 8.M2 now includes currency and demand deposits (the components of M1) plus time deposits, savings deposits, and non-institutional money market funds.Return to text 9.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1998), 1-017Return to text 10.Monetarists criticized the use of multiple targets, rather than a single objective. Another object of criticism was "base drift," a set of practices that had the effect of re-setting the base from which money growth targets were calculated when the growth of one or more monetary aggregates exceeded the upper end of the Federal Reserve’s target range.Return to text 11.Whether the Federal Reserve’s policies under Chairman Volcker were "truly" monetarist was a much-debated question at the time.Return to text 12.The new accounts included negotiable-order-of-withdrawal (NOW) accounts and money market deposit accounts.Return to text 13.Hallman, Porter, and Small (1991) and Kilborn (1989).Return to text 14.Another possible explanation for this instability is the Goodhart-Lucas law, which says that any empirical relationship that is exploited for policy purposes will tend to break down. This law probably has less applicability in the United States than in some other countries, as the Federal Reserve has not systematically exploited the relationships of money to output or inflation, except perhaps to a degree in 1979-82.Return to text 15.For a recent summary, see U.S. Department of the Treasury (2006).Return to text 16.As another example, U.S. regulations require servicers of mortgage-backed securities to hold mortgage prepayments in deposits counted as part of M2 before disbursing the funds to investors. A wave of mortgage refinancing and the resulting prepayments can thus have significant effects on M2 growth that are only weakly related to overall economic activity. See O’Brien (2005) for more discussion.Return to text 17.See Judson and Carpenter (2006) for a summary. A special factor that helps to explain some episodes of variable money demand is stock market volatility (Carpenter and Lange, 2003).Return to text 18.A recent example of instability occurred in the fourth quarter of 2003, when M2 shrank at the most rapid rate since the beginning of modern data collection in 1959 without any evident effects on prices or nominal spending. Subsequent analysis has explained part of the decline in M2 (the transfer of liquid funds into a recovering stock market was one possible cause), and data revisions have eliminated an additional portion of the decline, but much of the drop remains unexplained even well after the fact.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board announced Tuesday that it will publish the annual revision to the G.17 statistical release, Industrial Production and Capacity Utilization, on Monday, December 11, at 2 p.m. EST. The revision will be made available on the Board's web site atwww.federalreserve.gov/releases/G17
Statement by Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke: "Among economic scholars, Milton Friedman had no peer. The direct and indirect influences of his thinking on contemporary monetary economics would be difficult to overstate. Just as important, in his humane and engaging way, Milton conveyed to millions an understanding of the economic benefits of free, competitive markets, as well as the close connection that economic freedoms bear to other types of liberty. He will be sorely missed."
United National Corporation, First Premier Bank,and Premier Bankcard, Inc., Sioux Falls, S.D.Written Agreement dated September 23, 2003Terminated November 17, 2006
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the Cato Institute Monetary Policy Conference, Washington, D.C. I am delighted to speak at the Cato Monetary Conference. I have participated in a number of these stimulating conferences since I was in graduate school in the 1980s and have learned a lot from them as my thinking on monetary economics and monetary policy has evolved. Rather than focus on my intellectual journey, however, I would like to focus on a fundamental change that has taken place globally since I first spoke here roughly twenty years ago. In the United States and in virtually every country around the world, inflation has declined, and in most countries dramatically so. In addition, the volatility of inflation and expectations of future inflation have also fallen significantly. I will call these changes experienced around the globe the conquest of worldwide inflation. I will begin by providing a few facts about the substantial improvement of inflation during roughly the past decade compared with the quarter century that preceded it. I will then try to understand why this remarkable decline in inflation has taken place. In particular, I argue that globalization, deregulation, and financial innovation, in part spurred by experiences of high inflation in the 1980s, have fostered currency competition that has led to improved central bank performance and, hence, the recent conquest of worldwide inflation. Friedrich Hayek had long ago advocated permitting greater competition among currencies, arguing that there would be a race to the top rather than a race to the bottom.1Regardless of what one might think of Hayek's policy proposals, technological change in a globalized and competitive marketplace, I believe, has increased competition among currencies issued by central banks. The increased competition among currencies has changed the ability and the incentives of governments and central banks to pursue high-inflation policies. As I will argue, such changes have allowed improvements in central bank independence, governance and credibility, thereby leading to better inflation outcomes. In addition, greater central bank credibility has allowed the development of long-term bond markets in many countries where such markets did not previously exist and flattened of yield curves around the globe as concerns about future inflation risks declined. Deeper bond markets with a wider range of available maturities encourage long-term planning and investment, and thus convey lasting gains, particularly in emerging markets. The important issue is whether the conquest of worldwide inflation will persist or be a temporary phenomenon. The Worldwide Decline in InflationFrom the 1950s until the late 1960s, inflation rates were relatively contained, and episodes of high inflation were rare. Following the collapse of the Bretton Woods fixed-exchange-rate system in the early 1970s, however, inflation became a worldwide phenomenon. Even in Germany, where prices had been the most stable of any country in the world as tracked by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the purchasing power of the deutsche mark declined by more than half between 1972 and 1995.2For the United States, purchasing power declined more than 70 percent over this period. For roughly half of all countries reporting to the IMF, the erosion of value of the currency was more than 90 percent. To express this erosion in terms of cumulative inflation, $370 would be required today in the United Sates to purchase $100 worth of goods and services at 1972 prices. Brazil has by far had the worst experience of any country in the world during this period: The price level in Brazil is approximately 5 trillion times higher today than it was in 1972. Since the early 1990s, however, worldwide inflation has significantly declined. In the advanced economies, for instance, the median inflation rate has fallen from 7 percent in the 1980s to 2 percent in the current decade. In emerging markets, the median inflation rate has fallen from 9 percent to 4 percent over the same period. Indeed, the latest issue of the International Monetary Fund'sWorld Economic Outlookshows that average inflation rates in both the advanced economies and the developing countries in recent years are at their lowest levels since at least the early 1970s.3Indeed, the worst performers over the past five years have had inflation outcomes close to theaverageoutcome in the 1970s.4Thus, the worst inflation today is not nearly as bad as it once was. To give some specific examples, just ten or twenty years ago, annual inflation rates in Brazil and Mexico exceeded 100 percent. But during the past five to ten years, Brazilian and Mexican inflation rates have remained low. In particular, inflation in Brazil failed to spike after Brazil experienced financial crises and sharp currency depreciations in the late 1990s. Given Brazil's history of hyperinflation, this stability is especially remarkable. Brazil did experience an uptick of inflation around its presidential election in 2002, but even this was minor by historical standards. This pattern of reduced inflation is seen across many countries, large and small, developed and developing. The data thus clearly show that better inflation performance in the last decade is a worldwide phenomenon. But is this lower inflation regime likely to persist? One way to approach this issue is to investigate whether market participants appear to believe that this change is temporary or likely to last by examining measures of expected inflation. In the United States, where surveys go back furthest, long-term inflation expectations were as high as 8 percent in the early 1980s; they dropped to about 3 percent a decade ago and have since edged down a bit more, to about 2-1/2 percent, depending on your favorite measure of expectation.5Over the past ten years, other advanced economies and a few emerging markets such as Korea have had a broadly similar experience.6 In Brazil and Mexico, for example, long-term inflation expectations have declined from a range of 7 percent to 10 percent a decade ago to a fairly steady 3 percent to 4 percent in recent years. Considering the high rates of inflation that these economies experienced not long ago, the low level and stability of long-term inflation expectations in recent years is remarkable. Indeed, few long-term inflation forecasts in any country currently exceed 5 percent, although Venezuela provides one counterexample, with a long-term inflation forecast now of 15 percent. Overall, these surveys suggest that market participants do expect low inflation to persist around the globe. In addition, the risks of high inflation appear to have decreased as well. In particular, the volatility of inflation has declined notably almost everywhere. The standard deviation of inflation in the United States declined from as much as 4 percent in the early 1980s to around 1 percent a decade ago and has remained close to that level since then.7Other advanced economies have had a similar experience. The decline in volatility is even sharper for the emerging markets. In the early to mid 1990s, the standard deviation of inflation in Brazil at times exceeded 100 percent and in Mexico it exceeded 30 percent. In the current decade, however, the standard deviation of Brazilian inflation has been relatively stable at around 5 percent, while the standard deviation of inflation in Mexico has declined steadily to around 2 percent, a level similar to that experienced in the advanced economies. Factors Behind the Conquest of Worldwide InflationMy brief review of worldwide inflation performance suggests that something has changed in the past decade compared with the previous two decades: Inflation is substantially lower and less volatile and expectations of future inflation are also substantially lower. What has driven this change, which I call the conquest of worldwide inflation?8In understanding the key factors behind this change, we can also shed further light on the likelihood of whether this low inflation regime will persist. In a nutshell, I believe that the factors of globalization, deregulation, and financial innovation, arising partly in response to episodes of high inflation, have effectively eroded the central bank monopoly on the provision of monetary services and have enhanced global competition among currencies. These changes have, in turn, altered the incentives for central banks to behave badly and for finance ministries to use central banks as "piggy banks" to finance their fiscal policies. The resulting constraint on monetary policy, combined with increased public understanding of the costs of inflation, have led to institutional changes in central bank governance that bolster their credibility for maintaining price stability in the future. Improved central bank performance and credibility, thus, are the consequences of this combination of factors. To develop this explanation in more detail, I will start by describing how globalization, deregulation, and innovation can alter the ability and incentive of a government to pursue a high-inflation policy.9These factors are closely related and mutually reinforcing in many respects. Prompted in part by the collapse of central planning, many countries have turned increasingly to private markets and trade to deliver growth and progress. The resulting deregulation and greater openness has boosted innovation and has helped to increase global competition, or globalization, by shrinking the barriers of time and distance. Accordingly, trade and financial linkages between countries have soared in recent years to record levels. How does this affect inflation? When governments resort to printing money to finance their spending, inflation rises and nominal assets lose their value. This loss of value is also known as the inflation tax. Globalization, deregulation, and innovation make it easier for citizens to move their wealth out of nominal assets in the local currency should their government resort to an inflation tax. The demand for local currency has become much more sensitive to the inflation rate, and this greater sensitivity reduces the amount of real resources that the government can obtain for a given level of inflation. Therefore, the government has a reduced incentive to resort to the inflation tax. The specific channels by which globalization, deregulation, and financial innovation affect competition among currencies are many: Given such developments that facilitate competition among currencies, a government that pressures a central bank to pursue an inflationary policy gets much less benefit from increased inflation because people can more rapidly and conveniently switch out of the local currency. Indeed, the web site of the central bank of Brazil explicitly acknowledges the role of inflation in driving financial innovations that enabled firms and households to economize on cash balances in that country. It states, "Prior to the mid-1990s, [when inflation was stabilized] changes in the payment system in Brazil were motivated by the need to cope with high inflation rates. During that time, the system achieved significant technological progress, especially aimed at enhancing the speed of processing financial transactions."11 In addition to encouraging financial innovation, the painful experience of high inflation helped to educate the public and economists about the costs of inflation.12Although the specific experiences differed across countries, almost everywhere public opinion eventually turned against allowing inflation to continue, and this public pressure reinforced the trend against inflationary policies. Economists and central bankers also devoted great attention to understanding the causes and consequences of inflation, providing the intellectual underpinning to policies oriented toward price stability. In many countries, the factors I have discussed here led to changes in central banks that may make it more difficult to revert to high-inflation policies. The most notable change is the increased independence of many central banks and the correspondingly reduced control of the fiscal authorities over monetary policy. Central bank independence reduces the ability of a government to "rob the piggy bank" through a surprise inflation tax. In most cases, central bank independence can be reversed by a majority vote of the national legislature. But having to resort to such a vote is a greater obstacle to inflationary finance than that posed by previous arrangements, especially given the public's increased sensitivity and aversion to inflation. Central bank independence has typically been granted in conjunction with an explicit mandate that makes the achievement of low and stable inflation one of the goals of monetary policy. Central bank independence, together with a mandate that includes price stability, increases the credibility of monetary policy. Policy is credible because the central bank's objectives are clear to the public and because the central bank can be held accountable for failing to achieve its objectives. When citizens are more aware of the costs of inflation, and when governments are less able to reap benefits from high inflation and thus have less incentive to use the central bank as a piggy bank, institutional reforms that make central banks more credible and independent are more likely to be adopted and sustained.13 The fundamental forces I have described today--globalization, deregulation, financial innovation, and public understanding about the costs of inflation--provided the impetus for fighting inflation and opened the political path to institutional reforms, such as central bank independence, that enhance central bank credibility. Once in place, these reforms made further progress against inflation easier and raised the costs of backsliding. As the benefits of stable prices accrue and as financial markets deepen and become more sophisticated, the benefits of sound economic policies will help to create support for institutional reforms that make returning to inflation harder--but not impossible--for future governments. Implications of the Conquest for Bond MarketsWhat are the implications of the conquest of worldwide inflation for interest rates and yield curves? I believe that market confidence in continued low inflation has helped drive down the slope of the yield curve by reducing the premium demanded for holding long-term nominal assets. The conquest of inflation also has extended bond maturities and yield curves further into the future than ever before, most notably in many emerging markets. The current low level of long-term yields in the United States and other advanced economies is widely acknowledged as somewhat of a puzzle, or, to use former Chairman Greenspan's term, a conundrum.14Of course, flat and even inverted yield curves in advanced economies are nothing new. We know that the short end of the yield curve is dominated by monetary policy and cyclical factors. To abstract from the potential effect of cyclical factors on the yield curve, consider the pattern of forward rates many years into the future, at which point the effects of current cyclical shocks would be expected to no longer be important. The yield on a ten-year bond, for instance, can be thought of as an average of a series of consecutive forward rates. If you could borrow and lend at the same rate as the U.S. Treasury, then you could lock in a three-month loan ten years from now by borrowing for ten years and three months and simultaneously lending the same principal for ten years. The difference between the interest you pay and the interest you earn on this transaction determines the implied forward rate ten years from today. The forward rate reflects not only the market expectation of the future short-term interest rate but also a "term premium" to compensate for the risk of a commitment to extend credit so far in the future, including the risk of future inflation. At any point in time, then, we can calculate the short-term forward rate ten years ahead using the yield curve of U.S. Treasury coupon securities. This "far forward" rate has hovered around historically low levels of between 4-1/4 percent and 4-1/2 percent in the past year, more than 200 basis points (that is, two percent) below its average since 1990. Far-forward rates in other advanced economies have also declined over the past decade and are currently at or near historic lows.15 To some extent, low forward rates may reflect a persistent decline in expected future real rates of interest or in the real term premium. Chairman Bernanke has suggested that an excess of ex ante global saving relative to global investment has held down real interest rates around the world.16Some of the factors behind this excess of saving over investment include the surge in revenues of oil and commodity exporters, a retreat in Asian investment demand from the boom that preceded the late 1990s, and a reduction in fiscal deficits in some Latin American countries. But these low bond yields also have a nominal aspect. The declines in inflation rates, in the volatility of inflation, and in surveys of long-term inflation expectations all point to a reduction in the compensation required by investors for the effects of future inflation on the returns to holding long-term bonds. This development is particularly remarkable in many emerging markets, in which longer-dated fixed-coupon bonds issued in local currencies had ceased to exist during the inflationary 1970s and 1980s. The recent lengthening of maturities of domestic-currency-debt markets has, in many cases, not only extended the yield curve but--and this is one of the key results of the conquest of inflation--effectively created a local-currency yield curve that previously did not exist. Since 2000, ten-year nominal fixed-coupon bonds in the local currency have been introduced in Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Indonesia, Mexico, and Russia. Korea and Thailand introduced ten-year fixed coupon bonds in the 1990s. This year the government of Mexico issued a thirty-year fixed-coupon bond in pesos for the first time. The proportion of local-currency debt in Mexico maturing within one year was nearly 90 percent in 2002 and is now less than 75 percent.17The Korean government continues to increase the proportion of its domestic currency debt in longer maturities, with the one-year-and-under segment falling from roughly one-half in 1999 to one-quarter by the end of last year. Moreover, maturity extension is not limited to emerging markets. France and the United Kingdom, for example, issued fifty-year bonds last year. In addition to the development or extension of a yield curve worldwide, bond yields have tended to be relatively low and flat, at least in part because of the conquest of inflation. The flattening or slight inversion of yield curves in the major industrial economies, such as the United States, Japan, the euro area, the United Kingdom, and Canada is well known. For example, ten-year yields in the euro area are less than 50 basis points higher than three-month yields and the yield curve is currently downward-sloping in the United Kingdom. At the same time that maturities have been extended, bond yields in local currencies of emerging-market countries have also declined. It is perhaps not surprising that, given their high rates of saving and generally high level of economic development, the governments of Hong Kong and Korea can borrow at levels close to those in the advanced economies. More notable, however, is that the Mexican government can borrow in pesos at a thirty-year maturity at only 8 percent. Although Mexico is perhaps the most striking example, it is not alone. Other middle-income emerging markets with single-digit yields on fixed-rate ten-year bonds in the local currency include Chile, Colombia, Malaysia, Russia, and Thailand, to name but a few. The computation of forward rates for most of these countries is difficult due to the relative sparseness of the maturity distribution, but for those countries in which five-year forward rates can be computed, they have been declining and have reached very low levels in the past year or so. Overall, the combination of lower and less volatile inflation around the world has led to a reduction in inflation expectations and lower perceived inflation risk, and hence to a lower premium in long rates for inflation uncertainty. I believe that these factors have been important contributors to the lower long-term yields and the flattening of yield curves, particularly in emerging markets. The establishment of markets for long-term nominal government and corporate debt in countries in which they did not exist a decade ago is powerful evidence of the faith that investors place in a future environment of price stability. Broader Economic BenefitsThe economic benefits of price stability are too numerous and well known for me to cover here in detail. Long-run price stability certainly is essential for achieving maximum employment. However, I would like to underscore some benefits that are often overlooked, related to the development of markets for long-term bonds. Price stability boosts growth by deepening financial markets. Given stable prices, savers and investors have more confidence about the ultimate value of their investments. Stable prices encourage the growth of financial intermediaries and financial markets. As I have discussed, many emerging markets have recently experienced a deepening of their local financial markets through a greater issuance of longer-dated paper. There is a strong positive link between banking and financial market development and economic growth, and a number of studies have concluded that banking and financial market development is a key driver of economic growth. Thus, greater central bank credibility, which permits more development of local financial markets, can have an economic benefit beyond the financial sector.18 The development of long-term local-currency bond markets may also help to enable governments and firms to plan long-term infrastructure and investment projects that boost economic development. Although such debt markets are only one of many factors that can help to lower the costs of long-term planning and enhance the ability to undertake long-term investments, such developments can improve decisionmaking. In particular, investment decisions are less likely to be constrained by having only short term financing available for longer-term projects, thereby allowing improved decision making, for governments, firms, and individuals. Higher and more stable growth combined with better ability to undertake long-term plans can help to improve the fiscal outlook for a country. A better fiscal outlook, in turn, increases confidence and financial market development and thus further boosts growth and, in a virtuous cycle, reinforces prospects for continued price stability. More-prudent fiscal policies, including lower deficits, longer debt maturities, and reduced foreign-currency debt can reduce the likelihood and potential severity of financial crises. These policies make the financial positions of emerging-market governments less vulnerable to movements in interest rates and exchange rates. A reduction in the perceived risk that a government may not be able to service its debts makes changes in investor sentiment and financial contagion less likely, thereby reducing financial market volatility. Maintaining Progress on the Conquest of Worldwide InflationI have argued that globalization, deregulation, and financial innovation, in part spurred by recent experiences of high inflation, have fostered currency competition that has led to improved central bank performance and, hence, the conquest of worldwide inflation. The resulting enhancement of central bank governance and credibility has allowed the development of long-term bond markets in many countries and flattening of yield curves around the globe. I want to conclude by returning to the question of whether these phenomena are likely to persist. Globalization and innovation are genies that may prove difficult to put back in their bottles. Deregulation and global competition, however, may be more subject to change. Although I am an optimist, I would be remiss if I did not point out some risks to this otherwise cheerful narrative of conquest. The difficulty of reaching agreement in the Doha Round of trade negotiations highlights the risk of renewed protectionism and backtracking on deregulation. Trade barriers and regulations are anathema to globalization and competition. Barriers to the free flow of goods, services, capital, and technology would also diminish the force of innovation that has been so beneficial in the struggle against inflation. Transactions taxes and administrative barriers may hinder the development and liquidity of bond markets and there is still much progress that is required in many emerging markets on these fronts. High inflation can destroy an economy and result in enormous hardship for everyone involved. The benefits achieved through greater central bank credibility are substantial. Fortunately, economic forces have led to better central bank behavior around the world during the past decade. If citizens and politicians lose sight of these benefits and the forces that have led to enhanced currency competition are thwarted, these gains could prove fleeting. I believe that we must continue to work hard to lock in the gains achieved through anti-inflation credibility to ensure that the conquest will be long lasting. The lessons of the high inflation episodes are too important to forget. Endnotes 1.Friederich A. von Hayek (1976),Denationalization of Money: An Analysis of the Theory and Practice of Concurrent Currencies(London: Institute of Economic Affairs).Return to text 2.Based on changes in consumer prices, 1972 to 2005, from the International Monetary Fund,International Financial Statistics.Return to text 3.The IMF does report, however, some modest upward pressure during the past year or so.Return to text 4.The worst performers are defined as the 90th percentile of inflation rates across countries, from the IMF,International Financial Statistics. The typical outcome is defined as the 50th percentile.Return to text 5.Data are from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,Survey of Professional Forecasters.Return to text 6.The sample of foreign advanced economies consists of the euro area, Japan, and the United Kingdom. The sample of emerging-market economies consists of Brazil, China, Korea, and Mexico. Long-horizon forecasts refer to six-year- to ten-year-ahead forecasts from the April and October surveys of Consensus Economics.Return to text 7.Volatility is defined as the twenty-quarter rolling standard deviation of the annualized inflation rate.Return to text 8.I have borrowed my title from Thomas J. Sargent (1999),The Conquest of American Inflation(Princeton: Princeton University Press). Sargent focuses on the issue of central bank learning about evolving economic behavior in a statistical setting, and he does not directly analyze the institutional and regulatory changes that may be associated with this behavior.Return to text 9.This section draws on aspects of my presentation at a May 2001 conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and on my June 2006 speeches in New York. See Randall S. Kroszner (2003), "Currency Competition in the Digital Age," in David E. Altig and Bruce D. Smith, eds.,Evolution and Procedures in Central Banking(New York: Cambridge University Press), pp. 275-99; and Randall S. Kroszner (2006), "Why Are Yield Curves So Flat and Long Rates So Low Globally?"remarks at the Institute of International Bankers, New York, June 16. Kenneth Rogoff proposed another effect of globalization on inflation at the 2003 Jackson Hole conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. According to Rogoff, greater competition leads not only to lower but also to more-flexible prices. When prices are more flexible, a central bank's ability to temporarily influence output is diminished, while its influence on inflation is enhanced. Thus, more-competitive markets naturally help central banks achieve price stabilization. See Kenneth S. Rogoff (2003),"Globalization and Global Disinflation," (237 KB PDF)inMonetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy(Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City), pp. 77-112.Return to text 10.For example, over the past ten years, most major emerging-market economies have implemented real-time gross settlement payment systems, which allow markets to rapidly settle payments and other obligations with finality during the day. See Morten Bech and Bart Hobijn (2006),"Technology Diffusion within Central Banking: The Case of Real-Time Gross Settlement,"Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Reports No. 260.Return to text 11.http://www.bcb.gov.br/?PAYSYSREFORMReturn to text 12.This hypothesis was raised in the discussion of Rogoff (2003). See Guillermo Ortiz, chair,"General Discussion: Globalization and Global Disinflation," (120 KB PDF)inMonetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy(Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City), pp. 119-30. For evidence that voters in Latin America in recent years have punished politicians for bad inflation outcomes, see Eduardo Lora and Mauricio Oliveira (2005), "The Electoral Consequences of the Washington Consensus,"Economia, vol. 5 (Spring), pp. 1-61.Return to text 13.In a paper with Douglas Irwin, I documented a similar dynamic at work in the gradual reversal of protectionist policies in the United States in the 1930s and 1940s. See Douglas A. Irwin and Randall S. Kroszner (1999), "Interests, Institutions, and Ideology in Securing Policy Change: The Republican Conversion to Trade Liberalization after Smoot-Hawley,"Journal of Law and Economics, vol. 42 (October), pp. 643-73.Return to text 14.Alan Greenspan (2005),statementbefore the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, presenting the Federal Reserve Board's"Monetary Policy Report to the Congress,"February 16.Return to text 15.Far-forward rates in yen are up about 1 percentage point from their historical lows associated with the Japanese deflation scares of 1998 and 2003, a level obviously still low in historical context.Return to text 16.Ben S. Bernanke (2005),"The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,"Sandridge Lecture at the Virginia Association of Economists, March 10.Return to text 17.I have included floating-rate debt in the one-year maturity category.Return to text 18.See Ross Levine (2005), "Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence," Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds.,Handbook of Economic Growth(New York: Elsevier); and Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan (2006), "Regulation and Deregulation of the U.S. Banking Industry: Causes, Consequences, and Implications of the Future," unpublished paper.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the National Italian American Foundation, New York, New York Thank you for inviting me to speak today. I will take this opportunity to present an update on the economic outlook. This month marks the fifth anniversary of the beginning of the current expansion. Frequently, the early stages of an expansion include a period of above-trend growth, as underutilized resources are put back to work. As slack in the economy is reduced, however, economic growth tends to moderate. Indeed, at that stage, some slowing of growth to a pace consistent with the rate of increase in the nation's underlying productive capacity is necessary if the expansion is to be sustained without a buildup in inflationary pressures. In my testimony to the Congress in July, as part of the Federal Reserve's semiannual monetary policy report, I noted that the U.S. economy had entered this transition phase, and that some moderation of economic growth over the remainder of the year seemed likely. The deceleration in economic activity currently under way appears to be taking place roughly along the lines envisioned in the Federal Reserve's July report. As anticipated, the slowdown primarily reflects a cooling of the housing market. Most other sectors of the economy appear still to be expanding at a solid rate, and the labor market has tightened further. Inflation, which picked up earlier this year, has been somewhat better behaved of late. Overall inflation was pushed up this spring by a surge in energy prices, but the recent declines in energy prices have largely reversed those effects. Price inflation for consumer goods and services excluding energy and food, the so-called core inflation rate, has also moderated a bit in the past few months. But the level of the core inflation rate remains uncomfortably high. Over the next year or so, the economy appears likely to expand at a moderate rate, close to or modestly below the economy's long-run sustainable pace. Core inflation is expected to slow gradually from its recent level, reflecting the reduced impetus from high prices of energy and other commodities, contained inflation expectations, and perhaps further reductions in the rate of increase of shelter costs and some easing in the pressures on capital and labor resources. However, substantial uncertainties surround this baseline forecast. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the committee that sets monetary policy, will continue to monitor the incoming data closely. In its latest statement, the FOMC reiterated its view that the upside risks to inflation are the predominant risks to the forecast and indicated that it is prepared to take action to address inflation if developments warrant. Economic Activity: Recent Developments and ProspectsAs I have just noted, the pace of economic activity has moderated over the course of the year. According to the latest estimates by the U.S. Department of Commerce, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at an annual rate of 2.6 percent in the second quarter of 2006 and at a rate of only 1.6 percent in the third quarter. These figures are down noticeably from the 3-1/2 percent average pace of growth of the preceding two years. We will receive an updated estimate of third-quarter GDP growth tomorrow. At this juncture, information about economic activity in the fourth quarter is limited, and the range of plausible outcomes remains wide. But the indicators in hand suggest that real GDP growth this quarter is likely to be in the same general range that it was in the second and third quarters. Housing has played a significant role in the recent slowing of overall activity, and developments in this sector are likely to have an important influence on economic growth going forward as well. As you know, the correction in the housing market that is now in train follows a boom during the first half of this decade. Between 2000 and late 2005, the pace of construction of single-family homes rose more than 40 percent, and sales of both new and existing homes increased by a similar amount. Nationally, home prices increased about 60 percent over that period--an average figure that masks considerable variation in the rate of price appreciation across cities and regions, as home prices rose exceptionally rapidly in some "hot" locations but only modestly in others. No real or financial asset can be counted upon to pay a higher risk-adjusted return than other assets year after year, and housing is no exception. Thus, a slowing in the pace of house-price appreciation was inevitable. Moreover, the sustained rise in prices, together with some increase in mortgage interest rates, sowed the seeds of the correction by making housing progressively less affordable. Declining affordability ultimately served to limit the demand for housing, leading to a deceleration in house prices and slowing home purchases. The drop in home sales that began earlier this year has led homebuilders to curtail the rate of new construction. Indeed, single-family housing starts are down about 35 percent since their peak earlier this year. Obtaining a precise read on home prices is difficult: During a period of weak demand, potential sellers often choose to leave their homes on the market longer or even to remove them from the market, rather than accept price offers that are below their expectations. The timeliest data on house prices do not fully account for changes in the composition of home sales by location, size, and other characteristics. Moreover, the data do not capture hidden price cuts, as when builders try to stimulate sales through the use of "sweeteners" such as paying the customer's mortgage points or upgrading features of the house at no additional cost. Nevertheless, there can be little doubt that the rate of home-price appreciation has slowed significantly for the nation as whole. Some areas have continued to experience gains--albeit smaller ones than before--while other markets have seen outright price declines. Notwithstanding the sharp reduction in starts of new single-family houses, inventories of both new and existing homes for sale have increased markedly this year. For example, according to the most recent data, homebuilders currently have about 550,000 new homes for sale, roughly half again the number that has been typical during the past decade. Moreover, the official statistics likely understate the full extent of the inventory buildup, as many homebuilders have reported a sharp increase this year in the number of buyers canceling signed contracts. A home for which the sales contract is cancelled becomes available for sale once again but is not included in the official data on the inventory of unsold new homes. To reduce this inventory overhang, builders are likely to continue to limit the number of new homes under construction. Although residential construction continues to sag, some indications suggest that the rate of home purchase may be stabilizing, perhaps in response to modest declines in mortgage interest rates over the past few months and lower prices in some markets. Sales of new homes ticked up in August and increased a bit further in September. The University of Michigan's survey of consumers shows an increase in the share of respondents who believe that now is a good time to buy a home, from 57 percent in September to 67 percent in November. Meanwhile, an index of applications for mortgages for home purchases has been trending up since July. Although these developments are encouraging, we should keep in mind that even if demand stabilizes in its current range, reducing the inventory of unsold homes to more normal levels will likely involve further adjustments in production. The slowing pace of residential construction is likely to be a drag on economic growth into next year. Growth in some manufacturing industries has also slowed of late, and data prepared by the Federal Reserve show that aggregate manufacturing production declined in September and October. The motor vehicle sector in particular has experienced weaker demand and an accompanying buildup in stocks of unsold cars and trucks over the past year. Energy prices have contributed to these developments, as consumers have responded to high prices at the pump by reducing their demand for less fuel-efficient vehicles. The decline in sales caused inventories of these vehicles to surge this past spring. Since then, automakers have cut production to reduce the overhang of inventories; on a seasonally adjusted basis, the pace of light vehicle assembly in October was about 10 percent below the pace in the second quarter. The growth of production in some other manufacturing industries, notably those closely tied to the housing and automobile sectors, has also been slowing. Elsewhere in the industrial sector, though, production in high-tech industries has been growing rapidly, and high prices for energy and other commodities have stimulated drilling and mining activity. The global economy continues to be strong, with cyclical recoveries under way in Europe and Japan and ongoing growth in the emerging-market economies; this growth abroad should support the continuing expansion of U.S. exports of goods and services. Outside of the housing and motor vehicle sectors, economic activity has, on balance, been expanding at a solid pace. Perhaps the clearest evidence of this broader economic strength comes from the labor market. Although the number of jobs in manufacturing and construction fell in October, most other sectors of the economy experienced solid job gains. Private employers in industries outside of manufacturing and construction added nearly 125,000 workers to their payrolls last month, following an average increase of 140,000 jobs per month during the preceding three months. With labor demand continuing to expand over the past several months, the national unemployment rate fell to 4.4 percent in October, its lowest level since May 2001.The strength of the labor market and the associated increases in wage and salary income have supported consumer spending. The data in hand indicate that, the slowdown in housing notwithstanding, inflation-adjusted outlays for personal consumption increased in the third quarter at about the average rate seen since the current economic expansion began in late 2001. The latest retail sales figures suggest an increase in consumption at roughly that pace in the current quarter as well. Other factors that are positive for consumer spending include the recent declines in energy prices, which have boosted household purchasing power and consumer confidence; increases in stock prices, which have added to household wealth; and relatively low long-term interest rates.In the business sector, capital investment has continued to expand at a healthy pace. Spending on nonresidential construction--a component of business investment--has been particularly robust, reflecting higher outlays for new office and commercial buildings as well as a rapid increase in expenditures on drilling and mining structures. Outlays for equipment and software, which grew briskly from mid-2004 through the early part of this year, have moderated somewhat, though order backlogs for capital goods such as industrial machinery and other types of heavy equipment remain substantial. Moreover, financial conditions continue to be favorable for investment spending, as profitability is high, the cost of capital is relatively low, and significant cash reserves remain on firms' books.Overall, the economy is likely to expand at a moderate pace going forward. A reasonable projection is that economic growth will be modestly below trend in the near term but that, over the course of the coming year, it will return to a rate that is roughly in line with the growth rate of the economy's underlying productive capacity. This scenario envisions that consumer spending--supported by rising incomes and the recent decline in energy prices--will continue to grow near its trend rate, and that the drag on the economy from the motor vehicle and housing sectors will gradually diminish. The motor vehicle sector may already be showing signs of strengthening; after having cut production significantly in recent months in response to the rise in the inventory of unsold vehicles, automakers appear to have boosted the assembly rate a bit in November, and they have scheduled further increases for December. The effects of the housing correction on real economic activity are likely to persist into next year, as I have already noted. But the rate of decline in home construction should slow as the inventory of unsold new homes is gradually worked down.Like all economic forecasts, this one is provisional, and risks exist in both directions. On the downside, the correction in the housing market could turn out to be more severe and widespread than seems most likely at present. A deeper correction would directly affect economic activity through additional cutbacks in housing starts and through its effects on employment in construction and housing-related industries. More indirectly, it might also impose greater restraint on consumer spending by reducing homeowners' equity and thus household wealth, and perhaps by affecting consumer confidence as well. Because consumption makes up more than two-thirds of aggregate expenditure, any significant effect on consumer spending arising from further weakness in housing would have important implications for the economy.On the other hand, economic growth could rebound more vigorously than now expected. The solid rate of job growth, the decline in the unemployment rate, and the healthy pace of capital investment could be signals that underlying economic fundamentals are stronger than generally recognized. Moreover, to date there is little evidence that the weakness in housing markets is spilling over more broadly to consumer spending or aggregate employment. If these trends continue, growth in real activity might return to a pace that could intensify upward pressures on resource utilization.Potential OutputIn my remarks today, I have alluded to the economy's underlying productive capacity--in the jargon of economists, "potential output." The growth rate of potential output is the rate of growth that the economy can sustain in the long run. I will briefly discuss the factors determining potential output and the implications that the growth rate of potential output has for the economy and monetary policy.Growth in potential output is determined to a large extent by two factors: the trend growth rates of the labor force (that is, the number of individuals available to work) and of labor productivity (that is, the amount of output that each worker can produce).With regard to the labor force, research by the Board's staff highlights the role of demographic factors in determining the number of people available to work in the years just ahead. Most notably, the impending retirement of the baby boomers and the fact that women are no longer increasing their participation in the labor force at the rate they were in the past will tend to restrain the future growth rate of the U.S. labor force. All else being equal, these developments translate into a slower rate of growth of potential output. Estimates of the magnitude of the likely slowdown in labor force growth, particularly in the longer run, are subject to significant uncertainty. For example, to a degree that is hard to predict, improved health and increased longevity may increase the interest of older workers in remaining in the labor force, perhaps on a part-time basis, and an increasing scarcity of labor may prompt changes in labor-market institutions and employer behavior that facilitate the participation of older workers. But those adjustments are likely to take time, and some slowing in the growth of the labor force thus seems likely over the next few years at least.With regard to productivity, I remain optimistic that the recent favorable trends will continue. The price of computing power continues to fall sharply, having declined by nearly half between 2000 and 2005. Increased computing power has contributed, in turn, to the development and growth of other commercially relevant technologies, such as biotechnology, and has led to improvements in efficiency, through better supply-chain management, for example. Moreover, whatever the pace of future technological progress, further diffusion of already-existing technologies and applications to more firms and industries should continue to increase aggregate productivity for a time.That said, longer-run trends in the growth of productivity are very difficult to predict. During the first half of the decade, productivity in the nonfarm business sector increased at an unusually high average annual rate of about 3 percent. However, according to current estimates, productivity growth slowed in the second quarter of this year and came to a halt in the third quarter. Moreover, the strength of recent hiring raises the possibility of subpar productivity growth in the fourth quarter as well. When all is said and done, however, I expect that the latest numbers will turn out to have been a reflection of the typical volatility in the data and some cyclical response to the slowing in economic activity, not a signal of a sea change in the longer-run outlook for productivity growth.Even if productivity growth is sustained at a reasonably good rate, the slower expansion of the labor force will imply some moderation in the rate of growth of potential output over the next few years. In the very near term, that slower growth in the labor force needs to be taken into consideration when assessing the sustainability of given rates of expansion in economic activity. In the medium term, because the factors that affect potential output and thus aggregate supply also tend to affect aggregate demand, slower growth of potential output does not necessarily mean that inflation will be higher or that monetary policy will have to be tighter. Rather, the implications for monetary policy of a possible slowing in the growth of potential output depend on the extent to which such a slowing alters the balance of supply and demand in the economy. For example, as we saw in the second half of the 1990s, changes in expected productivity growth and potential output can significantly affect aggregate demand through their influences on income expectations and asset prices. The problem for policymakers is to identify, in real time, any changes in the prospective growth rate of potential output and to anticipate the accompanying effects on the balance of supply and demand.Inflation and Monetary PolicyOverall (or "headline") inflation has slowed significantly since earlier this year; indeed, in October the consumer price index fell by 1/2 percent for the second consecutive month. This improvement is largely the result of the recent declines in energy prices. The price of crude oil has fallen about one-fourth since its recent peak, reflecting some easing of geopolitical concerns and other factors. In particular, participants in crude oil markets--still mindful of the devastating effects on energy supplies of the hurricane season in 2005--appear in retrospect to have incorporated a substantial risk premium into spot prices earlier this year. In the event, no damaging storms occurred this hurricane season. As the good news about the weather unfolded, spot prices of crude oil fell from August through early October.Readings on the core inflation rate--that is, the inflation rate excluding the energy and food components--have improved modestly since the spring, but core inflation nevertheless remains uncomfortably high. Core CPI inflation over the most recent twelve months was 2.7 percent, up from 2.1 percent over the previous twelve months. Another measure of core inflation that we monitor, the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy, is available only through September; that index was up 2.4 percent over the past year, compared with a 2.1 percent rise in the preceding twelve months.Several factors underlie the increase in core inflation over the past year, although the relative contributions are impossible to estimate precisely. Increased pressure on resource utilization as the economic expansion matured and slack was reduced has likely played some role. The sharp increases in energy and materials costs figured in the rise in core inflation as well, as some suppliers of non-energy goods and services may have been able to pass through their higher input costs into final prices.More-rapid increases in shelter costs also boosted core consumer inflation over the past year. In the broad measures of consumer prices that we follow, substantial weight is given to an item called owners' equivalent rent (OER). OER is a measure of the price of the dwelling services enjoyed by people who own their homes; conceptually, if homeowners were to rent their homes from themselves, OER would be the market rent that they would pay. Economic statisticians estimate OER by using prices in the rental housing market. Over the past twelve months, the consumer price index for OER has risen about 4 percent, compared with 2-1/4 percent during the preceding twelve months. The acceleration in OER may reflect in part a shift in demand toward rental housing as families judged homeownership to have become less financially attractive of late. The most recent monthly increases in OER generally have been smaller than those earlier in the year, and further slowing may occur as the supply of rental units increases and the demand for owner-occupied housing stabilizes. However, the future evolution of this measure is difficult to know with any certainty.Looking forward, core inflation seems likely to moderate gradually over the next year or so. Some of the factors that pushed up core inflation in the recent past--in particular, energy prices and shelter costs--appear likely to be more neutral in the coming year, and inflation expectations remain contained. Moreover, if, as seems most probable, the economy grows at a rate modestly below its potential for a time, pressures on resource utilization should ease a bit.However, as with the outlook for economic activity, there are substantial uncertainties about the inflation forecast. In the case of inflation, the risks to the forecast seem primarily to the upside. Given the current level of inflation, a failure of inflation to moderate as expected would be especially troublesome.One factor that we are watching carefully is labor costs, which depend on both the compensation received by workers and labor productivity. Although the available indicators give somewhat different signals, it seems clear that labor costs--which account for roughly two-thirds of firm's total costs--have been rising more quickly of late. Some part of this acceleration no doubt reflects the current tightness in labor markets. For example, anecdotal reports suggest that businesses have been finding it difficult to recruit well-qualified workers in certain occupations.What implications does the pickup in labor costs have for price inflation? One possible outcome is that increases in labor costs will largely be absorbed by a narrowing of firms' profit margins and not be passed on to consumers in the form of higher prices. The fact that the average markup of prices over unit labor costs is currently high by historical standards suggests some scope for this outcome to occur. If higher labor costs are mostly absorbed by firms and not passed on, then workers will see the gains in their nominal compensation per hour of work translated into greater real compensation per hour; in the process, workers would capture a greater share of the fruits of the high rate of productivity growth seen in recent years. The more worrisome possibility is that tight product markets might allow firms to pass all or part of their higher labor costs through to prices, adding to inflation pressures. The data on costs, margins, and prices in coming months may shed some light on which of these two scenarios is likely to be the better description of events.During the early part of this decade, the Federal Reserve sharply eased the stance of monetary policy to help bring the economy out of recession and to foster a durable economic expansion. Once the expansion had clearly gained firm footing, the FOMC began a process of normalizing interest rates that involved seventeen consecutive increases in overnight rates of 25 basis points each. In August of this year, and again in September and October, the Committee left interest rates unchanged so as to assess the effects of its previous policy actions, and because of indications that economic growth was moderating and that inflation pressures might be diminishing somewhat. At the same time, the Committee has continued to emphasize the upside risks to inflation and the high costs that would be associated with a failure of inflation to moderate gradually as expected. Needless to say, we will continue to monitor the inflation situation closely. Whether further policy action against inflation will be required depends on the incoming data and in particular on how these data affect the FOMC's medium-term forecasts of both inflation and output growth.I have focused today on the near-term prospects for the economy and the risks to the economic outlook. However, in reviewing the economic developments of recent years, one cannot help but be impressed by the dynamism and resilience of the U.S. economy. I have confidence, therefore, that however events play out in the short term, in the longer term the economy will grow at a healthy pace, raising living standards in the process. The Federal Reserve will continue to play its part by implementing policies designed to achieve its mandate of fostering price stability and maximum sustainable employment. The strength of the labor market and the associated increases in wage and salary income have supported consumer spending. The data in hand indicate that, the slowdown in housing notwithstanding, inflation-adjusted outlays for personal consumption increased in the third quarter at about the average rate seen since the current economic expansion began in late 2001. The latest retail sales figures suggest an increase in consumption at roughly that pace in the current quarter as well. Other factors that are positive for consumer spending include the recent declines in energy prices, which have boosted household purchasing power and consumer confidence; increases in stock prices, which have added to household wealth; and relatively low long-term interest rates. In the business sector, capital investment has continued to expand at a healthy pace. Spending on nonresidential construction--a component of business investment--has been particularly robust, reflecting higher outlays for new office and commercial buildings as well as a rapid increase in expenditures on drilling and mining structures. Outlays for equipment and software, which grew briskly from mid-2004 through the early part of this year, have moderated somewhat, though order backlogs for capital goods such as industrial machinery and other types of heavy equipment remain substantial. Moreover, financial conditions continue to be favorable for investment spending, as profitability is high, the cost of capital is relatively low, and significant cash reserves remain on firms' books. Overall, the economy is likely to expand at a moderate pace going forward. A reasonable projection is that economic growth will be modestly below trend in the near term but that, over the course of the coming year, it will return to a rate that is roughly in line with the growth rate of the economy's underlying productive capacity. This scenario envisions that consumer spending--supported by rising incomes and the recent decline in energy prices--will continue to grow near its trend rate, and that the drag on the economy from the motor vehicle and housing sectors will gradually diminish. The motor vehicle sector may already be showing signs of strengthening; after having cut production significantly in recent months in response to the rise in the inventory of unsold vehicles, automakers appear to have boosted the assembly rate a bit in November, and they have scheduled further increases for December. The effects of the housing correction on real economic activity are likely to persist into next year, as I have already noted. But the rate of decline in home construction should slow as the inventory of unsold new homes is gradually worked down. Like all economic forecasts, this one is provisional, and risks exist in both directions. On the downside, the correction in the housing market could turn out to be more severe and widespread than seems most likely at present. A deeper correction would directly affect economic activity through additional cutbacks in housing starts and through its effects on employment in construction and housing-related industries. More indirectly, it might also impose greater restraint on consumer spending by reducing homeowners' equity and thus household wealth, and perhaps by affecting consumer confidence as well. Because consumption makes up more than two-thirds of aggregate expenditure, any significant effect on consumer spending arising from further weakness in housing would have important implications for the economy. On the other hand, economic growth could rebound more vigorously than now expected. The solid rate of job growth, the decline in the unemployment rate, and the healthy pace of capital investment could be signals that underlying economic fundamentals are stronger than generally recognized. Moreover, to date there is little evidence that the weakness in housing markets is spilling over more broadly to consumer spending or aggregate employment. If these trends continue, growth in real activity might return to a pace that could intensify upward pressures on resource utilization. Potential OutputIn my remarks today, I have alluded to the economy's underlying productive capacity--in the jargon of economists, "potential output." The growth rate of potential output is the rate of growth that the economy can sustain in the long run. I will briefly discuss the factors determining potential output and the implications that the growth rate of potential output has for the economy and monetary policy. Growth in potential output is determined to a large extent by two factors: the trend growth rates of the labor force (that is, the number of individuals available to work) and of labor productivity (that is, the amount of output that each worker can produce). With regard to the labor force, research by the Board's staff highlights the role of demographic factors in determining the number of people available to work in the years just ahead. Most notably, the impending retirement of the baby boomers and the fact that women are no longer increasing their participation in the labor force at the rate they were in the past will tend to restrain the future growth rate of the U.S. labor force. All else being equal, these developments translate into a slower rate of growth of potential output. Estimates of the magnitude of the likely slowdown in labor force growth, particularly in the longer run, are subject to significant uncertainty. For example, to a degree that is hard to predict, improved health and increased longevity may increase the interest of older workers in remaining in the labor force, perhaps on a part-time basis, and an increasing scarcity of labor may prompt changes in labor-market institutions and employer behavior that facilitate the participation of older workers. But those adjustments are likely to take time, and some slowing in the growth of the labor force thus seems likely over the next few years at least.With regard to productivity, I remain optimistic that the recent favorable trends will continue. The price of computing power continues to fall sharply, having declined by nearly half between 2000 and 2005. Increased computing power has contributed, in turn, to the development and growth of other commercially relevant technologies, such as biotechnology, and has led to improvements in efficiency, through better supply-chain management, for example. Moreover, whatever the pace of future technological progress, further diffusion of already-existing technologies and applications to more firms and industries should continue to increase aggregate productivity for a time.That said, longer-run trends in the growth of productivity are very difficult to predict. During the first half of the decade, productivity in the nonfarm business sector increased at an unusually high average annual rate of about 3 percent. However, according to current estimates, productivity growth slowed in the second quarter of this year and came to a halt in the third quarter. Moreover, the strength of recent hiring raises the possibility of subpar productivity growth in the fourth quarter as well. When all is said and done, however, I expect that the latest numbers will turn out to have been a reflection of the typical volatility in the data and some cyclical response to the slowing in economic activity, not a signal of a sea change in the longer-run outlook for productivity growth.Even if productivity growth is sustained at a reasonably good rate, the slower expansion of the labor force will imply some moderation in the rate of growth of potential output over the next few years. In the very near term, that slower growth in the labor force needs to be taken into consideration when assessing the sustainability of given rates of expansion in economic activity. In the medium term, because the factors that affect potential output and thus aggregate supply also tend to affect aggregate demand, slower growth of potential output does not necessarily mean that inflation will be higher or that monetary policy will have to be tighter. Rather, the implications for monetary policy of a possible slowing in the growth of potential output depend on the extent to which such a slowing alters the balance of supply and demand in the economy. For example, as we saw in the second half of the 1990s, changes in expected productivity growth and potential output can significantly affect aggregate demand through their influences on income expectations and asset prices. The problem for policymakers is to identify, in real time, any changes in the prospective growth rate of potential output and to anticipate the accompanying effects on the balance of supply and demand.Inflation and Monetary PolicyOverall (or "headline") inflation has slowed significantly since earlier this year; indeed, in October the consumer price index fell by 1/2 percent for the second consecutive month. This improvement is largely the result of the recent declines in energy prices. The price of crude oil has fallen about one-fourth since its recent peak, reflecting some easing of geopolitical concerns and other factors. In particular, participants in crude oil markets--still mindful of the devastating effects on energy supplies of the hurricane season in 2005--appear in retrospect to have incorporated a substantial risk premium into spot prices earlier this year. In the event, no damaging storms occurred this hurricane season. As the good news about the weather unfolded, spot prices of crude oil fell from August through early October.Readings on the core inflation rate--that is, the inflation rate excluding the energy and food components--have improved modestly since the spring, but core inflation nevertheless remains uncomfortably high. Core CPI inflation over the most recent twelve months was 2.7 percent, up from 2.1 percent over the previous twelve months. Another measure of core inflation that we monitor, the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy, is available only through September; that index was up 2.4 percent over the past year, compared with a 2.1 percent rise in the preceding twelve months.Several factors underlie the increase in core inflation over the past year, although the relative contributions are impossible to estimate precisely. Increased pressure on resource utilization as the economic expansion matured and slack was reduced has likely played some role. The sharp increases in energy and materials costs figured in the rise in core inflation as well, as some suppliers of non-energy goods and services may have been able to pass through their higher input costs into final prices.More-rapid increases in shelter costs also boosted core consumer inflation over the past year. In the broad measures of consumer prices that we follow, substantial weight is given to an item called owners' equivalent rent (OER). OER is a measure of the price of the dwelling services enjoyed by people who own their homes; conceptually, if homeowners were to rent their homes from themselves, OER would be the market rent that they would pay. Economic statisticians estimate OER by using prices in the rental housing market. Over the past twelve months, the consumer price index for OER has risen about 4 percent, compared with 2-1/4 percent during the preceding twelve months. The acceleration in OER may reflect in part a shift in demand toward rental housing as families judged homeownership to have become less financially attractive of late. The most recent monthly increases in OER generally have been smaller than those earlier in the year, and further slowing may occur as the supply of rental units increases and the demand for owner-occupied housing stabilizes. However, the future evolution of this measure is difficult to know with any certainty.Looking forward, core inflation seems likely to moderate gradually over the next year or so. Some of the factors that pushed up core inflation in the recent past--in particular, energy prices and shelter costs--appear likely to be more neutral in the coming year, and inflation expectations remain contained. Moreover, if, as seems most probable, the economy grows at a rate modestly below its potential for a time, pressures on resource utilization should ease a bit.However, as with the outlook for economic activity, there are substantial uncertainties about the inflation forecast. In the case of inflation, the risks to the forecast seem primarily to the upside. Given the current level of inflation, a failure of inflation to moderate as expected would be especially troublesome.One factor that we are watching carefully is labor costs, which depend on both the compensation received by workers and labor productivity. Although the available indicators give somewhat different signals, it seems clear that labor costs--which account for roughly two-thirds of firm's total costs--have been rising more quickly of late. Some part of this acceleration no doubt reflects the current tightness in labor markets. For example, anecdotal reports suggest that businesses have been finding it difficult to recruit well-qualified workers in certain occupations.What implications does the pickup in labor costs have for price inflation? One possible outcome is that increases in labor costs will largely be absorbed by a narrowing of firms' profit margins and not be passed on to consumers in the form of higher prices. The fact that the average markup of prices over unit labor costs is currently high by historical standards suggests some scope for this outcome to occur. If higher labor costs are mostly absorbed by firms and not passed on, then workers will see the gains in their nominal compensation per hour of work translated into greater real compensation per hour; in the process, workers would capture a greater share of the fruits of the high rate of productivity growth seen in recent years. The more worrisome possibility is that tight product markets might allow firms to pass all or part of their higher labor costs through to prices, adding to inflation pressures. The data on costs, margins, and prices in coming months may shed some light on which of these two scenarios is likely to be the better description of events.During the early part of this decade, the Federal Reserve sharply eased the stance of monetary policy to help bring the economy out of recession and to foster a durable economic expansion. Once the expansion had clearly gained firm footing, the FOMC began a process of normalizing interest rates that involved seventeen consecutive increases in overnight rates of 25 basis points each. In August of this year, and again in September and October, the Committee left interest rates unchanged so as to assess the effects of its previous policy actions, and because of indications that economic growth was moderating and that inflation pressures might be diminishing somewhat. At the same time, the Committee has continued to emphasize the upside risks to inflation and the high costs that would be associated with a failure of inflation to moderate gradually as expected. Needless to say, we will continue to monitor the inflation situation closely. Whether further policy action against inflation will be required depends on the incoming data and in particular on how these data affect the FOMC's medium-term forecasts of both inflation and output growth.I have focused today on the near-term prospects for the economy and the risks to the economic outlook. However, in reviewing the economic developments of recent years, one cannot help but be impressed by the dynamism and resilience of the U.S. economy. I have confidence, therefore, that however events play out in the short term, in the longer term the economy will grow at a healthy pace, raising living standards in the process. The Federal Reserve will continue to play its part by implementing policies designed to achieve its mandate of fostering price stability and maximum sustainable employment. With regard to productivity, I remain optimistic that the recent favorable trends will continue. The price of computing power continues to fall sharply, having declined by nearly half between 2000 and 2005. Increased computing power has contributed, in turn, to the development and growth of other commercially relevant technologies, such as biotechnology, and has led to improvements in efficiency, through better supply-chain management, for example. Moreover, whatever the pace of future technological progress, further diffusion of already-existing technologies and applications to more firms and industries should continue to increase aggregate productivity for a time. That said, longer-run trends in the growth of productivity are very difficult to predict. During the first half of the decade, productivity in the nonfarm business sector increased at an unusually high average annual rate of about 3 percent. However, according to current estimates, productivity growth slowed in the second quarter of this year and came to a halt in the third quarter. Moreover, the strength of recent hiring raises the possibility of subpar productivity growth in the fourth quarter as well. When all is said and done, however, I expect that the latest numbers will turn out to have been a reflection of the typical volatility in the data and some cyclical response to the slowing in economic activity, not a signal of a sea change in the longer-run outlook for productivity growth. Even if productivity growth is sustained at a reasonably good rate, the slower expansion of the labor force will imply some moderation in the rate of growth of potential output over the next few years. In the very near term, that slower growth in the labor force needs to be taken into consideration when assessing the sustainability of given rates of expansion in economic activity. In the medium term, because the factors that affect potential output and thus aggregate supply also tend to affect aggregate demand, slower growth of potential output does not necessarily mean that inflation will be higher or that monetary policy will have to be tighter. Rather, the implications for monetary policy of a possible slowing in the growth of potential output depend on the extent to which such a slowing alters the balance of supply and demand in the economy. For example, as we saw in the second half of the 1990s, changes in expected productivity growth and potential output can significantly affect aggregate demand through their influences on income expectations and asset prices. The problem for policymakers is to identify, in real time, any changes in the prospective growth rate of potential output and to anticipate the accompanying effects on the balance of supply and demand. Inflation and Monetary PolicyOverall (or "headline") inflation has slowed significantly since earlier this year; indeed, in October the consumer price index fell by 1/2 percent for the second consecutive month. This improvement is largely the result of the recent declines in energy prices. The price of crude oil has fallen about one-fourth since its recent peak, reflecting some easing of geopolitical concerns and other factors. In particular, participants in crude oil markets--still mindful of the devastating effects on energy supplies of the hurricane season in 2005--appear in retrospect to have incorporated a substantial risk premium into spot prices earlier this year. In the event, no damaging storms occurred this hurricane season. As the good news about the weather unfolded, spot prices of crude oil fell from August through early October. Readings on the core inflation rate--that is, the inflation rate excluding the energy and food components--have improved modestly since the spring, but core inflation nevertheless remains uncomfortably high. Core CPI inflation over the most recent twelve months was 2.7 percent, up from 2.1 percent over the previous twelve months. Another measure of core inflation that we monitor, the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy, is available only through September; that index was up 2.4 percent over the past year, compared with a 2.1 percent rise in the preceding twelve months. Several factors underlie the increase in core inflation over the past year, although the relative contributions are impossible to estimate precisely. Increased pressure on resource utilization as the economic expansion matured and slack was reduced has likely played some role. The sharp increases in energy and materials costs figured in the rise in core inflation as well, as some suppliers of non-energy goods and services may have been able to pass through their higher input costs into final prices. More-rapid increases in shelter costs also boosted core consumer inflation over the past year. In the broad measures of consumer prices that we follow, substantial weight is given to an item called owners' equivalent rent (OER). OER is a measure of the price of the dwelling services enjoyed by people who own their homes; conceptually, if homeowners were to rent their homes from themselves, OER would be the market rent that they would pay. Economic statisticians estimate OER by using prices in the rental housing market. Over the past twelve months, the consumer price index for OER has risen about 4 percent, compared with 2-1/4 percent during the preceding twelve months. The acceleration in OER may reflect in part a shift in demand toward rental housing as families judged homeownership to have become less financially attractive of late. The most recent monthly increases in OER generally have been smaller than those earlier in the year, and further slowing may occur as the supply of rental units increases and the demand for owner-occupied housing stabilizes. However, the future evolution of this measure is difficult to know with any certainty. Looking forward, core inflation seems likely to moderate gradually over the next year or so. Some of the factors that pushed up core inflation in the recent past--in particular, energy prices and shelter costs--appear likely to be more neutral in the coming year, and inflation expectations remain contained. Moreover, if, as seems most probable, the economy grows at a rate modestly below its potential for a time, pressures on resource utilization should ease a bit. However, as with the outlook for economic activity, there are substantial uncertainties about the inflation forecast. In the case of inflation, the risks to the forecast seem primarily to the upside. Given the current level of inflation, a failure of inflation to moderate as expected would be especially troublesome. One factor that we are watching carefully is labor costs, which depend on both the compensation received by workers and labor productivity. Although the available indicators give somewhat different signals, it seems clear that labor costs--which account for roughly two-thirds of firm's total costs--have been rising more quickly of late. Some part of this acceleration no doubt reflects the current tightness in labor markets. For example, anecdotal reports suggest that businesses have been finding it difficult to recruit well-qualified workers in certain occupations. What implications does the pickup in labor costs have for price inflation? One possible outcome is that increases in labor costs will largely be absorbed by a narrowing of firms' profit margins and not be passed on to consumers in the form of higher prices. The fact that the average markup of prices over unit labor costs is currently high by historical standards suggests some scope for this outcome to occur. If higher labor costs are mostly absorbed by firms and not passed on, then workers will see the gains in their nominal compensation per hour of work translated into greater real compensation per hour; in the process, workers would capture a greater share of the fruits of the high rate of productivity growth seen in recent years. The more worrisome possibility is that tight product markets might allow firms to pass all or part of their higher labor costs through to prices, adding to inflation pressures. The data on costs, margins, and prices in coming months may shed some light on which of these two scenarios is likely to be the better description of events. During the early part of this decade, the Federal Reserve sharply eased the stance of monetary policy to help bring the economy out of recession and to foster a durable economic expansion. Once the expansion had clearly gained firm footing, the FOMC began a process of normalizing interest rates that involved seventeen consecutive increases in overnight rates of 25 basis points each. In August of this year, and again in September and October, the Committee left interest rates unchanged so as to assess the effects of its previous policy actions, and because of indications that economic growth was moderating and that inflation pressures might be diminishing somewhat. At the same time, the Committee has continued to emphasize the upside risks to inflation and the high costs that would be associated with a failure of inflation to moderate gradually as expected. Needless to say, we will continue to monitor the inflation situation closely. Whether further policy action against inflation will be required depends on the incoming data and in particular on how these data affect the FOMC's medium-term forecasts of both inflation and output growth. I have focused today on the near-term prospects for the economy and the risks to the economic outlook. However, in reviewing the economic developments of recent years, one cannot help but be impressed by the dynamism and resilience of the U.S. economy. I have confidence, therefore, that however events play out in the short term, in the longer term the economy will grow at a healthy pace, raising living standards in the process. The Federal Reserve will continue to play its part by implementing policies designed to achieve its mandate of fostering price stability and maximum sustainable employment.
Governor Susan S. Bies At the Drake-FEI Lecture, Des Moines, Iowa Thank you for inviting me to speak with you today. I am pleased to have the opportunity to address both leading financial professionals--the members of Financial Executives International--as well as future leaders--the students here at Drake University. In my remarks today, I will discuss the near-term outlook for the U.S. economy and some of the longer-run issues that economic policy makers should consider. I want to emphasize that these views are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Economic activity slowed in the middle part of this year. Real gross domestic product increased at a 2.6 percent annual rate in the second quarter of this year, and last week the Commerce Department announced that output rose at only a 1.6 percent rate in the third quarter. These figures are down notably from the nearly 3-1/2 percent average pace of the preceding two years. Despite the recent slowing in output, however, resource utilization remains relatively high by historical standards and thus continues to be a potential source of upward pressure on inflation. In the aftermath of the 2001 recession, the FOMC eased monetary policy substantially. However, the degree of easing in place in 2003 and 2004 was clearly unsustainable and risked overheating the economy. Since mid-2004, the FOMC has gradually moved monetary policy from an accommodative stance to a more neutral position. As a consequence, the elements now appear to be in place for some easing of resource utilization rates over the next year or so and a reduction in inflationary pressures. However, substantial uncertainty surrounds the near-term outlook. In determining the future path of interest rates, the FOMC will be guided by the incoming data on both output and prices, so let’s begin by reviewing recent developments. Economic ActivityThe slowdown in the growth of real GDP since the spring largely reflects a cooling of the housing market: The number of single-family and multifamily housing starts has fallen nearly 25 percent since the beginning of the year; sales of both new and existing homes have dropped sharply since their peak of last summer, and the inventory of unsold homes has soared. At the same time, homes are appreciating more slowly and in some markets prices are even declining. While much of the downshift in the housing market appears to have occurred already, some further softening may yet lie ahead. Nonetheless a variety of factors should help limit any remaining contraction in housing demand. For example, despite the 4-1/4 percentage point increase in short-term interest rates over the past two years, the interest rate on a thirty-year fixed-rate mortgage has increased only about 1/2 percentage point, and borrowing costs continue to be relatively low. The ongoing growth in real incomes and the recent increase in the stock market wealth of households should also support the demand for housing. It is encouraging also that the recent weakness in residential construction does not appear to have spilled over to other sectors. For instance, employment has been growing smartly in nonresidential construction, even as it has shrunk in the residential sector. In addition, consumer confidence currently stands a bit above its long-run average and consumption is still being fueled by past house-price gains, which raised household wealth. This contrasts with previous slowdowns in the housing market, which have typically coincided with widespread economic weakness. Although the slowdown in the housing market has so far done little to reduce consumer outlays, other factors do appear to have had a damping effect. In particular, consumption likely was restrained earlier this year by the rise in energy prices, which took a large bite out of household budgets. The rise in energy prices over the past few years has also affected the auto sector--reducing the demand for sport utility vehicles and other gas-guzzling automobiles. As a result, inventories of these vehicles have risen, and domestic automakers have been cutting production in response. In the business sector, spending on nonresidential construction has been particularly robust. In the third quarter, nonresidential investment grew at an annual rate of 14 percent, down from the sizzling 20 percent pace in the previous quarter but still very substantial. Expenditures on drilling and mining structures have increased particularly rapidly in response to high prices for natural gas and crude oil. Investment in other types of structures, such as offices and commercial buildings, has also been strong over the past year or so. Spending on equipment and software, which grew quite rapidly from mid-2004 to early 2006, has advanced at a more moderate pace lately. The recent slowdown in the growth of business sales would be expected, all else equal, to have a damping influence on capital spending, and in fact business confidence has moved down since the start of the year. However, order books for capital goods such as industrial machinery and other types of heavy equipment appear to be full and should support near-term investment gains. Moreover, the demand for information technology equipment is also likely to be well maintained, in part because of the recent introduction of a new generation of microprocessing chips and more-efficient large servers. Current financial conditions also are supportive of business spending. Corporate balance sheets are strong and flush with cash, and broad stock price indexes are up more than 10 percent so far this year. At the same time, yield spreads on corporate bonds across the ratings spectrum have been low, supported by the strong balance sheets and robust profit growth. InflationThe picture painted here is one of an economy that has been growing solidly, albeit at a rate below its potential. What are the implications of this picture for inflation prospects? Consumer prices excluding food and energy have accelerated over the past year, and this clearly is a concern. The core inflation rate rose 2.4 percent over the most recent four quarters, up from 2.0 percent for the same period a year ago. In thinking about the macroeconomic consequences of inflation, it makes sense to abstract from the prices of energy and food when the focus is on the short run. Temporary shocks to food and energy prices typically don’t translate into changes in inflationary pressure. However, if these shocks persist, they may have an effect on core inflation and, more generally, on the economic behavior of households and businesses. Core inflation can be affected when the price changes are propagated along the production chain--say from oil prices to the prices of chemicals and ultimately to the prices of goods made with those chemicals. In addition, the shocks to food and energy prices may affect inflation expectations. Thus, we also pay attention to broader measures of inflation. Nonetheless, the scene appears to be set for a deceleration in prices over time. One contributing factor is likely to be the slowing in activity I already discussed, which should ease the overall pressure on resources. Another important factor affecting the inflation outlook is household and business expectations for inflation. As best we can judge, inflation expectations appear to be well contained: Measures of longer-term inflation expectations, based on surveys and on a comparison of yields on nominal and inflation-indexed government debt, have remained within the ranges in which they have fluctuated in recent years. Finally, the recent decline in energy prices, if it is sustained, should reduce cost pressures along the production chain. One upside risk to the inflation outlook comes from the labor market. The unemployment rate declined steadily between the second half of 2003 and the beginning of 2006 and has stood at a relatively low 4.7 percent for the past six months. With labor markets comparatively tight by historical standards, unit labor costs have begun to accelerate, especially since the end of last year, and firms may pass on some of these higher costs to consumers. However, the large markup of prices over costs--the margin is currently well above its historical average--could act as a shock absorber if cost strains were to intensify. Thus, in my judgment, inflation appears poised to decelerate in coming months as energy prices stabilize and resource pressures ease. But the risks to that outlook seem tilted toward the upside. Aggregate SupplyIn considering the appropriate setting for monetary policy, the level of the economy’s underlying productive capacity--its potential output--is the benchmark against which we assess actual output. Accordingly, whether the recent slowdown in economic activity eases resource constraints enough to reduce inflationary pressure depends importantly on how fast potential output is growing. If the key determinants of potential output--the workforce, economic efficiency, and the capital stock--grow quickly, as they did in the second half of the 1990s, then GDP can also rise quickly without increasing the pressure on the economy’s resources. Conversely, a reduced rate of growth of potential output would require slower growth of actual GDP to keep resource pressures from increasing. I’d like to spend a little time examining in greater depth the outlook for some of the factors that determine potential output, starting with the labor force. The size of the labor force depends on a combination of two factors: the size of the working-age population and the likelihood that members of this population join the labor force--a likelihood that economists refer to as the labor force participation rate. The labor force participation rate tends to vary over the business cycle as potential workers become more or less encouraged about job prospects. However, the influence of labor force participation on potential output does not depend on short-run conditions in the labor market but rather on long-run changes due to demographic and social factors. For instance, in the 1950s and 1960s the labor force participation rate stood at just under 60 percent. In subsequent years, women entered the labor force in large numbers and thus dramatically pushed up the participation rate. Indeed, by some estimates, the increase in the labor force participation of women aged sixteen years and older added a little more than 1/2 percentage point per year to the growth rate of potential output between the late 1960s and the early 1990s. Now, the United States is facing another change in the trend of labor force participation. The baby boomers, the large population born between 1946 and 1964, are getting older, and the oldest are turning sixty this year. Older individuals tend to have relatively low participation rates, with many people starting to retire in their fifties and more still when they reach sixty and then sixty-five. Thus, with the aging of the boomers, a large share of the population is entering the low-participation years, which will tend to pull down the aggregate labor force participation rate. Recent work by economists at the Federal Reserve Board has explored how changes in the age distribution of the population affect the participation rate. For instance, between 1995 and 2005 the participation rate declined on net from 66.4 percent to 66.0 percent. The study suggests that changes in the age distribution of the population--the movement of a large portion of the population from their high-participation-rate years to their later, low-participation-rate years--can explain the bulk of the decline.1The changing age distribution--primarily the aging of the baby boomers--is expected to lower the participation rate by about 0.2 percentage point next year and continue to lower it over the next several years. However, this decomposition assumes that the participation rate for each age group is constant at its average between 1995 and 2005. But the propensity of individuals of a given age to participate in the labor force changes over time. Already, individuals aged fifty-five and older are working more than they did ten years ago, perhaps because of better health; higher levels of education; and a reduction, over time, in the share of workers employed in physically strenuous occupations. Unfortunately, there is still much we do not understand about the increase in the participation rates of older workers, so it is difficult to predict how much their participation will rise in the future. However, given the magnitude of the predicted age-related decline, it is unlikely that changes in behavior could completely offset it. As I noted earlier, the reduction in the growth of the labor force and, thus, of potential output has important implications for how we interpret incoming economic data. For example, to the extent that the aging of the baby boomers reduces the growth in labor force participation and hence potential output, the benchmark we use for assessing the macroeconomic implications of actual GDP growth will need to be lower. Similarly, changes in the expected growth rate of the labor force affect our interpretation of the monthly employment data. If the labor force participation rate remains at its current level, then what might be thought of as the “equilibrium” growth rate of payroll employment--that is, the increase consistent with a stable unemployment rate--would be about 140,000 per month. However, if the labor force participation rate instead declines 0.2 percentage point over the next year, as suggested by the Fed’s staff research, then the comparable equilibrium payroll employment growth would be closer to 110,000 per month. While reductions in the labor force participation rate will apparently damp the growth rate of potential output in coming years, productivity growth, another important factor in determining the capacity of the economy, likely will remain supportive. Although productivity growth has stepped down from the scorching pace seen early in the recovery, factors remain in place for continued solid growth over the next few years. One element is capital deepening, that is, the rate at which the stock of equipment, software, and so forth is expanding relative to the number of workers, or--to put it even more simply, how fast workers are getting more of the tools they need. As I mentioned earlier, business investment spending has been strong in recent years and seems likely to remain at a high level for some time. Another element is improvements in the efficiency of how businesses do business. Here it appears that the flexibility of business processes and product, financial, and labor markets in the United States will continue to allow for the quick adoption of new technologies and the efficient reallocation of resources. On balance, despite the outlook for continued solid longer-run productivity growth, the slowing in trend labor force growth will likely yield a modest deceleration the growth of potential output. However, the considerable uncertainty that, as I noted earlier, surrounds the prospect for all of these elements makes it extremely difficult in real time to discern changes in potential output. Ferreting out the changing trends in these elements is an important part of making monetary policy. For example, the early identification of the resurgence of productivity growth, and hence of potential output growth, that began in the mid-1990s allowed the Federal Reserve to put in place a monetary policy that accommodated both strong economic growth and low inflation during the second half of that decade.2Similarly, it is important now to try to understand the new forces determining potential output growth so that monetary policy can respond accordingly. Footnotes: 1.Stephanie Aaronson, Bruce Fallick, Andrew Figura, Jonathan Pingle, and William Wascher (2006), “The Recent Decline in the Labor Force Participation Rate and Its Implications for Potential Labor Supply,”Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,1:2006, pp. 69-154.Return to text 2.One of the papers used by many observers inside and outside the Federal Reserve to suggest the possibility of a mid-1990s inflection point in productivity growth was Carol Corrado and Lawrence Slifman (1999), "Decomposition of Productivity and Unit Costs,"American Economic Review,vol. 89 (May), pp. 328-32.Return to text
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the American Bar Association, Banking Law Section, Washington, D.C. I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak to this group of lawyers who practice in the banking area. As banking lawyers are well aware, the Federal Reserve embodies a unique legal structure compared with other central banks around the world. Unlike the Bank of England, for example, the Federal Reserve is a not a single entity, but a decentralized system. The essential components are the Board of Governors, a federal government agency, and the twelve regional Federal Reserve Banks, which are structured essentially as private corporations. This structure has served the nation exceptionally well over the years. In the past decade or so, however, the emergence of nationwide banking systems, significant changes in the nation's payments systems, technological advances, and other developments have prompted changes in the ways in which we meet our responsibilities, including a geographic consolidation of a number of the functions that historically had been performed by each of the individual Reserve Banks. Today, I will review these trends, and consider some of their practical and legal implications for the Reserve Banks and for the future role of the current decentralized network of Reserve Bank offices around the country.1 The Existing Structure of the Federal Reserve SystemThe current structure of the Federal Reserve--the combination of a centralized government agency and regional corporate Reserve Banks--is the product of a carefully crafted political compromise. In the early years of our nation, the First and Second Banks of the United States performed many basic central banking services. These were banks that, while chartered by Congress, were owned and managed by private, nongovernmental interests. Their charters, however, were allowed to expire, and their demise has been attributed to deep-seated opposition in some parts of the country to the centralization and concentration of economic power. As the nation grew through the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, it lacked any entity that was constituted to carry out the basic roles of a central bank. However, after a financial panic in 1907 forced a number of banks to close, disrupting the economy, a consensus emerged that the nation needed some form of central bank, and Congress created the National Monetary Commission. The commission, chaired by Rhode Island senator Nelson Aldrich, called for one central institution, with fifteen branches across the country, to issue currency and discount commercial paper. However, thirty-nine of the institution's forty-two-member board of directors would be bankers, which aroused the long-standing fear of some about the concentration of economic power in the hands of a few large banks. Agrarian and progressive interests, led by William Jennings Bryan, favored a central bank under public, rather than banker, control. But the vast majority of the nation's bankers, concerned about government intervention in the banking business, opposed a central bank structure directed by political appointees. The legislation that Congress ultimately adopted in 1913 reflected a hard-fought battle to balance these two competing views and created the hybrid public-private, centralized-decentralized structure that we have today. A centralized governmental Federal Reserve Board, with members appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate, exercises general oversight over the Federal Reserve System and works with the Reserve Banks to determine policies to fulfill the Federal Reserve's legislative mandates. The Reserve Banks were intended to be "banker's banks" and to carry out the operational functions of a central bank. Additional duties were assigned to them as a result of subsequent developments. Reserve Banks now have broad responsibilities, playing a central role in the nation's payment systems and also in monetary policy through their participation in open market operations and membership on the Federal Open Market Committee. In addition, the Reserve Banks supervise state-chartered banks that choose to be members of the Federal Reserve System and all bank holding companies, under the overall direction of the Board of Governors. Each of the Reserve Banks is structured as a separate corporation operating under a charter granted by the Comptroller of the Currency. The stock of each Bank is owned by the member commercial banks within its District; however, the holding of Reserve Bank stock is in the nature of an obligation that goes along with membership and does not carry with it the characteristics of control or financial interest normally attached to stock in a corporation. Each Reserve Bank is supervised by its own board of directors. This board of directors, subject to the approval of the Board of Governors, appoints a president, who serves as the Bank's chief executive officer and has general charge and control over the business of the Bank. However, in laying out the governance structure for the Reserve Banks, Congress adopted several significant departures from the standard business corporation model. Notably, three of each Bank's nine directors are selected by the Board of Governors, which designates one of its appointees as the Chairman. Three of the directors are elected by the stockholding banks and must represent the public. The remaining three directors are chosen by and represent the member banks. The Board of Governors is also given general oversight authority relating to the Reserve Banks and their activities. These characteristics reflect the fact that the Reserve Banks are structured to carry out public policy objectives set in the Federal Reserve Act, not to advance the interests of their shareholders. Consolidation of Certain Reserve Bank FunctionsIn recent years, in response to major developments in the financial industry and technology, as well as statutory and regulatory changes, a number of Reserve Bank functions have evolved from highly localized operations at individual Reserve Bank offices to more consolidated and centralized functions. This trend is particularly evident in the financial services the Reserve Banks offer to depository institutions. From the creation of the System, the Federal Reserve has not only been closely involved in overseeing the nation's payment systems but has also been an important operational component of that system. Historically, each Reserve Bank and Branch provided a full range of services to local institutions. In particular, the Federal Reserve Act gave the System the authority to establish a nationwide check-clearing system to minimize inefficiencies and disruptions. The ongoing transformation of our retail payments system, resulting from shifts in consumer behavior and rapid industry innovation, has directly affected the operations of the Reserve Banks. The number of checks being written has been steadily falling as consumers increasingly take advantage of electronic payments mechanisms. In 2003, for the first time, the number of electronic payments in the United States, such as credit card, debit card, and automated clearinghouse (ACH) payments, exceeded the number of check payments. A range of data indicates that electronic payments have continued to increase and that check payments have continued to decline. Not only are more payments being made electronically, but more check payments are also being processed electronically, in part because of the enactment of the Check Clearing for the Twenty-first Century Act, commonly known as Check 21.2 As a result of these trends, the Reserve Banks' check-collection volume has declined. Since 1999, the number of checks collected through the Reserve Banks has fallen by about 30 percent. Consequently, the Reserve Banks have taken major steps to reduce check costs, including reducing the resources devoted to this service by transferring check-processing operations from some offices to more centralized locations. Today, twenty-two offices offer check processing, down from forty-five just three years ago. Other Reserve Bank services have been undergoing consolidation as well. At some Branches, cash processing by the Federal Reserve has been replaced by a cash depot operated under contract by armored carriers, who collect currency deposits from and distribute currency to depository institutions. The Federal Reserve System has also consolidated certain other services for banks and the U.S. Treasury, such as automated clearinghouse (ACH), offline Fedwire, and savings bond services. Similar trends are occurring in other areas of Reserve Bank operations. The Reserve Banks have found it more efficient to have a few central offices perform certain internal support and back-office services--such as managing information technology and payroll--rather than having each Bank conduct them individually. This trend toward consolidation of operations has precipitated significant structural changes at the Reserve Banks. Staff levels have been reduced throughout the System. Several Reserve Bank Branch offices now have, or soon will have, no remaining financial services operations. These Branches focus on matters such as community affairs, economic information gathering, economic and financial education, and director recruitment. Some Branches have sold their own buildings and operate in leased space. In addition to affecting operations, the centralization of some Reserve Bank functions has raised issues related to the governance of the Reserve Banks in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Reserve Act. As mentioned earlier, Congress provided that each Reserve Bank is controlled by its own board of directors and president, subject to the general oversight and approval authority assigned to the Board of Governors by the Federal Reserve Act. Under the act, the directors are required to perform the duties "usually appertaining to the office of directors of banking associations." When Reserve Bank functions are consolidated, operations that once had been performed by a Reserve Bank under the direction of that Bank's board and president are now carried out on its behalf by another Reserve Bank, which has its own governance reporting chain running to its president and board of directors. And some of the operations at each Reserve Bank are being performed for the other Banks. To address these complications, the Reserve Banks have put into place procedures designed to ensure accountability by those Banks that provide services to, or conduct functions for, other Banks on a centralized basis. More generally, as interdependencies have risen, the Reserve Banks have had increasingly to learn to manage processes and control risks across Reserve Banks. This learning process has been challenging at times as individual Reserve Banks have had to give up performing functions they had been providing for many years and as structures to oversee and manage across Reserve Banks were constructed and strengthened. But the challenges are being met. Payments and operations are not the only areas of responsibility affected by the changes in the structure of our financial system and in technology. In the supervision and regulation of financial institutions, it has become more and more common for Reserve Banks to cooperate, coordinate, and share resources and analysis as the Federal Reserve adapts to oversight of large complex banking organizations and prepares for the implementation of Basel II. The continued consolidation and adaptation in at least some Reserve Bank functions is likely to continue. For example, check volumes are forecast to continue to decline as more payments are made electronically, and the clearing of paper checks will drop even faster as banks take advantage of Check 21. In response, the Reserve Banks will have to reduce even further the number of offices processing checks. In some other functions too we are likely to find opportunities to operate more efficiently and effectively from fewer locations. We will be taking advantage of those opportunities. The Monetary Control Act, enacted in 1980, requires the Federal Reserve to set fees for providing certain payment services to depository institutions. These fees must, over the long run, recover all the direct and indirect costs of providing the services, including imputed costs that would have been incurred and imputed profits that would have been earned if the services had been provided by a private firm. And for these types of services, we will simply be following the dictates of a marketplace in which legislative and technological change is driving consolidation. More fundamentally, to protect our independence within the government--the arms-length relationship that provides monetary policy making with a degree of insulation from short-run political pressures--Congress has given us autonomy over our budget. It is incumbent on us to exercise stewardship of our small part of the public purse as responsibly as we can. The Future of a Decentralized Federal Reserve SystemGiven these recent developments, what will the Federal Reserve System of the future look like? Will a decentralized system of twelve Reserve Banks located nationwide continue to make sense? I think that it will. But my reasons for thinking so have little to do with the delivery of services to depository institutions. Rather, they reflect the attributes of the Reserve Banks that flow from their status as independent, separate entities in close contact with their region's financial institutions, businesses, and communities. Most important, this status enables the Reserve Banks to bring informed, diverse views to our policy deliberations. Senior management at the Reserve Banks have their own staffs of economists, financial analysts, supervisors, payments system experts, and, yes, even attorneys, to help them formulate their positions in our policy councils. Local offices, where Federal Reserve officials can have direct and frequent contact with the financial institutions and businesses in the immediate region, can gather a wealth of very current information about economic conditions and the financial system within that region that may not be available from other sources. The diversity of perspectives, the analysis backing those views, and the information the Reserve Banks bring from their regional contacts help us reach better policy decisions. The Reserve Banks are also a source of continuity, experience, and institutional memory, especially when, as now, the Board of Governors has experienced rapid turnover. The contributions of the Reserve Banks are perhaps most visible to the public in the sphere of monetary policy. All twelve presidents attend and participate actively in the meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. What they tell the Committee about what they are hearing from their contacts helps us recognize shifting economic conditions before they are evident in the data. Their reports often illuminate the reasons for the data we are receiving, thereby helping us anticipate what will come next. Their policy perspectives are informed by the research and analysis of outstanding staffs. The presidents and other senior Reserve Bank officials bring similar strengths to our discussions of other types of policies. The Banks' active role in payments helps us to design policies and procedures to encourage a safe and efficient payments system. Their daily contacts with depository institutions contributes to shaping our regulatory decisions and is a resource when we are managing crises. Their close relationship to their communities is important as we administer consumer-protection statutes and work to foster fair and open access to credit and greater public understanding of available financial services. I have stressed the information a Reserve Bank brings from its community to Federal Reserve policymaking, but Reserve Banks also play an increasingly important role in reaching out to convey information to the community. Through extensive education efforts, speeches by their presidents and other officers, and discussions with their boards of directors and other groups, Reserve Banks foster understanding about the System, its policies, and its objectives, as well as about matters of general economic interest. In addition, because of their many contacts with their communities, local offices of the Reserve Banks play a major role in the Federal Reserve's efforts to improve financial education and financial literacy. In recent years, financial innovations have widened the range of households that have access to opportunities to borrow and lend and have added to the variety and complexity of instruments they can use. The Federal Reserve has responded by putting added emphasis on promoting improved financial literacy among the general public. Greater financial sophistication among consumers will produce a number of economic benefits. Informed consumers place market pressure on financial institutions to offer better products at better prices. Increased financial literacy is also likely to result in better management of personal finances. In sum, strong, independent Reserve Banks grounded in their regions have been critical to the success of the Federal Reserve. The private-public, centralized-decentralized character of the Federal Reserve System has contributed to policymaking and has been a part of the fabric of our independence within the government. The Reserve Banks will need to continue to adapt to changing circumstances, but their essential characteristics will be preserved and will continue to enable them to help the Federal Reserve pursue the very important public policy objectives we have been entrusted with. Footnotes:1.My remarks today reflect my own thoughts and not necessarily those of the other members of the Federal Reserve Board. Rich Ashton and Yvonne Mizusawa, of the Board's Legal Division, contributed to these remarks.Return to text2.Before Check 21, a bank had to present the original paper check to the paying bank unless the paying bank had agreed to accept electronic presentment of the check. Although Check 21 did not mandate the electronic processing or presentment of checks, it did authorize a new negotiable instrument, called a substitute check, which is the legal equivalent of the original check. By permitting banks to use substitute checks in the check-collection process when the recipient could not or would not accept electronic payment, Check 21 has facilitated the expanded use of electronic technologies in check processing, enabling the banking industry and the Federal Reserve to improve the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of its check-processing operations.Return to text Footnotes: 1.My remarks today reflect my own thoughts and not necessarily those of the other members of the Federal Reserve Board. Rich Ashton and Yvonne Mizusawa, of the Board's Legal Division, contributed to these remarks.Return to text 2.Before Check 21, a bank had to present the original paper check to the paying bank unless the paying bank had agreed to accept electronic presentment of the check. Although Check 21 did not mandate the electronic processing or presentment of checks, it did authorize a new negotiable instrument, called a substitute check, which is the legal equivalent of the original check. By permitting banks to use substitute checks in the check-collection process when the recipient could not or would not accept electronic payment, Check 21 has facilitated the expanded use of electronic technologies in check processing, enabling the banking industry and the Federal Reserve to improve the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of its check-processing operations.Return to text