The federal financial regulatory agencies today extended the comment period on the proposed guidance onConcentrations in Commercial Real Estate Lending, Sound Risk Management Practices. Today’s action was prompted by requests from some commenters to extend the comment period. The comment period will be extended for 30 days to April 13, 2006 from the previous date of March 14, 2006. Attachment (60 KB PDF)Media Contacts:Federal ReserveDeborah Lagomarsino(202) 452-2955FDICDavid Barr(202) 898-6992OCCDean DeBuck(202) 874-5770OTSChris Smith(202) 906-6677
The federal financial institution regulatory agencies and the Federal Trade Commission have jointly issued for comment an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) on section 312 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACT Act). Comments are invited for the purpose of developing guidelines and rules to implement section 312. Section 312 requires the agencies to: (1) establish guidelines regarding the accuracy and integrity of information furnished to consumer reporting agencies; and (2) prescribe regulations that require the entities that furnish such information to establish reasonable policies and procedures for implementing the guidelines. Section 312 also requires the agencies to prescribe regulations that identify the circumstances under which an entity that furnishes information to consumer reporting agencies will be required to reinvestigate a dispute concerning the accuracy of information contained in a consumer credit report based on a consumer’s direct request. The FACT Act requires the agencies to consider specific issues as they develop guidelines and rules to implement section 312. The ANPR invites comment on issues relating to: (1) the factors that the agencies must consider for developing the accuracy and integrity guidelines; and (2) the considerations that the agencies must weigh before adopting rules that identify the circumstances in which entities that furnish information to consumer reporting agencies must reinvestigate direct consumer disputes. Comments are due 60 days after publication in the Federal Register. The notice is attached. Attachment (204 KB PDF)Media Contacts:Federal ReserveSusan Stawick(202) 452-2955FDICDavid Barr(202) 898-6992OCCKevin Mukri(202) 874-5770OTSKevin Petrasic(202) 906-6677NCUACherie Umbel(703) 518-6330FTCClaudia Farrell(202) 326-2181
Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the Banking Institute, Charlotte, North Carolina Thank you for the invitation to speak here at the Banking Institute. I want to discuss with you today some recent and ongoing regulatory issues that are likely of interest to this audience. These issues include efforts to enhance our regulatory capital regime, compliance risk management, and consumer protection. Proposed Revisions to Regulatory Capital RegimeFirst of all, you probably heard the good news yesterday that the Federal Reserve Board reviewed and in an open Board meeting approved a draft of the interagency notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) on the Basel II capital framework. The draft NPR was made available on the Board's website as well as some statements made at the public meeting. The final NPR is expected to be issued in theFederal Registeronce all of the U.S. banking agencies have completed their review and approval processes, at which time it will then be "officially" out for comment. We are very pleased that the substantial time spent on this effort has culminated in this agreement among the agencies. We also recognize the significance of this development to the industry, the Congress, and others who have waited for greater specificity on the proposed revisions. We look forward to comments on the NPR; they will be an important contribution to the assessment of Basel II objectives and implementation of the framework. In some areas, the agencies are still grappling with what the correct approach is. For this reason, the NPR contains a number of requests for feedback on specific topics. All of this will help us as we continue to develop the framework. But before commenting further on the NPR and the U.S. Basel II process, I would like to reiterate our rationale for pursuing Basel II. Reasons for Pursuing Basel IIThe current Basel I capital framework, adopted nearly twenty years ago, has served us well, but has become increasingly inadequate for large, internationally active banks that are offering ever-more complex and sophisticated products and services. We need a revised capital framework for these large, internationally active banks, and we believe that Basel II is such a framework. One of the major improvements in Basel II is the closer linking of capital requirements and risk. The current Basel I measures are not very risk-sensitive and do not provide bankers, supervisors, or the marketplace with meaningful measures of risk at large, complex organizations. Under Basel I, it is possible for two banks with dramatically different risk profiles in their commercial loan portfolio to have the same regulatory capital requirement, and a bank's capital requirement does not reflect deterioration in asset quality. In addition, the balance-sheet focus of Basel I does not adequately capture risks of certain off-balance-sheet transactions and fee-based activity--for example, the operational risk embedded in many of the services from which many large U.S. institutions generate a good portion of their revenues. In addition to enhancing the meaningfulness of regulatory capital measures, Basel II should make the financial system safer by substantially improving risk management at banks. Basel II builds on the risk-management approaches of well-managed banks and creates incentives for banks to move toward leading risk-measurement and risk-management practices. By providing a consistent framework for all banks to use, supervisors will more readily be able to identify portfolios and banks whose risk management and risk levels are significantly different from the range seen in other banks. By communicating these differences to banks, management will be able to benchmark their risk assessments, models, and processes in a more detailed and regular manner. We have already seen some progress in risk management at many institutions in the United States and around the globe as a result of preparations for Basel II. The new framework is also much more consistent with the internal capital measures that institutions use to manage their business. Basel II can also provide supervisors with a more conceptually consistent and more transparent framework for assessing the link between risk and capital over time at our most complex institutions; identifying which institutions have deficiencies; and evaluating systemic risk in the banking system through credit cycles. Therefore, Basel II establishes a more coherent relationship between how supervisors assess regulatory capital and how they supervise the banks, enabling examiners to better evaluate whether banks are holding prudent capital levels, given their risk profiles, and to better understand differences among institutions. As a central bank and supervisor of banks, bank holdings companies, and financial holding companies, the Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that the Basel II framework delivers a strong and risk-sensitive base of capital. That is why we support safeguards to ensure strong capital levels during the transition to Basel II, and will remain vigilant in monitoring Basel II's impact on an ongoing basis. This means that duringandafter the transition to Basel II, supervisors will rely upon ongoing, detailed analysis to continuously evaluate the results of the new framework and ensure prudent levels of capital. To be quite clear, the Federal Reserve believes that strong capital is critical to the health of our banking system and we believe that Basel II will help us continue to ensure that U.S. banks maintain capital levels that serve as an appropriate cushion against risk-taking. As we have mentioned before, we will continue to use existing prudential measures to complement Basel II. For example, the current leverage ratio requirement--a ratio of capital to total assets--will remain unchanged for all banks, whether or not they are subject to the Basel II framework. Also, supervisors will continue to enforce existing prompt-corrective-action rules in response to declines in capital. Both the leverage ratio and prompt-corrective-action are fully consistent with Basel II. Basel II NPRI will not try to summarize the NPR here today. We want all of you to read it and come to your own judgments. I would, however, like to highlight a few key points. As you know, the U.S. Basel II NPR is based on the 2004 framework issued by the Basel Committee and adheres to the main elements of that framework. But the U.S. agencies, just as their counterparts in other countries, have exercised national discretion and tailored the Basel II framework to fit the U.S. banking system and U.S. financial environment. For example, the U.S. agencies continue to propose that we implement only the advanced approaches of Basel II, namely the advanced internal-ratings-based approach (AIRB) for credit risk and the advanced measurement approaches (AMA) for operational risk. The U.S. agencies also included in the NPR a timetable and set of transition safeguards that are more rigorous than those set forth in the 2004 Basel II framework. For instance, the U.S. agencies are proposing three transition floors, below which minimum required capital under Basel II will not be permitted to fall, relative to the general risk-based capital rules. The first transition period would have a floor of 95 percent, the second 90 percent, and the third 85 percent. Part of the justification for implementing more rigorous floors stemmed from the lessons we learned from the fourth quantitative impact study (QIS4) conducted in the United States in 2004. As I have said before, QIS4 was not intended to reflect the ultimate impact of Basel II on U.S. institutions--particularly since it was not based on a complete proposal and bank inputs to QIS4 were not based on fully developed systems or full supervisory guidance. Rather, it was conducted on a "best-efforts basis" to provide a snapshot for gauging progress toward implementation of Basel II and to give the U.S. agencies a better sense of how to structure the NPR. One of the key areas in the NPR influenced by QIS4 pertains to banks' estimates of loss given default (LGD). QIS4 results showed that, in general, data histories were not long enough to capture weaker parts of the economic cycle, especially for LGDs, which must reflect downturn conditions. As a result, the agencies have provided a supervisory mapping function for those institutions unable to estimate downturn LGDs. The mapping function takes average LGDs and "stresses" them to generate an input to the capital calculation that is better suited to the Basel II formulas and produces a more appropriate capital requirement. The Federal Reserve believes this supervisory mapping function is a necessary component of Basel II because it appears difficult for some banks to produce internal estimates of LGD that are sufficient for risk-based capital purposes. I hope it is clear from the NPR and other statements made by the agencies that we are committed to ongoing, detailed analysis to ensure that U.S. implementation of Basel II achieves a strong and risk-sensitive base of minimum regulatory capital. We need to ensure that the items we identified as incomplete in QIS4 are appropriately addressed, and we also need to ensure that additional areas will not inadvertently lower capital levels. We intend to conduct thorough analysis of each institution's Basel II capital results and the impact on aggregate capital in the U.S. banking system at many stages along the way. In addition, the U.S. regulators are united in their belief that no bank should be permitted to operate under Basel II until it has proven itself ready to do so. There will be no "free pass" or "safe harbor" for any institution, regardless of portfolio composition or business activity. In other words, we plan to have very high standards for Basel II qualification requirements. For instance, a bank will be able to move from the parallel run to live capital calculations with a 95 percent floor only after its primary supervisor has given it permission to do so after having thoroughly evaluated its risk-management methodologies and its ability to calculate minimum regulatory capital using the new framework. Similarly, a bank will need approval to move to each of the other two floor levels. After the third floor period, a bank will be allowed to move to the full Basel II minimum capital calculation without floors upon a finding by the primary supervisor that it is ready, following a rigorous qualification process. Proposed Amendments to Basel IBefore I end my remarks about regulatory capital, I would like to offer some thoughts about ongoing efforts to revise existing regulatory capital rules, known as Basel I. First of all, we expect only one or two dozen banks to move to Basel II in the near term. The vast majority of U.S. banks would be able to continue operating safely and profitably under Basel I as amended through the rulemaking process. The Basel I framework has already been amended more than twenty-five times in response to changes in the banking environment and a better understanding of the risks of individual products and services. The agencies believe that now is another appropriate time to amend the Basel I rules. Concerns have been raised about potential competitive inequities between Basel II banks and Basel I banks. We take these concerns seriously and sought input from the industry and other interested parties in the Basel I ANPR process. In an effort to mitigate those concerns, regulators have proposed changes to enhance the risk sensitivity of U.S. Basel I rules and remain vigilant about potential competitive distortions that might be created by introducing Basel II. We are also mindful that amendments to Basel I should not be too complex or too burdensome for the multitude of smaller banks to which the revised rules will apply. Additionally, we recognize the need for full transparency about Basel II proposals and proposed Basel I amendments. For that reason, we expect to have overlapping comment periods for both the Basel II NPR and the proposed Basel I amendments. The intent is to allow banks and others to review both NPRs before both sets of rules are finalized. In that way, bankers from potential opt-in institutions and those not planning to move to Basel II can evaluate the potential impact of Basel II in light of the proposed Basel I amendments. In fact, we want all interested parties to compare, contrast, and comment on the two proposals in overlapping timeframes. At this point, we are still reviewing the comments received on the ANPR for amendments to Basel I. The comment period ended in mid-January. The agencies are developing their proposals for Basel I amendments, based on comments received, and hope to have a Basel I NPR by summer. Finally, I would like to underscore that both regulatory capital proposals being worked on by the U.S. agencies are just that--proposals. The U.S. agencies welcome any and all comments on these documents. Accordingly, our proposals could change based on comments received or new information gathered by the U.S. agencies. We know that at times this posture can be frustrating to some, but given the breadth and depth of these proposals, it is critical that we consider all viewpoints. This is especially true for the Basel II proposal, which represents a substantial and complex change in bank supervision and regulation. In this respect, I would like to echo the comments made earlier this month by Comptroller John Dugan: if the U.S. agencies see that Basel II is not accurately reflecting risk or is producing unacceptable capital levels, we will seek to make changes. Indeed, we expect to make some adjustments as we move forward, just as changes have been made to Basel I over the years to reflect changes in bank practice and improvements in supervision. Compliance-Risk ManagementWhile the release of the Basel II NPR is indeed a major step forward, it is of course not the only topic worth addressing here today. Accordingly, I would now like to turn to another area the financial sector and regulators are focused on: compliance-risk management. "Compliance-risk" can be defined as the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, financial loss, or damage to an organization's reputation and franchise value. This type of risk may result when an organization fails to comply with the laws, regulations, or standards or codes of conduct that are applicable to its business activities and functions. The Federal Reserve expects each banking organization to have a compliance culture in place across the whole institution and an infrastructure that can identify and control the compliance risks it faces, along with appropriate rewards and penalties for business managers who oversee the compliance risk. To create appropriate compliance-risk controls, organizations must first understand risks across the entire entity. Managers should be expected to evaluate the risks and controls within their scope of authority at least annually. I also emphasize the need for the board of directors and senior management to ensure that staff members throughout their organizations understand the compliance objectives and each member's role in implementing the compliance program. An enterprise-wide compliance-risk management program should be dynamic and proactive, meaning it constantly assesses evolving risks when new business lines or activities are added or when existing activities are altered. To avoid having a program that operates on "autopilot," an organization must continuously reassess its risks and controls and train employees to effectively implement those controls. An integrated approach to compliance-risk management can be particularly effective for Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money-laundering (BSA/AML) compliance. Often, the identification of a BSA/AML risk or deficiency in one business activity can indicate potential problems or concerns in other activities across the organization. Controlling BSA/AML risk continues to be a primary concern for banking organizations. We recognize the commitment that organizations have made to compliance with BSA/AML requirements, and, in return, we continue to work to ensure that obligations in this area are clearly communicated to banking organizations and examiners alike. The Federal Reserve strives to provide clear and comprehensive guidance that directly communicates our expectations to the institutions we supervise, so that institutions do not need to rely on, for example, their own interpretations of public enforcement cases, which are not intended to serve as industry-wide compliance guidance. The Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC)BSA/AML Examination Manualissued last year is one example of our interagency efforts to clearly communicate our expectations. TheFFIEC BSA/AML Examination Manualreflects a common view of the federal banking agencies and the Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) with regard to BSA/AML compliance expectations. The agencies universally stress that the purpose of a BSA/AML examination is to assess the overall adequacy of a banking organization's BSA/AML controls, in view of that particular organization's lines of business and customer mix. This is critical to ensuring that resulting controls are risk-based, so that resources are directed appropriately. We also are working closely with our Treasury and law enforcement counterparts to disseminate information about perceived money-laundering or terrorist-financing threats. By identifying emerging vulnerabilities, we can better collaborate with banking organizations to develop systems and procedures to combat criminals' abuse of the financial sector. For example, the interagencyMoney Laundering Threat Assessment(4.1MB PDF)is one step we have taken--with fifteen other U.S. government bureaus, offices and agencies, including law enforcement--to identify significant concerns and communicate them to banking organizations.1 Consumer ProtectionThe Federal Reserve also cares greatly about consumer protection, as should bankers when they are assembling a broad risk-management strategy. Bankers need to be especially alert to developing easily understood disclosures as they introduce more innovative and complex products that can be confusing to consumers. As you may know, the U.S. banking agencies recently issued proposed guidance on nontraditional mortgages. The comment period for this interagency proposal closed on March 29, so we are now in the process of reviewing comments and determining how to proceed. Nontraditional mortgages allow borrowers to defer payment of principal and, sometimes, interest. While the proposed guidance focuses on banks' ability to adequately identify, measure, monitor, and control the risk associated with these products, it also addresses consumer protection. Nontraditional mortgages, including "interest-only" mortgages and "payment-option" adjustable-rate mortgages, have been available for many years, and are beneficial for some borrowers because of the payment flexibility they offer. Although these products were initially designed for higher-income borrowers, today these products are being offered to a wider spectrum of consumers, including borrowers for whom these types of mortgages may be ill-suited. Moreover, institutions are combining these nontraditional loans with other practices, such as reduced documentation of income and assets in evaluating applicants' creditworthiness. Many borrowers may not fully recognize the risks of nontraditional mortgages, particularly "payment shock" when the loan's interest rate increases, or when the consumer is required to make fully amortizing payments. Negative amortization coupled with flattening, or even lower, housing prices could make it difficult for some borrowers to refinance or sell the property to avoid payment shock. In addition to ensuring that institutions comply with the Truth in Lending Act and other applicable laws, the draft guidance urges institutions to ensure that their advertisements, promotional materials, and oral communications are consistent with the product terms and that these communications provide clear, balanced, and timely information about the risks. This is important so that consumers have the information they need at critical decision times, such as when selecting a loan product or choosing a specific payment option each month. The Board's Truth in Lending regulations require creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about the loan terms, including a schedule of payments. For interest-only and payment option ARMs, the payment schedule shows consumers how their payments will increase to include amortization of the principal. The proposed interagency guidance describes how institutions can use their promotional materials to provide better information about the features and risks of these products, especially the risk of payment shock. For example, the guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials inform consumers about the maximum monthly payment they could be required to pay once interest-rate caps and negative-amortization caps have been reached. The proposed guidance also lists recommended practices to address other risks. When negative amortization is possible, the guidance suggests that institutions alert consumers about the consequences of increasing principal balances and decreasing home equity. If both reduced-documentation and full-documentation loan programs are offered, the draft guidance advises institutions to inform consumers if they will pay a pricing premium for the reduced-documentation loan. When institutions provide monthly statements with payment options, they are urged to include on the statement information that enables borrowers to make responsible choices, by explaining each payment option and the impact of each choice. In addition to the draft nontraditional mortgages, the Federal Reserve Board plans to hold several public hearings this summer on home-equity lending. These hearings are a first step to a broader review of mortgage disclosure rules. One of the issues that will be explored at the hearings is likely to be the adequacy of the existing disclosures for nontraditional mortgages, such as interest-only loans and payment-option ARMs, as well as forty-year mortgages and reverse mortgages. The hearings also likely will address issues related to predatory lending and market developments since 2002, when the Board last revised its rules for higher-priced loans under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA). Concerns about predatory lending continue to be raised, and the hearings could explore the impact of the HOEPA rule changes on abusive lending practices as well as on the availability of subprime credit. ConclusionIn carrying out its role as central bank and banking supervisor, the Federal Reserve must continue to ensure that banking institutions operate in a safe and sound manner with a strong capital base. For large, internationally active U.S. organizations, the Federal Reserve believes that the current regulatory capital regime is insufficient. The Basel II framework, we believe, provides more risk sensitivity and a much better link between capital and risk--especially for complex products, services and processes--promotes advanced risk management practices and improves transparency to supervisors, bankers, and markets about the nature of risk exposures and risk management. Beyond our work on regulatory capital, we encourage institutions to focus on overall improvements in risk management, of which compliance-risk management is an important element. One key message is to continue to make sure the compliance process reflects the changing product and customer mix of the financial institution. Another is that as institutions provide more complex products with features that are not as familiar to the customer, the organization must also improve the clarity of its communications with customers. Footnotes 1.U.S. Money Laundering Threat Assessment Released.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of a final rule to amend Regulation K to require Edge and Agreement corporations and U.S. branches, agencies, and other offices of foreign banks supervised by the Board to establish and maintain procedures reasonably designed to ensure and monitor compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act and related regulations. The Board will publish its final rule in the Federal Register shortly, and the rule will become effective 30 days after publication. The Bank Secrecy Act generally requires a financial institution doing business in the United States to keep records and make reports that have a high degree of usefulness in criminal, tax, or regulatory proceedings. Domestic financial institutions, such as state member banks subject to the Board's Regulation H, already have been required to establish and maintain programs to ensure and monitor compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act. The Board's final rule amends Regulation K to require Edge and Agreement corporations and U.S. branches, agencies, and other offices of foreign banks to implement and maintain similar compliance programs. The Board's final rule is consistent with regulations issued by the Department of the Treasury under section 352 of the USA PATRIOT Act, which requires all financial institutions to maintain effective anti-money-laundering programs. The Board believes that the final rule will not impose any material administrative burden for affected institutions because, in supervising these institutions to ensure safety and soundness, the Board has consistently expected such entities to maintain programs to ensure compliance with all applicable provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act. The Board's final rule is attached. Attachment (44KB PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the approval of policy changes that seek to reduce the overuse of Federal Reserve Bank cash-processing services by providing incentives for depository institutions to recirculate currency among their customers. The Reserve Banks estimate that the changes to the cash services policy could affect approximately 150 to 225 depository institutions with high-volume currency operations. The changes are intended to reverse a shift by depository institutions away from traditional patterns of currency activity toward greater reliance on Reserve Bank cash processing. The Federal Reserve expects depository institutions to recirculate to their customers fit currency deposited with them and to deposit only excess or unfit currency with Federal Reserve Banks. To promote the recirculation of fit Federal Reserve notes by depository institutions, two elements have been added to the existing cash services policy. First, a custodial inventory program will permit depository institutions to transfer a percentage of the $10 and $20 notes in their vaults to the books of the Federal Reserve, allowing the institutions to reduce the size and frequency of their deposits of currency to and orders from the Reserve Banks. This incentive will be coupled with a fee charged to depository institutions that deposit fit $10 or $20 notes at a Reserve Bank and order the same denomination, above ade minimisamount, during the same business week. The Reserve Banks will put the policy changes into effect in two phases. In the first phase, the custodial inventory program will be implemented for eligible participants. About one year later, in the second phase, the Reserve Banks will begin assessing the recirculation fee after they have put in place a currency quality policy to prevent deterioration in the quality of currency in circulation. The Reserve Banks expect to begin accepting requests to participate in the custodial inventory program in May 2006, with program operations beginning in July 2006. The assessment of fees is expected to begin in July 2007. Additional information about implementation of the policy changes will be published soon on the Federal Reserve Financial Services web site,http://www.frbservices.org/Cash. The Board's notice is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the approval of the application of Banco Latinoamericano de Exportaciones S.A., Panama City, Republic of Panama, to establish a representative office in Miami, Florida. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the notice under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Bank Hapoalim, B.M. and Arison Holdings (1998) Ltd., both of Tel Aviv, and Israel Salt Industries Ltd., Atlit, all in Israel, to acquire all the outstanding shares of Investec (US) Incorporated, New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application and notice under sections 3 and 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by BB&T Corporation, Winston Salem, North Carolina, to effect the following transactions: (1) to acquire Main Street Banks, Inc. ("Main Street"), Atlanta, and its subsidiary bank, Main Street Bank, Covington, both of Georgia; and (2) to acquire Main Street's subsidiary, MSB Payroll Solutions, LLC, Alpharetta, Georgia, and thereby engage in permissible data processing activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the approval of an application by Caja de Ahorros de Galicia, Caixa Galicia, A Coruña, Spain, to establish an agency in Miami, Florida. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the approval of the application of Caja de Ahorros del Mediterráneo, Alicante, Spain, to establish an agency in Miami, Florida. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Compass Bancshares, Inc., Birmingham, Alabama, to acquire TexasBanc Holding Co., Weatherford, and TexasBank, Fort Worth, both of Texas. The Board also approved the applications under the Bank Merger Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by Compass Bank, also of Birmingham, to merge with TexasBank and to establish and operate branches at TexasBank's main office and branch locations. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application and notice under sections 3 and 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Marshall & Ilsley Corporation, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, to acquire Gold Banc, Inc. and its subsidiary bank, Gold Bank, both in Leawood, Kansas. The Board also approved the applications under the Bank Merger Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by M&I Marshall & Ilsley Bank, also in Milwaukee, to merge with Gold Bank and to establish and operate branches at Gold Bank's main office and branch locations. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Marshall & Ilsley Corporation, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, to acquire Trustcorp Financial, Inc., St. Louis, and its subsidiary bank, Missouri State Bank and Trust Company, Clayton, both of Missouri. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the approval of the application of National City Corporation, Cleveland, Ohio, to acquire Forbes First Financial Corporation, St. Louis, and its subsidiary bank, Pioneer Bank and Trust Company, Maplewood, both in Missouri. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the proposal by New York Community Bancorp, Inc. and New York Community Newco, Inc., both of Westbury, to acquire Atlantic Bank of New York, New York, all in New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the notice under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Société Générale, Paris, France, to engage in physical commodity trading activities on a limited basis as an activity that is complementary to the financial activity of engaging regularly as a principal in commodity derivatives. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application by Whitney Holding Corporation, New Orleans, Louisiana, to acquire First National Bancshares, Inc. and its subsidiary bank, 1st National Bank & Trust, both of Bradenton, Florida. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday approved action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, increasing the discount rate at the Bank from 5-1/2 percent to 5-3/4 percent, effective immediately.
Governor Mark W. Olson At the Annual Washington Conference of the Institute of International Bankers, Washington, D.C. Thank you for inviting me to speak to you today. Over the past twenty years, I have attended many of these Institute of International Bankers (IIB) spring conferences in Washington, D.C., either as a speaker or a participant. These meetings continue to address interesting and pertinent issues. The consistently larger number of attendees at a meeting here in Washington, as opposed to a meeting in one of the more dynamic international financial centers like New York or Los Angeles, reflects this group's clear recognition that public policy has a direct impact on the viability of your respective institutions. Appropriately, most of the topics presented over these two days cover legislative and regulatory issues intermixed with critical strategic issues. For my presentation, I will revisit a topic initially raised twenty-four years ago by a former president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank, E. Gerald Corrigan. In 1982, Jerry Corrigan, then the president of the Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank, wrote an essay entitled "Are Banks Special?" for the Bank's annual report. Today I would like to revisit the issue and ponder the question "Are Banks Still Special?" I realize that some of you may be wondering why a focus on the specialness of the domestic U.S. banking industry would be an appropriate topic at a meeting of foreign bank representatives. There are several reasons why the subject is relevant to this group. First, U.S. laws and regulations for foreign banks adhere to the fundamental principle of national treatment. That is, our regulations allow foreign banks to have the same range of product authority as domestic banks. Therefore, any change in policy that affects domestic banks will also potentially affect the range of products foreign banks may offer. Another reason why the issue is likely to be of interest to this audience is that, in any discussion of product authority or regulatory structure, the experiences of other nations are often used as examples. These examples are often presented as policies or practices to be avoided or emulated. But the accuracy of the facts presented to support or oppose other countries' experiences is not always clear. At times, these "facts" may be undocumented generalities or even wild speculation. Let me return to Corrigan's essay. In 1982, the banking industry was facing an identity crisis unlike any it had faced since the Depression era fifty years earlier. Within a period of a few months in the mid-1930s, Congress (1) required the separation of banking from many securities functions by passing the Glass-Steagall Act, (2) provided protection for bank depositors by passing the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, and (3) authorized the creation of a dedicated home mortgage lender by passing the Home Owners' Loan Act. Through these laws, Congress established the legal framework that clearly delineated the competitive relationship for the securities, banking, and thrift industries for close to fifty years. This delineation extended to the marketplace for the banking and securities industries. During this period, there were few issues of controversy between banks and securities firms, the most notable exception being the narrowly focused but heated disagreement as to whether banks should be allowed to underwrite revenue bonds. The Glass-Steagall Act specifically authorized banks to underwrite general obligation bonds, but the act was silent on the issue of revenue bonds. The banking industry viewed that as an oversight; the securities industry viewed it as a purposeful exclusion. This debate went unresolved until 1999, when the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act specifically authorized revenue bond underwriting by banks. In contrast to the relative peace between banks and securities firms, the competition for deposits between banks and thrifts was quite strong and intensified with the imposition of Regulation Q. Not only did Regulation Q establish ceilings on interest rates for both passbook savings accounts and certificates of deposit (CDs), the regulation gave thrifts an interest rate advantage of initially 50, then 25, basis points for each of their interest-bearing products. The intense marketplace competition between banks and thrifts was matched by the level of competition in the halls of Congress. Bankers aggressively worked to eliminate that quarter-point rate differential, while thrifts worked equally hard to preserve it. Such widespread competition was nonexistent between the securities and banking industries. From the 1930s to the late 1970s, there seemed to be a clear distinction between investment and savings or at least between investment dollars and savings dollars. Savings dollars were held in passbook accounts or CDs, and were insured up to certain limits by Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) or Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC) insurance. Investment dollars were in equities or bonds. Banks and thrifts waged a turf war against each other, but neither industry aimed its marketing guns or lobbying efforts at the securities industry. Then along came money market mutual funds, or money funds. High interest rates during the late 1970s and early 1980s had a stunning effect on the flow of deposits into banks and thrifts. Money fund shares issued by investment firms offered market interest rates and a high level of liquidity, through either immediate withdrawal or the ability to effect transactions by using payable-through drafts. By contrast, Regulation Q mandated low interest rates on passbook accounts, specific term restrictions on CDs, and significant penalties for early withdrawal. Money funds offered rates that were at times double the rates on passbook accounts. The banking industry had no products to counter the market appeal. Even though money funds shares are not federally insured, billions of dollars flowed into the accounts. In 1981 alone, $109 billion flowed into money funds. After a tepid and wholly unsuccessful effort by bankers to restrict the growth of money funds, the banking industry began considering a different response. Now that the securities industry had successfully breached the separation between banking and savings by allowing consumers to invest in money funds, the banking industry was forced to examine its fundamental marketplace role. During that period, I was the vice chairman, then the chairman, of the Governmental Relations Committee of the American Bankers Association. At meetings held between 1980 and 1982, as many as 400 bankers representing institutions of all sizes and markets gathered to consider an industry response. Congress's response to the growth of money funds was to pass the Monetary Control Act of 1980 and the Garn-St Germain Act of 1982. Taken together, these laws, along with other provisions, eliminated many of the rate and term restrictions on banks' and thrifts' deposit taking and allowed both types of institutions to offer products that could match the rate and liquidity provisions of money funds. But it was clear to many bankers that a lasting response to marketplace changes would require more than just the removal of Regulation Q. Bankers were seeking answers to such basic questions as "What is a bank?" and "What is the public purpose of banking?" Jerry Corrigan's essay proved to be a beacon of rationality in that discussion. Are Banks Special?Corrigan identified three characteristics that made banks special:-Banks and only banks offered transaction accounts. That is, "they incurred liabilities payable on demand at par and are readily transferable by the owner to third parties." That transaction account authority helped "to insure that financial disruptions do not spread." Backed also by deposit insurance and access to the discount window, banks "reinforced public confidence that is essential to a healthy economy."-Corrigan's second criterion identified banks as critical backup sources of liquidity. In fact his essay stated that "banks are the primary source of liquidity for all other classes and sizes of institutions, both financial and nonfinancial."-The third characteristic Corrigan identified is that banks "are the transmission belt for monetary policy. That role combined with operating the payments mechanism permit the highly efficient financial markets to function and effect the orderly end of day settlement."Corrigan went on to address the question "what is a bank," a question that had been complicated by different definitions in different laws. The Federal Deposit Insurance Act defined "bank" differently than the Bank Holding Company Act did, a distinction that allowed commercial entities to own FDIC-insured banks by narrowing their product offerings to meet the BHC Act test. (The Competitive Equality Banking Act reconciled these definitions in 1987.) If banks are special, Corrigan stated, limitations on what services and lines of business banks could offer were justified. Further, the services of businesses that are allowed to be owners of banks should reflect in a nearly symmetric way, the services banks are allowed to offer. Corrigan had made a remarkably prescient observation, as the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act that would be passed seventeen years later essentially adopted that last criterion in determining what types of corporations could own banks, and what activities could be conducted in those corporations. Between the publication of Corrigan's essay and passage of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, market forces, supported by either regulatory interpretation or court challenges, continued to blur the lines between the banking, securities, and insurance industries. As capital markets expanded, mutual funds put pressure on bank deposits. In Europe, foreign bank successes in securities activities suggested that banks conduct these activities in a safe and sound manner. But until 1999, there was no legislative response to these basic marketplace changes or to the broader question of the separation of banking and commerce.Separation of Banking and CommerceThe appropriate separation of banking and commerce is a delicate proposition that has both historical and philosophical underpinnings. The term "separation of banking and commerce" can mean different things, depending on the perspective of the person using the term. At the time of Corrigan's essay--the early 1980s--the statutory authority for that separation was largely contained in two laws: the Glass-Steagall Act, which separated commercial banking from certain investment and securities activities, and the Bank Holding Company Act (with amendments), which narrowly limited the activities of corporations that were allowed to own banks. When it passed in 1956, the Bank Holding Company Act was thought to have been in response to one company's aggressive expansion into banking activities. That company, Transamerica Insurance, had expanded into several western states and concerns were raised about the resulting concentration of financial resources. Therefore, the ensuing body of law on the commerce and banking issue concentrated significantly on separating, or was inspired by desire to separate, banking from securities or banking from insurance. From the time of Corrigan's essay until passage of Gramm-Leach-Bliley, the banking industry had expanded substantially into both the securities and insurance agency fields, though significant restrictions still remained.Much of the industry's expanded securities authority was gained through the Federal Reserve's approval of securities underwriting for banks, under Section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act. Under the Federal Reserve's rule, a bank subsidiary was "not engaged principally" in securities underwriting if at first 5 percent, then 10 percent, and ultimately 25 percent of its revenue came from underwriting. This expanded authority allowed many banking organizations, though almost exclusively large banks, to significantly expand their domestic securities activities. These same powers were extended to foreign banks operating in the United States.In insurance, gains for the banking industry were largely the result of court determinations that annuities could be underwritten and sold by banks. Court determinations also expanded national banks' ability to market insurance products. Consequently, banks of all sizes have expanded their involvement in insurance and annuity activities.By 1999, banks and bank holding companies had gained significant additional product authority in securities and insurance, areas that had been perceived to be on the other side of the banking and commerce wall at the time Corrigan wrote his essay. A number of factors persuaded Congress that federal action was appropriate, and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act was passed. Congress had learned from the securities and insurance experiences of foreign banks, both the high points and the low points. On the one hand, institutions in some European countries had successfully broadened their securities and insurance activities. On the other hand, there were lingering questions about whether some Pacific rim banks were too closely linked to certain commercial enterprises in the region, thus facilitating the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s. However, the U.S. banking industry had also developed improved ways to manage risk, and banking supervision had become more effective. In addition, the improved analytical capacity offered by new technology, better coordination among domestic and international bank supervisors, a healthy track record for U.S. banks, and the growth of consolidated home-country supervision across the world helped U.S. banks and their affiliates to further expand their commercial activities.The response of Congress was essentially threefold. First, it moved the separation wall between banking and commerce to reflect what had already occurred in the marketplace: Gramm-Leach-Bliley also addressed the broader question of what types of businesses could own or affiliate with banks by allowing companies to own banking, securities, and insurance entities within a structure known as a financial holding company. Second, Congress provided a way for banks to gain new-product authority when the new products were determined to be financial in nature, incidental to banking, or complimentary to existing banking authority. Third, by clearly separating the federally insured entity--either banks or thrifts--from the newer and potentially higher-risk new-product authorities, Gramm-Leach-Bliley reaffirmed as a matter of public policy that banks continue to be regarded as special. But the act offers a clear acknowledgment that the separation of banking and commerce is not a bright line but is instead a negotiated compromise--one that will continue to move as markets change and products are refined. The guiding consideration in this compromise will be the protection of the federal deposit insurance fund.Are Banks Still Special?Much has changed in the banking landscape since Corrigan wrote his essay twenty-four years ago. Significant increases in international capital flows among bank and nonbank entities, in addition to a broad range of specialized financial instruments mean banks can no longer be considered the only source of transaction accounts. Except for their access to the Federal Reserve discount window, banks are no longer the dominant provider of liquidity for other financial industries. But banks remain the key access point to the dominant wholesale payments network, and they still provide federally insured checking and savings deposits. With the rise of new financial services, products, and techniques, moreover, banks have expanded their role in providing liquidity in more indirect ways, for example, through securitization of loans and backup commitments to securitization vehicles and other capital-markets instruments. Even when banks may not be "special" or unique providers in a particular market, banks have proven themselves to be formidable competitors and innovators--which only reinforces banks' importance in the proper functioning of our financial system. In short, the public's trust and confidence in banking continue to be vital to our financial well-being.Banks provided considerable credit in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks, when financial flows were slowed by operational problems. To be sure, banks were able to provide this credit in part because of the huge injection of liquidity provided by the Federal Reserve. But that is a key role for banks in a crisis: to obtain funds--through the discount window or from open market operations, if necessary--and to channel them to those needing funds, based on an assessment of their creditworthiness. Banks' access to the discount window and the payments system, as well as their ongoing relationships with customers and their credit-evaluation skills, allow them to play this role. During a crisis, those banks that play critical roles in the payments system are especially important. As a result, these banks are expected to be very resilient. Though banks now have a smaller role in transmitting monetary policy, they still help to transmit policy actions by arbitraging between the federal funds market and other money markets.ConclusionA strong case can be made that banks continue to be special. And because they are special, we, as regulators, will continue to apply high standards to companies seeking a bank charter. We must also continue to examine and supervise banks for safety and soundness. Likewise, it appears that Congress will take a cautious approach when determining what types of companies may own and affiliate with banks.But banks must also compete in the marketplace. Consequently, we can expect over time to see adjustments in both the direct activities of banks and in the line separating banking and commerce. History is, in some sense, about the drawing, re-evaluation, and re-drawing of lines. As a matter of public policy, changes will trail rather than lead the marketplace, and any changes must be informed by a careful study of both the role we want banks to play in our economy and the needs of the marketplace. -Corrigan's second criterion identified banks as critical backup sources of liquidity. In fact his essay stated that "banks are the primary source of liquidity for all other classes and sizes of institutions, both financial and nonfinancial." -The third characteristic Corrigan identified is that banks "are the transmission belt for monetary policy. That role combined with operating the payments mechanism permit the highly efficient financial markets to function and effect the orderly end of day settlement." Separation of Banking and CommerceThe appropriate separation of banking and commerce is a delicate proposition that has both historical and philosophical underpinnings. The term "separation of banking and commerce" can mean different things, depending on the perspective of the person using the term. At the time of Corrigan's essay--the early 1980s--the statutory authority for that separation was largely contained in two laws: the Glass-Steagall Act, which separated commercial banking from certain investment and securities activities, and the Bank Holding Company Act (with amendments), which narrowly limited the activities of corporations that were allowed to own banks. When it passed in 1956, the Bank Holding Company Act was thought to have been in response to one company's aggressive expansion into banking activities. That company, Transamerica Insurance, had expanded into several western states and concerns were raised about the resulting concentration of financial resources. Therefore, the ensuing body of law on the commerce and banking issue concentrated significantly on separating, or was inspired by desire to separate, banking from securities or banking from insurance. From the time of Corrigan's essay until passage of Gramm-Leach-Bliley, the banking industry had expanded substantially into both the securities and insurance agency fields, though significant restrictions still remained. Much of the industry's expanded securities authority was gained through the Federal Reserve's approval of securities underwriting for banks, under Section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act. Under the Federal Reserve's rule, a bank subsidiary was "not engaged principally" in securities underwriting if at first 5 percent, then 10 percent, and ultimately 25 percent of its revenue came from underwriting. This expanded authority allowed many banking organizations, though almost exclusively large banks, to significantly expand their domestic securities activities. These same powers were extended to foreign banks operating in the United States. In insurance, gains for the banking industry were largely the result of court determinations that annuities could be underwritten and sold by banks. Court determinations also expanded national banks' ability to market insurance products. Consequently, banks of all sizes have expanded their involvement in insurance and annuity activities. By 1999, banks and bank holding companies had gained significant additional product authority in securities and insurance, areas that had been perceived to be on the other side of the banking and commerce wall at the time Corrigan wrote his essay. A number of factors persuaded Congress that federal action was appropriate, and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act was passed. Congress had learned from the securities and insurance experiences of foreign banks, both the high points and the low points. On the one hand, institutions in some European countries had successfully broadened their securities and insurance activities. On the other hand, there were lingering questions about whether some Pacific rim banks were too closely linked to certain commercial enterprises in the region, thus facilitating the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s. However, the U.S. banking industry had also developed improved ways to manage risk, and banking supervision had become more effective. In addition, the improved analytical capacity offered by new technology, better coordination among domestic and international bank supervisors, a healthy track record for U.S. banks, and the growth of consolidated home-country supervision across the world helped U.S. banks and their affiliates to further expand their commercial activities. The response of Congress was essentially threefold. First, it moved the separation wall between banking and commerce to reflect what had already occurred in the marketplace: Gramm-Leach-Bliley also addressed the broader question of what types of businesses could own or affiliate with banks by allowing companies to own banking, securities, and insurance entities within a structure known as a financial holding company. Second, Congress provided a way for banks to gain new-product authority when the new products were determined to be financial in nature, incidental to banking, or complimentary to existing banking authority. Third, by clearly separating the federally insured entity--either banks or thrifts--from the newer and potentially higher-risk new-product authorities, Gramm-Leach-Bliley reaffirmed as a matter of public policy that banks continue to be regarded as special. But the act offers a clear acknowledgment that the separation of banking and commerce is not a bright line but is instead a negotiated compromise--one that will continue to move as markets change and products are refined. The guiding consideration in this compromise will be the protection of the federal deposit insurance fund. Are Banks Still Special?Much has changed in the banking landscape since Corrigan wrote his essay twenty-four years ago. Significant increases in international capital flows among bank and nonbank entities, in addition to a broad range of specialized financial instruments mean banks can no longer be considered the only source of transaction accounts. Except for their access to the Federal Reserve discount window, banks are no longer the dominant provider of liquidity for other financial industries. But banks remain the key access point to the dominant wholesale payments network, and they still provide federally insured checking and savings deposits. With the rise of new financial services, products, and techniques, moreover, banks have expanded their role in providing liquidity in more indirect ways, for example, through securitization of loans and backup commitments to securitization vehicles and other capital-markets instruments. Even when banks may not be "special" or unique providers in a particular market, banks have proven themselves to be formidable competitors and innovators--which only reinforces banks' importance in the proper functioning of our financial system. In short, the public's trust and confidence in banking continue to be vital to our financial well-being. Banks provided considerable credit in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks, when financial flows were slowed by operational problems. To be sure, banks were able to provide this credit in part because of the huge injection of liquidity provided by the Federal Reserve. But that is a key role for banks in a crisis: to obtain funds--through the discount window or from open market operations, if necessary--and to channel them to those needing funds, based on an assessment of their creditworthiness. Banks' access to the discount window and the payments system, as well as their ongoing relationships with customers and their credit-evaluation skills, allow them to play this role. During a crisis, those banks that play critical roles in the payments system are especially important. As a result, these banks are expected to be very resilient. Though banks now have a smaller role in transmitting monetary policy, they still help to transmit policy actions by arbitraging between the federal funds market and other money markets. ConclusionA strong case can be made that banks continue to be special. And because they are special, we, as regulators, will continue to apply high standards to companies seeking a bank charter. We must also continue to examine and supervise banks for safety and soundness. Likewise, it appears that Congress will take a cautious approach when determining what types of companies may own and affiliate with banks. But banks must also compete in the marketplace. Consequently, we can expect over time to see adjustments in both the direct activities of banks and in the line separating banking and commerce. History is, in some sense, about the drawing, re-evaluation, and re-drawing of lines. As a matter of public policy, changes will trail rather than lead the marketplace, and any changes must be informed by a careful study of both the role we want banks to play in our economy and the needs of the marketplace.
The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies today issued an interagency advisory to financial institutions and their technology service providers that is intended to raise awareness of the threat of a pandemic influenza outbreak and its potential impact on the delivery of critical financial services. The advisory discusses the National Strategy for Pandemic Influenza and the roles and responsibilities this strategy outlines for financial institutions and advises financial institutions and their service providers to consider this and similar threats in their event response and contingency strategies. The advisory, which is being issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision, is attached. Attachment (27 KB PDF)Media Contacts:Federal ReserveSusan Stawick(202) 452-2955FDICDavid Barr(202) 898-6992OCCDean DeBuck(202) 874-5770OTSChris Smith(202) 906-6677
The federal banking agencies today announced final guidance implementing the recent changes to their Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations. The guidance clarifies, among other things, the availability of CRA consideration for bank activities that revitalize or stabilize designated disaster areas. The guidance indicates that a bank's loans, investments, and services in support of disaster recovery that help to attract new, or retain existing, businesses or residents to a designated disaster area will receive CRA "community development" consideration for a 36-month period following designation of the area. The guidance allows for extensions of this period in unusual cases, and the agencies plan to substantially extend the time periods in the Gulf Coast areas hit by hurricanes Rita and Katrina. The guidance also addresses the availability of CRA "community development" consideration for bank activities that revitalize or stabilize underserved or distressed middle-income rural areas. The other major issue it addresses is implementation of the new community development test for banks with assets between $250 million and $1 billion. The guidance, which takes the form of questions and answers, was proposed for public comment on November 10, 2005. Some of the questions and answers have been revised from the proposal to reflect suggestions from commenters. The guidance is being issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. The guidance implements changes to the agencies' CRA regulations that took effect on September 1, 2005. The guidance will be effective upon publication in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. The Federal Register notice is attached. CRA directs the agencies to assess an insured depository institution's record of meeting the credit needs of its entire community, and to consider that record when acting on certain applications for branches, office relocations, mergers, consolidations and other corporate activities. Attachment (128 KB PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the issuance of a consent Cease and Desist Order against Asian Financial Corporation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and its subsidiary bank, Asian Bank, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. A copy of the Cease and Desist Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the issuance of a consent Cease and Desist Order against Doral Financial Corporation, San Juan, Puerto Rico, a registered bank holding company that owns and controls Doral Bank, San Juan, Puerto Rico, a state nonmember bank, and indirectly owns and controls Doral Bank, FSB, New York, New York, a federal savings bank. In a separate, coordinated action, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation contemporaneously issued a consent Cease and Desist Order against Doral Bank, San Juan, Puerto Rico. A copy of the Board's Cease and Desist Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the issuance of a consent Cease and Desist Order against First BanCorp, Santurce, Puerto Rico, a registered bank holding company that owns and controls FirstBank Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico, a state nonmember bank, and indirectly owns and controls FirstBank Florida, Miami, Florida, a federal savings and loan association. In a separate, coordinated action, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation contemporaneously issued a consent Cease and Desist Order against FirstBank Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico. A copy of the Board's Cease and Desist Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the issuance of a consent Cease and Desist Order against R&G Financial Corporation, Hato Rey, San Juan, Puerto Rico, a registered bank holding company that owns and controls R-G Premier Bank of Puerto Rico, Hato Rey, San Juan, Puerto Rico, a state nonmember bank, and indirectly owns and controls R-G Crown Bank, Casselberry, Florida, a federal savings bank. In a separate, coordinated action, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation contemporaneously issued a consent Cease and Desist Order against R-G Premier Bank of Puerto Rico, Hato Rey, Puerto Rico. A copy of the Board's Cease and Desist Order is attached.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Independent Community Bankers of America National Convention and Techworld, Las Vegas, Nevada Good morning. I am pleased to join you today to discuss matters of mutual interest to the Federal Reserve and community banks; to learn more about your business; and, I hope, to meet many of you in person. Community banks have long played a critical role in the U.S. economy, and this is no less true in the twenty-first century. Today, I will begin by making some observations, based in part on research done at the Federal Reserve and elsewhere, about the health of community banks and their evolving role in our economy. Community banks are generally doing quite well, and I expect that good performance to continue. But community banks also face a changing business environment that presents a number of important long-run challenges. In the second portion of my remarks, I will speak a bit about how the Federal Reserve, as the supervisor of many community banks, is also adjusting to a changing environment, and I will review some of the key financial risks facing community banks. Developments in Community BankingBy a wide variety of indicators, the overall performance of community banks in recent years has been quite strong. Average return on equity (ROE), for example, following a decline associated with the 2001 recession, remains solid and indeed has shown a slight upward trend. Return on assets for community banks as a whole demonstrates a similar pattern and has stayed well above traditional benchmarks of strong performance. Net interest margins remain higher than those of the largest banks, and this gap has even widened since 2003. Various measures of loan quality for community banks have been robust, and bank failures have been rare. Equally important, both our on-site examinations and our off-site surveillance system, which uses statistical models to attempt to flag emerging weaknesses at community banks, detect signs of potential problems at very few banks. Consistent with this view, community bank capital ratios remain impressively high, and community banks' ability to attract deposits continues to be a source of strength. One strong indicator of the continued health of community banks is the rate at which new banks continue to be created. For example, if we define a community bank as any bank or thrift organization with total real (2002) assets of a billion dollars or less, slightly more than 700 community banks were formed from the beginning of 2000 through 2005, an average of about 120 per year. Clearly, many people remain willing to invest in the future of community banking. The Board has long taken the view that community banks will remain a vigorous and innovative sector of the economy. I think that forecast remains a good one today. All of this is good news. But I am sure that many in this audience would agree that community banks also face serious challenges. Expansion of the geographic scope of banking activities, rapid technological change in the production of financial services, the increasing importance of nonbank providers, and evolving patterns of economic growth are among the factors that are changing the banking marketplace. And, while many of these changes have improved the efficiency of our financial system and lowered costs for consumers, it is only realistic to acknowledge that they also present new and sometimes daunting tests for community banks. Indeed, we have seen major shifts in the structure of the U.S. banking industry in recent decades. Under the same definition of community banks that I used a moment ago, the share of banking industry assets held in community banks has fallen from about 20 percent in 1994 to a little more than 12 percent in 2005. In addition, the number of community banks has dropped from more than 10,000 in 1994 to about 7,200 in 2005. Other definitions of community banks and other structural measures, such as the share of total deposits, also show declines in recent years. Most of this consolidation is a result of mergers. A recent study by a member of the Federal Reserve Board staff shows that between 1994 and 2003 there were more than 3,500 bank and thrift mergers (Pilloff, 2004). In about 92 percent of these mergers, the target institution had one billion dollars or less in total assets. Although bank merger activity has generally declined since the late 1990s, at least 200 deals were completed in each year from 2000 through 2005. The Evolution of Relationship FinanceThese developments notwithstanding, research by our staff and other economists supports the view that community banks continue to play an important role in the provision of financial services, particularly to small businesses, but also to a wide range of retail customers nationwide. Indeed, conventional wisdom in the research community is that "the central principle of community banking is 'relationship finance'" (DeYoung et al., 2004, p. 81). By relationship finance I mean financial services whose value-added depends importantly on the ongoing personal interactions of bankers with their customers, interactions that improve the flow of information and allow for more customized services. Relationship finance strengthens the economy by allowing credit and other financial services to be provided more efficiently. But recent research also confirms what many community bankers tell us--that traditional notions of relationship finance are changing, along with the nature of community bank-customer relationships. The conventional research paradigm included the idea that small businesses and households tend to be informationally "opaque"; that is, information about these potential borrowers can be costly to obtain and hard to quantify. According to this view, the efficient supply of credit to such parties required close interactions to elicit "soft," or qualitative, information, such as the personal characteristics of the borrower or relevant aspects of local markets and opportunities. This paradigm holds that large banks have a comparative advantage lending to those relatively transparent customers from which they can obtain "hard," or quantitative, information, such as standardized accounting data, and community banks have a comparative advantage lending to relatively opaque small businesses and households. However, this division of labor between large and small institutions has begun to blur. Today, practitioners and researchers understand that low-cost information processing, improved credit-scoring, and more sophisticated management techniques are rapidly reducing the effective opacity of many small businesses and households. Credit card lending provides an example of this phenomenon. Technological and financial innovation, including credit scoring, securitization, and economies of scale in data processing, have combined to make credit card lending a hard-information, transactions-driven business, quite different from traditional unsecured personal lending, which relies heavily on personal knowledge and relationships. Some recent data from the Board's forthcoming Survey of Small Business Finances sheds some light on how the marketplace, and the role of community banks, is changing. The Board conducts this survey every five years. Our most recent data, which are still preliminary and will be released later this year, are for year-end 2003; they are the result of interviews with more than 4,200 small businesses that represent an estimated 6.3 million small businesses in the United States. The surveys show that small businesses are heavy users of financial services. For example, the proportion of these businesses using some type of financial service at a bank or thrift rose from 92 percent in 1998 to 96 percent in 2003. Increases occurred across a broad range of financial services and were especially strong in the area of "financial management services," which includes activities such as check clearing, cash management, letters of credit, and credit card processing. According to the surveys, community banks remain an important provider of these services, albeit in an increasingly competitive marketplace. Among small businesses that reported using a bank or thrift in 2003, about 37 percent used a community bank, down from about 42 percent in 1998. Over the same period, the share of small businesses using a financial service supplied by a nondepository institution rose from 40 percent to 54 percent. Although these surveys show that community banks face increasing competition, including from nondepository providers, they also highlight the importance of one of the traditional strengths of community banks: local presence. For example, in 2003 the median distance between a small business's headquarters and its bank or thrift was three miles, about the same as in 1998. Indeed, part of the success of nondepository institutions may have been due to the fact that the median distance between a small-business customer and its nondepository service provider fell from 83 miles in 1998 to 37 miles in 2003, with most of the change resulting from greater proximity of customers to nondepository loan providers. Being close and convenient is important. Data collected as part of the banking agencies' Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) activities also demonstrate the importance of proximity. As you know, the CRA focuses on banks' lending and services provided within their local communities. From CRA and other data, we can estimate the share of loans to small businesses made by depository institutions located physically within the local market area. These data show that between 1996 (the year we began collecting such data) and 2004, the competition from out-of-market lenders has increased, a result that will not surprise you. However, in value terms, the share of small-business loans made by out-of-market firms did not exceed 18 percent in any year. Small-business owners look overwhelmingly to local lenders for credit. We see that, for community banks, the overall picture is complex. In financial terms, community banks remain quite strong, and there is considerable entry into the business. New technologies and management methods have eroded some of the traditional informational benefits of relationship finance, however, and community banks have lost market share to larger banks and to nondepository institutions. But the data also show that many customers want to be served locally; they value proximity and convenience. In my view, the strong relationships and personalized services provided by community banks remain an important reason for their continuing success. Supervisory PerspectivesLike community banks, bank supervisors must also adapt to a changing financial and economic environment. I would like to discuss some of the ways in which the Federal Reserve's supervision of community banks has evolved in recent years and also briefly review some of the key financial risks that we see in our examinations. In the 1990s, bank supervisors began to take a more proactive, risk-focused approach. Under this approach, examiners focus their on-site reviews on those activities that appear to pose the greatest risks to each individual banking organization, with particular attention to the bank's procedures for evaluating, monitoring, and managing those risks. The objective is to address weaknesses in management and internal controls before, rather than after, financial performance suffers. In adapting to change, the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies have also consistently kept in view the competitive pressures that community banks face, pressures that make the costs of regulation an important concern. Whenever possible, we have streamlined procedures and worked to eliminate unnecessary burden. For example, based on industry feedback and supervisory experience, the Federal Reserve recently modified its Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement to raise the asset size used to define eligible companies from $150 million to $500 million. These revisions address changes in the industry and in the economy since the initial issuance of the policy statement in 1980. While the bank holding companies (BHCs) affected hold only 6 percent of total BHC assets, this change increases the exempt group to roughly 85 percent of all BHCs, thereby providing some burden relief to many smaller companies. These companies will be exempt from consolidated risk-based capital guidelines and will be allowed to file abbreviated semiannual reports in place of consolidated quarterly financial statements. Under the policy statement, the exemption would not be extended to holding companies with significant nonbank or off-balance-sheet activities or that have material amounts of public debt or equity securities outstanding. Of course, we and the other banking agencies will vigorously enforce prudential capital standards for all deposit-taking institutions, including those owned by the exempt BHCs. Supervisors have sought to adjust regulatory procedures to account for the needs of community banking organizations in other ways. As you are no doubt aware, in tandem with the review of capital standards for the largest banks, known as Basel II, the federal banking agencies are taking a comprehensive look at additional possible changes to existing regulatory capital guidelines for banks that would not adopt the proposed Basel II revisions. These possible changes to Basel I would seek to increase the risk sensitivity of the framework and to help mitigate any competitive inequities that could result from the implementation of Basel II. The recent update to the CRA regulations provides another example in which regulators have taken into account the special features of community banks. Last year, the Federal Reserve and other federal agencies issued final CRA rules that reduced compliance burden by creating a new category of intermediate small banks with assets between $250 million and $1 billion. Banks in this new category now face reduced requirements for data collection and reporting, and they have become eligible for a two-pronged set of CRA tests--a streamlined lending test and a community development test--rather than the three-part CRA criteria that larger banks must meet. These changes are intended to reduce the costs borne by smaller banks and to increase flexibility while still achieving the community development objectives of CRA. To target examination resources and to limit the burden of on-site reviews, the Federal Reserve also has increasingly relied on automated off-site monitoring tools. For example, since the late 1990s, the Federal Reserve has supervised many small bank holding companies using an off-site review program. We support this program with a targeted monitoring system that seeks to identify parent company and nonbank issues that may adversely affect affiliated insured depository institutions. This program enables us to limit on-site reviews to those bank holding companies with characteristics that could pose risks to insured depositories. We also use statistical models to monitor the condition of state member banks and quickly address any issues that emerge between regularly scheduled on-site examinations. This year, we substantially updated these models to improve their performance. Thanks in large part to such efforts, examiners today conduct more of their supervisory activities offsite, helping to reduce the burden that is associated with on-site examinations at institutions like yours. Beyond these changes, the Federal Reserve is participating in an ongoing interagency review of banking regulations pursuant to the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act, known as EGRPRA. This review seeks to identify opportunities to streamline regulatory procedures and requirements when such changes would be consistent with maintaining bank safety and soundness. The Board has also supported various legislative changes that would ease regulatory burden. These include a recently proposed change that would permit supervisors to extend the time between on-site examinations to eighteen months for well-managed and well-capitalized banks with up to $500 million in assets. This change would double the current size threshold and has the potential to allow roughly 1,200 more community institutions to qualify for the extended examination cycle. In my remaining time, I would like to discuss some of the key financial and risk-management challenges that we have identified through our supervisory activities. Banking has always been a business of taking and managing risks, but evolving market and economic conditions affect the types of opportunities available. In recent years, community banks have become more focused on commercial real estate lending, leading to a significant shift in the balance sheet and risk profiles of growing numbers of banks. In most local markets, commercial real estate loans have performed well. Our examiners tell us that lending standards are generally sound and are not comparable to the standards that contributed to broad problems in the banking industry two decades ago. In particular, real estate appraisal practices have improved. However, more recently, there have been signs of some easing of underwriting standards. The rapid growth in commercial real estate exposures relative to capital and assets raises the possibility that risk-management practices in community banks may not have kept pace with growing concentrations and may be due for upgrades in oversight, policies, information systems, and stress testing. In response to these developments, the federal banking agencies have recently proposed guidance that would focus examiners' attention on those loans that are particularly vulnerable to adverse market conditions--that is, loans dependent primarily on the sale, lease, or refinancing of commercial property as the source of repayment. I emphasize that, in proposing this guidance, supervisors are not aiming to discourage banks from making sound loans in commercial real estate or in any other loan category. Rather, we are affirming the need for each bank to recognize the risks arising from concentration and to have in place appropriate risk-management practices and capital levels. Adjusting to changes in the level of short-term interest rates can also pose challenges to community banks. Thus far, the relative stability of community bank net interest margins suggests that they have done a good job of managing their interest rate risk exposure throughout the recent increase in market rates. Importantly, most community banks have effectively controlled the maturity distributions of their assets and made significant improvements over the past decade to their management and measurement of interest rate risk. Certainly, the procedures employed by community banks today are significantly more effective than those typically used as recently as a decade ago. However, we continue to see a small number of institutions with concentrations in longer-term assets. In these cases, our examiners encourage banks to gauge the risks of new yield-enhancing strategies over the intermediate and longer terms. The unique funding structure of community banks supports their strong recent performance. For the most part, community banks continue to fund themselves primarily with relatively low cost and stable "core" deposits. However, a limited segment of community banks is increasing its reliance on wholesale sources of funding. Greater reliance on these sources places a premium on appropriate measurement and management of liquidity risk. Most community banks manage their liquidity risk positions well, but supervisory reviews suggest that some institutions have room for improvement. With the banking system enjoying a period of relatively high liquidity, now is a good time for all companies to assess the adequacy of their processes for managing liquidity risk. I emphasize that, on the whole, we do not have broad supervisory concerns with community banks. But it is only prudent to reiterate the importance of sound risk management to the continued success of community banks. ConclusionIn closing, I want to return to where I began. In my judgment, well-managed and innovative community banks will continue to play a critical role in the U.S. economy. Community banks provide vital services for their customers and are key contributors to sustained economic growth, both locally and nationally. Indeed, the performance of community banks over the past decade has been very impressive. But neither bankers nor their supervisors should become complacent. Doubtless the future will continue to require both of us to evaluate and respond to changes that are often complex and difficult to understand, much less to predict. It has been my pleasure to be here today, and I look forward to working with you in the coming years to ensure the continued vitality of the U.S. banking and financial system. Thank you. References DeYoung, Robert, William C. Hunter, and Gregory F. Udell (2004). "Whither the Community Bank?"Journal of Financial Services Research, vol. 25 (April/June), pp. 81-84. Pilloff, Steven J. (2004).Bank Merger Activity in the United States, 1994-2003, Staff Study 176. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May.
The Federal Reserve Board announced today that the Consumer Advisory Council will hold its next meeting on Thursday, March 30. The meeting will take place in Dining Room E, Terrace level, in the Board's Martin Building. The session will begin at 9:00 a.m. and is open to the public. Anyone planning to attend the meeting should, for security purposes, register no later than Tuesday, March 28, by completing the form found online at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/secure/forms/cacregistration.cfm. Additionally, attendees must present photo identification to enter the building. The Council's function is to advise the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under various consumer financial services laws and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics: Reports by committees and other matters initiated by the Council members may also be discussed. The Board invites comments from the public on any of these matters. The Board's notice is attached.
Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Howard University Economics Forum, Washington, D.C. I appreciate the opportunity to speak to you today about the macroeconomic outlook for the U.S. economy. I will discuss both the baseline outlook and some of the risks to that outlook. As always, the views that I will be expressing are my own and do not necessarily represent those of my colleagues at the Federal Reserve. Last year was, in some respects, a difficult one for the American people and the economy. As you recall all too well, the hurricanes in the fall inflicted a terrible human toll, in terms of both the number of lives taken and the dislocation of so many people. On the economic side, the storms destroyed residential and business capital along with critical infrastructure and also disrupted economic activity, particularly in the energy and petrochemicals industries and at ports on the Gulf Coast. These effects also contributed to the sharp increase in energy prices that occurred last year. Both the aftermath of the storms and the influence of the higher energy prices are reflected in the slower growth of real (that is, inflation adjusted) gross domestic product in the fourth quarter of last year. Even so, over the course of the year as a whole, real GDP rose a bit more than 3 percent, payroll employment increased significantly, labor productivity posted another solid advance, and the unemployment rate moved down further. Increases in overall consumer prices were boosted by the rise in energy prices, but increases in prices apart from those for food and energy--that is core inflation--remained moderate. In light of the challenges confronting the economy, this was quite a favorable outcome. Moreover, much of the slowdown in growth last quarter reflected factors that are unlikely to persist. First, as I mentioned, the hurricanes significantly damped economic activity in the Gulf Coast region and led to a sharp increase in energy-related imports. Although the recovery of economic activity in the worst-affected areas will take a long time, many of the affected industries, including those in the energy sector, have made considerable progress toward returning their production to normal levels. Second, much of the weakness in consumer spending came from a sharp drop in motor vehicle sales after the end of last summer's employee pricing programs. Third, defense spending, which can be volatile from quarter to quarter, dropped sharply in the fourth quarter. The unwinding of these factors should provide some support to growth of real activity in the near term. Indeed, the most recent data suggest that economic activity in 2006 is off to a solid start. Payroll employment expanded briskly in January--the latest month for which figures are available--on top of sizable gains over the preceding two months. Although these increases contain some bounceback from the effects of the hurricanes, they also likely reflect underlying strength in labor demand--an impression that is corroborated by the recent low readings on initial claims for unemployment insurance. In addition, the underlying pace of activity in the industrial sector has been quite robust recently. Real household spending continued to climb in January; although unseasonably warm weather that month left an imprint on the data, the result suggests some underlying strength in this sector. Housing activity has, on balance, been a bit softer recently but still remains at a high level. Overall, the fundamentals appear sufficient to support continued economic expansion. Underlying productivity growth remains strong, the financial positions of households and businesses remain conducive to spending, and, if we have no further run-up in oil prices, the drag on activity from higher energy prices should diminish over time. And the outlook for activity abroad is quite favorable. In Japan, the expansion appears to be broadening, and signs suggest that the Japanese financial sector may finally be stabilizing. Prospects in Europe are gradually improving, particularly in Germany, after several years of sluggish growth. Many emerging market economies also are doing well, with exports providing a significant boost to activity in these countries. These developments should provide some ongoing support to the U.S. economy. The Inflation OutlookThe continued surge in energy prices was the dominant factor affecting inflation last year. Rising energy prices contribute to consumer inflation in several ways--by boosting prices for gasoline and other energy goods; by raising the price of non-energy goods and services as firms pass on increased energy costs; and by putting upward pressure on expectations of future inflation. Despite those pressures, core inflation has, as I mentioned, remained contained, a result likely attributable to a range of causes. The decline in the economy's energy intensity is one of the factors that has restrained the pass-through of energy prices into core inflation in recent decades. As energy prices started to rise in the 1970s, households responded by purchasing products that were more energy efficient and adjusting their consumption habits in other ways. Businesses responded by designing and purchasing capital goods that were more energy efficient and by redesigning production processes in ways that used less energy. One measure of these changes in energy intensity is the ratio of energy use to real GDP, which has fallen more than half since the mid-1970s. Econometric evidence suggests, however, that the pass-through of energy prices to core inflation has dropped by more than would be implied by the decline in energy intensity. In particular, we often look at forecasting equations for core inflation that include a term for the price of energy, weighted by a measure of energy intensity. Using data for years preceding 1981, the pass-through of energy prices to core prices is large and statistically significant. In the period since 1981, the evidence of pass-through of energy prices to core inflation is more limited. Because the energy-price term in these models already controls for the decline in energy intensity, this result suggests that other factors also are restraining the pass-through of energy prices to core inflation. Although many factors could have led to these results, a likely explanation is that inflation expectations have become better anchored. In the 1970s, monetary policy unfortunately allowed large increases in energy prices to have a persistent effect on inflation, a policy that undercut the Fed's credibility and caused long-run inflation expectations to be more volatile. Since that time, however, the Federal Reserve has been more aggressive in fighting all sources of inflationary pressures, including energy price changes. This effort appears to have paid off not only in low and stable inflation but also in a reduction in the sensitivity of long-run inflation expectations to energy prices. The reduced sensitivity is evidenced by how little movement has appeared in survey measures in response to the rise in energy prices over the past two years. This same tendency can be seen in longer-horizon measures of inflation compensation derived from a comparison of yields on nominal Treasury securities and those on Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS), which are indexed to a measure of price change. Specifically, for the period five to ten years ahead, the TIPS-based measure of inflation compensation has remained well anchored in recent quarters. Moreover, econometric evidence suggests that since early 2004, energy prices have had only a modest effect on TIPS-based inflation compensation at relatively longer horizons. Because inflation-indexed securities were not issued in the 1970s and early 1980s, we cannot know for sure how these recent effects differ from those that might have operated earlier, but I believe that the difference would be stark. All told, increases in energy prices over the past couple of years probably added about 1/2 percentage point to core inflation in 2005, and the lagged pass-through of past increases in energy prices appears likely to add roughly the same amount this year, provided that energy prices do not rise significantly further. The Term Structure of Interest RatesAnother development that has received considerable attention recently is the term structure of interest rates--the yield curve. Typically, longer-term interest rates are higher than short-term rates, so a curve plotting yields would rise as maturity lengthens. However, since late last fall, yields on longer maturities have been equal to or less than those at some shorter maturities, creating a flat to inverted yield curve. Going back to the 1950s, a simple picture suggests that the yield curve tends to invert before recessions. In addition, some academic research, along with recent market commentary, suggests that the shape of the yield curve is a strong predictor of future economic growth. However, the Treasury yield curve is now only slightly inverted between one and five years and is roughly flat beyond that. Moreover, yield curves can be flat or inverted either because short-term interest yields are relatively high or because long-term rates are relatively low. Historically, flat or inverted yield curves owing to unusually high short-term rates have tended to be followed by slowdowns, but that has not been the case for those episodes of inverted yield curves owing to relatively low long-term rates. And, in the current situation, the flatness of the term structure results largely from relatively low long-term yields. In addition, the relationship between the yield curve and future economic growth may have weakened in recent decades because the decline in inflation, the dropoff in the variance of economic growth since the mid-1980s, and financial innovation may have altered the sensitivity of households and businesses to changes in rates. Indeed, in simple regression models estimated with recent data, a change in the slope of the term structure has a smaller effect on economic growth than when the models are estimated with data taken from a longer sample period. And models using the more recent data anticipate more rapid real GDP growth in coming quarters than do models using the longer sample period. The relationship between the yield curve and future growth also appears to depend on the factors that are keeping long-term rates low. Long-term interest rates embody both expectations of future interest rates as well as the amount of compensation demanded by investors for the risk of unanticipated movements in real interest rates and inflation--that is, the term premium. By historical standards, the term premium appears to have come down significantly in recent years and to be quite low. A flat yield curve resulting from low term premiums should have quite different implications for future growth than would a flat yield curve resulting from tight monetary policy. Indeed, an exogenous decline in term premiums would make financial conditions more accommodative and would, other things being equal, be followed by higher growth. To account for these developments, an estimate of the term premium can be added to a simple regression model of the relationship between real GDP growth and the slope of the yield curve. Forecasts of future real GDP growth from this extended model are higher than those from models that include only the slope of the yield curve. And the forecasts from this extended model currently are very close to the private-sector consensus forecast. Thus, we have reasons to believe that the current configuration of the term structure is not signaling an economic downturn. At the same time, the amount of economic stimulus arising from low long-term rates is probably not especially large. Indeed, low long-term rates may be signaling relatively low demand for capital around the world relative to saving, which in turn may reflect a lack of sufficiently attractive investment opportunities. For example, in the United States, the nominal share of business fixed investment in GDP has risen recently only to about its long-run average--a level arguably somewhat lower than might be expected given the low level of long-term interest rates. Because interest rates equilibrate the supply and demand of capital, an excess of desired saving relative to desired investment would tend, all else equal, to hold down long-term rates. In turn, low rates have stimulated activity in areas outside of business investment: Housing has been boosted significantly, and consumer spending may also have received some additional impetus. Some Risks to the OutlookAll told, the U.S. economic expansion appears to be solidly on track. Nevertheless, the outlook for real activity faces a number of significant risks, including the possibility that house prices and construction could retrench sharply and that energy prices could rise significantly further. Housing construction has been a significant source of strength in this expansion, and consequently, some analysts have suggested that a correction in this sector could take a big bite out of growth. By my reading, the incoming data suggest that the housing market has begun to cool somewhat, but they do not point to a sharper falloff. Sales of both new and existing homes have declined in recent months, although they remain at a high level; and after cutting though volatility likely related to swings in weather, housing starts appear to have softened recently. Moreover, other indicators of activity, along with anecdotal reports, also seem consistent with an easing, but not with a sharp downward correction. Of course, house prices may become an area of vulnerability. House prices have increased at a remarkable rate during the past several years, and for some fundamentally sound reasons, including low mortgage rates. However, the possibility remains that the recent run-up in prices may be greater than can be justified by the fundamentals and that increases in house prices may moderate or undergo a sharper adjustment. The latest data on house prices--including the figures released this week--provide a hint that a moderation in house prices, and nothing more serious, may now be under way. The primary channel through which a deceleration or downturn in housing prices would be likely to affect the economy is the so-called wealth effect. That is, the path of house prices directly affects the value of housing wealth, and changes in wealth influence households' consumption and saving. Estimates from the Federal Reserve Board staff's large econometric model and from various consumption equations suggest that wealth effects are somewhere in the neighborhood of 3-1/2 cents on consumption for every dollar of change in wealth, with roughly half the effect realized within a year. However, these estimates are uncertain, and plausible estimates of the wealth effect range from about 2 cents to 6 cents for every dollar of change in wealth. Moreover, these estimates are obtained from equations that look at changes in total wealth, whereas historically, much of the variation in wealth has reflected movements in equity prices. Although efforts have been made to isolate the effects of changes in different types of wealth, it is difficult to get precise estimates of wealth effects specifically for real estate. And, it is always possible that the effects of housing wealth on consumption might have changed in ways that would be hard to identify using standard econometric modeling techniques. For example, the effects could, perhaps, have increased in the last decade as a wave of financial innovation made it easier and less costly for households to tap accumulated housing equity. A decline in consumer confidence is another channel through which a correction in house prices could affect the economy. In the current situation, a sizable deceleration in house prices could have an outsized effect on consumer confidence and thereby reduce household spending by more than is implied by conventional estimates of the wealth effect. Another possible avenue for gauging the effects of housing prices on the economy is to look at experiences in other countries. House prices have risen markedly in recent years in many industrial countries amid low long-term interest rates, ample liquidity, and steady economic growth. Although movements in real house prices flattened out or turned down in several countries in the first half of 2005, they have since recovered for the most part. Of the countries that have seen recent booms in house prices, Australia has experienced a decline in real house prices over the past year; real prices are down about 3 percent since their peak at the end of 2003. During this period, residential investment contracted, and the growth of real consumption slowed a bit; but the economy continued to grow, in part because investment in other sectors picked up in response to strong global demand. More countries have experienced a slowdown in rates of increase in home prices than experienced an outright decline. For example, in the Netherlands--where residential property prices rose particularly rapidly in the late 1990s--the rate of increase slowed significantly beginning in 2000. In 2002 and 2003, the economy experienced a mild recession, with domestic demand contracting as a result of declines in investment (including residential investment) and contracting consumption. But, even so, the economy started to recover in 2004 and 2005, and house prices there have continued to rise in recent years. In the United Kingdom, house prices also flattened out last year, and this deceleration was accompanied by a slowdown in real consumption growth. More recently, house prices have started rising again, and consumption growth has also picked up. The experiences in Australia and the United Kingdom could be taken as suggesting that adjustments in house prices can be associated, on balance, with continued modest economic growth, while the Dutch experience paints a slightly more pessimistic picture. Having said that, one difficulty in interpreting the foreign evidence is that gauging the direction of causality is difficult--that is, are adjustments in house prices causing a slowdown in real economic growth or is a slowdown in activity causing the adjustment in house prices. On this point, a recent Federal Reserve study of international experience documented the pro-cyclicality of real house prices: House prices have tended to reach a maximum near business cycle peaks, with real GDP growth slowing during the first year or so after house prices peak.1 Given the limits of what we know about the future path of housing prices and about the implications of any particular house-price scenario for real activity, the Federal Reserve will have to continue monitoring this area closely. Further increases in energy prices are another risk to the economic outlook. The spot price of West Texas intermediate crude oil rose from around $30 per barrel in December 2002 to around $65 per barrel in mid-August 2005, shortly before Hurricanes Katrina and Rita made landfall. Since the storms hit, prices have fluctuated widely in response to developments in both domestic and foreign oil markets and recently stood a bit below pre-Katrina levels. Over the same time period, prices of far-dated futures contracts have also risen a substantial amount. As oil prices have pushed higher since late 2003, prices of natural gas also have trended up sharply. And storm-related disruptions to natural gas production as well as weather patterns this winter have caused considerable volatility in natural gas prices. Economic theory suggests that energy price hikes of this magnitude should have an important contractionary effect on the economy by reducing the purchasing power of households and holding down business profits outside the energy sector. Persistently higher oil prices also likely reduce labor productivity and potential output over time as firms adjust their production processes to use less energy. As for the reduction in aggregate demand, higher energy prices increase the bill for imported oil and natural gas, which can be viewed as a "tax" on U.S. residents by foreign energy producers, thereby holding down aggregate demand. Given the rise in energy prices since 2003, the import "tax" has risen more than $150 billion annually. Although they are imprecise, simulations from the Federal Reserve Board staff's large-scale econometric model, which account for these effects, suggest that increases in spot and futures prices of energy from late 2003 to the present subtracted a 1/2 percentage point from real GDP growth in 2004 and more than 1 percentage point in 2005. The model suggests the subtraction this year will be about a 1/2 percentage point. In addition to their effect on economic activity, further increases in energy prices also pose a risk to the inflation outlook. Looking ahead, the path of far-dated futures prices for oil indicates that markets are not expecting prices to rise significantly further. However, given strong global demand for energy resources and the ever-present risk of supply disruptions, additional increases in energy prices cannot be ruled out. Such increases would boost the overall inflation rate and might put additional upward pressure on production costs and inflation expectations, which in turn, could create forces that would tend to push core inflation up. If that were to occur, the Fed would need to be particularly vigilant to ensure that inflation remained under control. Where Do We Go From Here?As you know, the Federal Reserve seeks to foster price stability and to promote sustainable growth in output, and the members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) are committed to achieving these objectives. Translating these general economic objectives into operational decisions about monetary policy poses many challenges, and no simple toolkit of economic and financial indicators or economic models can provide reliable guidance at all times. Rather, the FOMC must assess the implications of a wide range of developments and data as well as rely on the best modeling that the economics profession can provide. In the current situation, the economic expansion appears to be on track and core inflation has remained moderate. As I indicated, significant risks, if realized, could alter this generally sanguine outlook, and the Federal Reserve will continue to monitor developments closely. Given the considerable uncertainties facing the economy and the outlook for policy, policy decisions in coming months will depend heavily on the implications of incoming economic data for future growth and inflation. Footnote 1.Alan G. Ahearne, John Ammer, Brian M. Doyle, Linda S. Kole, and Robert F. Martin (2005), "House Prices and Monetary Policy: A Cross-Country Study," International Finance Discussion Papers 2005-841 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday launched a newkids web pagedesigned to educate middle school students about the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The new web page is designed in a user-friendly, question-and-answer format to ensure easy navigation and the ability to learn basic information about the Fed. The new web page (www.federalreserve.gov/kids/) features information about the history, structure, and primary functions of the Federal Reserve; the Chairman of the Board of Governors; and the structure of Federal Open Market Committee. Other highlights include a kids quiz and links to other valuable resources on the Federal Reserve Board's web site. "The Federal Reserve has a long history of promoting economic education and financial literacy. This new web page provides younger students with a basic approach to the complexities of the Federal Reserve that is both enjoyable and interesting," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Mark Olson.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a Final Decision and Order of Prohibition against Oyeacholem Moseri, a former employee of First North American National Bank, Kennesaw, Georgia. The Order, the result of an action brought by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, prohibits Mr. Moseri from participating in the conduct of the affairs of any financial institution or holding company. Attached are the Board's Final Decision and Order relating to this action.
Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Institute of International Finance Spring 2006 Membership Meeting, Zurich, Switzerland I am pleased to participate in the panel discussion at this Institute of International Finance Spring 2006 Membership Meeting. As I will make clear, I think meetings of this sort, by contributing to the dialogue between the leaders of financial institutions and policymakers, can play a critical role in increasing mutual understanding and improved decisionmaking by both groups. The financial environment can best be described as "dynamic." Financial innovations have been coming at a rapid pace in recent years; new financial products have been introduced and are expanding rapidly, and new institutions have taken on prominent roles in key financial markets. Financial technologies have improved as well and have the potential to contribute to the efficiency and resilience of financial markets. However, with new products and institutions comes the potential for new risks to financial stability. As a result, we policymakers are likely to be torn. On the one hand, we may want to encourage welfare-improving innovations by limiting the extent of regulation. On the other hand, because of possible systemic concerns, some policymakers may want to regulate innovative instruments and institutions even as they are developing. In my view, policymakers can best balance these goals by expending the effort needed to understand financial innovations as they emerge and by avoiding overregulation that may stifle valuable innovations. When I talk about financial innovations, I have in mind several types of developments. A far-reaching set of innovations is the development and increasing popularity of products for the transfer of credit risk. Prominent among such innovations are credit derivatives, asset-backed securities, and secondary-market trading of syndicated loans. Another important development has been the rapid growth of the hedge fund industry and its expanded role in the financial system. On the retail side, we have seen a proliferation of new lending products in the United States, including home-equity lines of credit, interest-only and even negative-amortization mortgages, and subprime mortgages and consumer loans. Today, I will discuss briefly the potential benefits and drawbacks associated with new products and institutions and spend most of my remarks on a middle way that regulators might pursue as these new products and institutions emerge. Benefits and DrawbacksFinancial innovations hold the promise of improved efficiency and increased overall economic welfare. For example, new products and markets can open the door to new investment opportunities for a variety of market participants. And improved risk-measurement and risk-management technologies can contribute to an improved allocation of risk as risk is shifted to those more willing and able to bear it. Financial innovations also have the potential to boost financial stability. Risk-transfer mechanisms can not only better allocate risk but also reduce its concentration. Improved efficiencies and increased competition may result in substantially lower trading costs and may consequently improve liquidity in many markets. Better liquidity, which is instrumental to faster and more accurate price discovery and therefore to more-informative prices, can also be brought about by an increased presence of new institutions in new or existing markets. The entry of those new institutions into new markets can, so long as the institutions prove resilient, increase the availability of funds to borrowers in times of stress and may thus reduce the likelihood of credit crunches. Although financial innovations have the capacity to improve economic welfare overall, it is natural for policymakers to worry that innovations may have unexpected and undesirable side effects and may even represent new sources of systemic risk. For example, policymakers may be concerned about unexpected price dynamics or problems in infrastructure or operations. Market participants estimate how prices and investment flows are likely to behave for new instruments, but their understanding becomes more detailed and more accurate only as behavior under a variety of economic conditions is observed, and the development of that understanding obviously takes time. Under turbulent conditions, or when new information causes market participants to question their own investment strategies, their behavior may change rapidly, leading to rapid price changes that may seem outsized relative to changes in economic fundamentals. That was briefly the case recently in the market for synthetic collateralized debt obligations. Market participants did not anticipate the sharp decline in implied default correlations that followed the downgrades of Ford and General Motors debt. Prices moved quite a bit for a short time as portfolios were rebalanced, but spillovers to other markets were limited, and market volatility subsequently eased. Problems with the infrastructure or operations that support an innovation--including the underlying legal documentation and accounting--are also likely to be revealed only over time, as exemplified by the technical difficulties with restructuring clauses in credit default swaps that became apparent a few years ago. In that case, default events and related payoffs sometimes did not occur as expected, and so actual exposures differed from those investors had intended. The result was a change in the value of existing contracts and a period of market adjustment as new restructuring clauses were developed and implemented. Of course, we should not want to prevent rapid price changes or changes in investment flows, as such changes may be appropriate as new information about fundamentals emerges. And the occurrence of glitches in new markets and institutions need not reflect policy failures or provide evidence that an innovation is undesirable. Preventing all such occurrences would probably require us to stop all innovation. But neither is it desirable that growing pains in one market or at a few institutions spill over so strongly that the financial system as a whole could be destabilized. A Middle Way in RegulationPolicymakers have a range of strategies available for dealing with innovation. At one extreme, in theory we could take a completely hands-off approach, allowing new financial markets and instruments to develop without restrictions and indeed without any scrutiny, trusting private market participants to do everything necessary for stability and efficiency. At the other extreme, policymakers theoretically might be quite heavy-handed, either imposing regulations on virtually every market and instrument to stop any innovations that, in their judgment, could cause harm or, conversely, actively fostering or subsidizing innovations seen as desirable. Obviously, these are extreme positions, and I do not know of any practicing policymaker who seriously wants to pursue either extreme course. Today I wish to argue for a middle ground in which markets are allowed to work and develop and in which policymakers work hard to understand new developments and to help market participants see the need for improvements where appropriate. In my view, regulations should be imposed only when market participants do not have the incentive or the capability to effectively manage the risks created by financial innovation. For example, explicit or implicit subsidies of some institutions could limit market discipline of their risk-taking, leading to a concentration of risk so large that even the most sophisticated institutions would find it next to impossible to manage the risk under stressful circumstances. Or policymakers may be concerned that some potential parties to innovative contracts, especially in the retail arena, are insufficiently knowledgeable to understand or manage the associated risks. I believe such instances are rare. Making a case for early regulatory intervention is particularly difficult when the private parties involved in an innovation are sophisticated because, in many cases, they will be the first to recognize possible problems and will have strong incentives to fix them and also to protect themselves against fraud or unfair dealing. So how should policymakers proceed down this middle path? First of all, we need to learn--we need to understand and evaluate the innovations that are taking place in financial markets. This process should include information sharing with other authorities, including those in other nations, in order to benefit from the experiences in other markets and regions. The resulting improved understanding is often enough to prepare policymakers to deal with any breakdowns that do occur and to avoid having the breakdowns turn into systemic problems. The U.S. response to the century date change is an example from a different context that fits into this category. In that case, policymakers worked hard to understand the complex practical issues and to share that knowledge with financial firms. Those firms independently evaluated the risks they faced and took appropriate action to manage them effectively. Improved understanding may also ease concerns about potential risks. For example, in light of the effects of financial consolidation on the number of firms acting as dealers in the market for dollar interest rate options, the Federal Reserve became concerned about possible risks to the functioning of that market. These concerns included questions about the adequacy of risk management at the remaining dealers and about the possible effects that problems at one of those dealers could have on its counterparties and market liquidity. However, further investigation by Federal Reserve staff suggested that market participants were generally managing their market and counterparty risks effectively and that those hedging risk in the options market would not unduly suffer from a temporary disruption in liquidity. Our wariness about concentration in this market has not disappeared as a result of our improved understanding, but it has diminished. In general, improved knowledge about financial innovations may prevent the imposition of unwarranted restrictions and is surely a precursor to intelligent regulation in the event it is warranted. A second step for policymakers walking the middle path should be to ensure that market participants have the proper incentives and the information they need to protect themselves from any problems related to new products, markets, or institutions; by so doing, policymakers can perhaps mitigate those problems. Policymakers should insist that regulated firms effectively manage the risks associated with new activities and markets, thereby fostering effective market discipline of risk-taking, including risk-taking by unregulated firms. Such an insistence generally does not require new regulation but rather is an application of existing regulation in a potentially new context. One of the lessons of the difficulties at Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) was that the hedge fund had been able to achieve very high levels of leverage because some regulated counterparties had not appropriately managed their counterparty risk exposures. Subsequently, both banks and supervisors had to reassess what such management entailed. Clearly, supervisors should strongly encourage institutions to know their risk posture and to be able to control it and react appropriately as circumstances change. Policymakers should insist on similarly high risk-management standards for regulated financial institutions that provide retail products. As a case in point, bank supervisors in the United States recently issued guidance about the management of risks related to home-equity lines of credit. This guidance did not involve new regulation of these instruments but rather reminded institutions offering such products that they have an obligation to manage the resulting risks appropriately. A pervasive lack of awareness about the risks embedded in new financial products certainly increases the likelihood that users of those products may face difficulties and that those difficulties may become systemic. One way policymakers can help prevent this possibility from happening is by supporting increased transparency and disclosure. Although counterparties in wholesale markets should generally be expected to demand and obtain the information they need to evaluate their risks, policymakers can no doubt help establish high standards. In the case of retail transactions, support for efforts to foster the basic financial literacy of households is a useful complement to efforts to promote appropriate disclosure. The more consumers are equipped to interpret disclosures, the more effective those disclosures are likely to be. A third feature of the moderate approach I am trying to chart is an active dialogue between policymakers and market participants. In my view, policymakers should serve as a voice for the development of infrastructure and sensible standards and practices. Ideally such steps would be taken by market participants of their own volition, but sometimes informal interventions by policymakers can help foster cooperative efforts by market participants. For example, partly in reaction to the report of the second Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York recently hosted a meeting with representatives of major participants in the credit default swap market, as well as with their domestic and international supervisors, to discuss a range of issues, including market practices with regard to assignments of trades and operational issues associated with confirmation backlogs. The result was an industry commitment to take concrete steps to address issues of concern. A fourth dimension of my proposed middle path is the ongoing monitoring of key markets and institutions. Policymakers should be aware of any emerging stresses in the financial system, including those related to new instruments and institutions. Indeed, some central banks have created "financial stability" staff groups to oversee such monitoring and, in some cases, to publish regular financial stability reports. In the event that such monitoring suggests that the operations of some institutions or markets are under significant strain and, importantly, that the resulting pressures on businesses and households could have a material adverse effect on the real economy, the central bank may want to respond by adjusting the stance of monetary policy. Finally, financial innovations may on occasion warrant new regulations because financial institutions either cannot or will not manage the associated risks appropriately. Indeed, regulation should be seen as part of the broader "infrastructure" that supports both financial stability and innovation, and like other more traditional infrastructure, regulatory regimes have to keep up. For example, developments in financial markets and advances in the ability of banks to measure and manage their risks have increasingly made the existing capital regulation of the largest banks, the 1988 Basel Accord, look antiquated. Basel II is a more flexible framework than Basel I and is intended to better permit capital regulation to keep up with financial market innovations in the future. To conclude, I wish to emphasize that policymakers should have a bias toward trusting financial markets to manage the introduction of new products and the development of new institutions smoothly and without undue stress to the financial system. However, we cannot take such an outcome for granted: Financial firms may not consider the effects of their decisions on the stability of other firms or on the broader financial markets, and some may lack the incentives and ability to learn about and manage the risks induced by financial innovations. In such cases, policymakers may need to work with markets and their participants, and on occasion regulate them, to achieve the desired outcomes. However, policymakers should, wherever possible, avoid premature regulation that could stifle innovation. I would note that a significant number of substantial shocks to financial markets have occurred in recent years--including, for example, the difficulties at Long-Term Capital Management and the unexpected and massive fraud at some high-profile companies--and yet the broader effects on the real economy have ultimately been quite small. Our financial markets are flexible and resilient, and they can absorb shocks surprisingly well. As a result, most risks caused by new developments in financial markets should be manageable without heavy-handed regulation. This meeting is a good example of what my middle course suggests we should be doing: working hard to understand innovations and their possible implications. Alertness and knowledge on the part of policymakers would go a long way toward ensuring that our positive recent track record will carry on amid what I am sure will continue to be a rapidly changing financial landscape.
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 4-3/4 percent. The slowing of the growth of real GDP in the fourth quarter of 2005 seems largely to have reflected temporary or special factors. Economic growth has rebounded strongly in the current quarter but appears likely to moderate to a more sustainable pace. As yet, the run-up in the prices of energy and other commodities appears to have had only a modest effect on core inflation, ongoing productivity gains have helped to hold the growth of unit labor costs in check, and inflation expectations remain contained. Still, possible increases in resource utilization, in combination with the elevated prices of energy and other commodities, have the potential to add to inflation pressures. The Committee judges that some further policy firming may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance. In any event, the Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to foster these objectives. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Susan S. Bies; Jack Guynn; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Jeffrey M. Lacker; Mark W. Olson; Sandra Pianalto; Kevin M. Warsh; and Janet L. Yellen. In a related action, the Board of Governors approved a 25-basis-point increase in the discount rate to 5-3/4 percent. In taking this action, the Board approved the requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Dallas, and San Francisco.
Kevin M. Warsh and Randall S. Kroszner were formally sworn in as members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System at a ceremony Thursday in the atrium of the Board's main building in Washington. Friends, family, and Board employees attended the ceremony, which was presided over by Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. Governor Warsh assumed his position on February 24 and Governor Kroszner assumed his position on March 1 following their confirmation by the Senate on February 17, 2006. Governor Warsh’s term expires January 31, 2018. Governor Kroszner’s term expires January 31, 2008. Biographies of Governor Warsh and Governor Kroszner are available on the Board's website:www.federalreserve.gov/bios/
Governor Donald L. Kohn At "Monetary Policy: A Journey from Theory to Practice," a European Central Bank Colloquium held in honor of Otmar Issing, Frankfurt, Germany I am honored to participate in this tribute to Otmar Issing. I have known and admired Otmar for some time. It has been a source of great pride that he has considered me a worthy intellectual sparing partner over the years. From the hiking trails of Jackson Hole to the restaurants of Frankfurt and at many conferences in between, we have challenged each other to state our assumptions, examine the evidence, and adjust our conclusions accordingly. I have derived enormous benefit from that give-and-take--a sentiment, I am sure, that many others in this room share.I can think of no better way to celebrate the signal contributions of this leading force in the world of monetary policymaking than to address an issue of great importance to central banks, and one that has drawn considerable public attention and comment of late--namely, the proper role of asset prices in the determination of monetary policy. Otmar and I have debated this issue on many occasions, and these discussions--together with recent research carried out at the European Central Bank, the Bank for International Settlements, and elsewhere--have been both challenging and stimulating. The preparation of this talk has afforded me a welcome opportunity to reexamine my thinking on this subject. So, today, I will review the arguments and the evidence as I see them and draw out the conclusions to which I am currently led.At the outset, let me stress that I will be expressing my own opinions, which are not necessarily shared by my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.1Two Strategies for Dealing with Market BubblesMost fluctuations in stock prices, real estate values, and other asset prices pose no particular challenge to central banks, as they are just some of the usual factors influencing the outlook for real activity and inflation. But many argue that pronounced booms and busts in asset markets are another matter, especially if actual valuations appear to be misaligned with fundamentals. What should a central bank do when it suspects it faces a major speculative event--one that might be large enough to threaten economic stability when it unwinds? To help frame the discussion, I will focus on two different strategies that have been proposed for dealing with market bubbles.The first approach--which I will label theconventional strategy--calls for central banks to focus exclusively on the stability of prices and economic activity over the next several years. Under this policy, a central bank responds to stock prices, home values, and other asset prices only insofar as they have implications for future output and inflation over the medium term. Importantly, the strategy eschews any attempt to influence the speculative component of asset prices, treating any perceived mis-pricing as, rightly or wrongly, an essentially exogenous process. Following this strategy does not imply that policymakers ignore the expected future evolution of speculative activity. If policymakers suspect that a bubble is likely, say, to expand for a time before collapsing, the implications of that possibility for future output and inflation need to be folded into their deliberations. Practically speaking, however, I view our ability to act on such suspicions as limited given how little we know about the dynamics of speculative episodes.Despite its approach to perceived speculative activity, the conventional strategy does recognize that monetary policy has an important influence on asset prices--indeed, this influence is at the heart of the transmission of policy decisions to real activity and inflation. It occurs through standard arbitrage channels, such as the link between interest rates and the discount factor used to value expected future earnings.The second strategy, by comparison, is more activist and attempts to damp speculative activity directly. It was described at length in "Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy," an article published by the ECB last year. I quote from the article: "This approach amounts to a cautious policy of 'leaning against the wind' of an incipient bubble. The central bank would adopt a somewhat tighter policy stance in the face of an inflating asset market than it would otherwise allow if confronted with a similar macroeconomic outlook under more normal market conditions. . . . It would thus possibly tolerate a certain deviation from its price stability objective in the shorter term in exchange for enhanced prospects of preserving price and economic stability in the future."2I am labeling this second approachextra action, as it calls for steps that would not be taken in ordinary circumstances.3Compared with the first approach, the extra-action strategy responds to a perceived speculative boom with tighter monetary policy--and thus lower output and inflation in the near term--with the expectation of significantly mitigating the potential fallout from a possible future bursting of the bubble. Thus, the strategy seeks to trade off the near-certainty of worse macroeconomic performance today for the chance of disproportionally better performance in the future, on the theory that the repercussions of a major market correction could be highly nonlinear. But the extra-action proposal is by no means a bold call for central banks to prick market bubbles. As the ECB article stresses, such an attempt would be extremely dangerous given the risk that a concerted effort at stamping out a speculative boom would lead to outsized interest rate hikes and recession. Rather, the extra-action strategy is intended only to provide some limited insurance against the possibility of highly adverse events occurring down the road.Common GroundI will be talking at length about the differences between the two strategies, but I must stress up front how much they have in common. Both policies aim to achieve the same general objectives of monetary policy, using the same broad analytic framework. Most central banks, I believe, share these basic features of monetary policymaking, notwithstanding important differences in their official mandates and the nature of their economies.At the risk of considerable oversimplification, policymakers can be described as seeking to set policy over time so as to minimize the present value of future deviations of output from potential and inflation from a desired level. Of course, we may not be prepared to write down a specific loss function and say, "There, that's what I'm minimizing." But our deliberative processes and our actions seem broadly consistent with that characterization of the general problem. This statement is true whether our institutions have a specific mandate to keep inflation low and stable and output close to potential, as in the United States, or whether our mandate is defined primarily in terms of stabilizing inflation, as in the euro area. Stabilizing output complements maintaining price stability in the medium to long run, and often in the short run as well.We also can agree that asset prices play critical and complicated roles in determining real activity and inflation--roles that may be changing over time because an increasing share of wealth is market-determined and easily liquified. Movements in stock prices and real estate values affect household wealth and thus consumer spending. Changes in bond prices, stock prices, and exchange rates imply movements in the cost of capital and relative prices that influence investment and foreign trade; exchange rate movements also directly affect the prices of goods and services. Finally, asset prices can affect the value of collateral and thus the provision of credit, thereby influencing aggregate spending. In cases of sharply falling market valuations, these adverse credit-channel effects may even be exacerbated by the deteriorating health of banks and other financial institutions. In sum, asset prices influence the economy in complex and subtle ways over potentially extended periods of time.Finally, I think it fair to say that most central banks, faced with only a limited understanding of asset prices and their interactions with the full economy, engage in a form of risk management when dealing with market booms and busts. In part, they do this because any particular policy under consideration is never associated with a single forecast for the future paths of output and inflation but, instead, with a large set of possible scenarios with differing odds of coming to pass. While no one uses formal Bayesian methods to solve this difficult problem, I think most policymakers do engage in at least an informal weighing of the various possibilities and their implications when setting policy.Three Conditions for Extra Action to Lead to Better OutcomesNow let me turn from areas of agreement to more contentious issues, ones that have a strong bearing on the relative merits of the two strategies. As the ECB article notes, extra action is often seen as a type of insurance. And as with any insurance policy, before you buy you have to ask whether the expected benefits outweigh the costs. As I see it, extra action pays only if three tough conditions are met. First, policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, there must be a fairly high probability that a modestly tighter policy will help to check the further expansion of speculative activity. And finally, the expected improvement in future economic performance that would result from a less expansive bubble must be sizable. You may be thinking that, in stating the three conditions, I have slanted the case with such phrases as "reasonable confidence" and "fairly high probability." But stick with me, and I hope to persuade you that these probabilistic qualifiers are needed to judge the merits of extra action.For the moment, let me set aside the first condition and assume that central banks can distinguish an emerging bubble from improving fundamentals at an early stage. What about the other two conditions? Should we presume that a limited application of restrictive policy would materially restrain the speculative boom and make its eventual unwinding less disruptive for the overall economy?Consider the U.S. stock market boom of the mid-to-late 1990s. The boom was fueled by a sustained acceleration of productivity and an accompanying rise in corporate profits--fundamental changes that justified a major rise in equity prices. How high those prices should have risen was difficult to judge in real time because no one, not investors or central bankers, could be sure how fast profits would grow in the future. In the event, share prices increased more than was justified by improved fundamentals. But overly optimistic expectations for long-run earnings growth were not being driven by easy money, and I see no reason to believe that an extra 50 or even 100 basis points on the funds rate would have had much of a damping effect on investor beliefs in the potential profitability of emerging technologies. At present, we just do not have any empirical evidence of a link between interest rates and corporate equity valuationerrors, as opposed to standard arbitrage effects.In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy. In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4Again, consider the U.S. experience of the late 1990s. When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained. Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily. These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text I can think of no better way to celebrate the signal contributions of this leading force in the world of monetary policymaking than to address an issue of great importance to central banks, and one that has drawn considerable public attention and comment of late--namely, the proper role of asset prices in the determination of monetary policy. Otmar and I have debated this issue on many occasions, and these discussions--together with recent research carried out at the European Central Bank, the Bank for International Settlements, and elsewhere--have been both challenging and stimulating. The preparation of this talk has afforded me a welcome opportunity to reexamine my thinking on this subject. So, today, I will review the arguments and the evidence as I see them and draw out the conclusions to which I am currently led.At the outset, let me stress that I will be expressing my own opinions, which are not necessarily shared by my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.1Two Strategies for Dealing with Market BubblesMost fluctuations in stock prices, real estate values, and other asset prices pose no particular challenge to central banks, as they are just some of the usual factors influencing the outlook for real activity and inflation. But many argue that pronounced booms and busts in asset markets are another matter, especially if actual valuations appear to be misaligned with fundamentals. What should a central bank do when it suspects it faces a major speculative event--one that might be large enough to threaten economic stability when it unwinds? To help frame the discussion, I will focus on two different strategies that have been proposed for dealing with market bubbles.The first approach--which I will label theconventional strategy--calls for central banks to focus exclusively on the stability of prices and economic activity over the next several years. Under this policy, a central bank responds to stock prices, home values, and other asset prices only insofar as they have implications for future output and inflation over the medium term. Importantly, the strategy eschews any attempt to influence the speculative component of asset prices, treating any perceived mis-pricing as, rightly or wrongly, an essentially exogenous process. Following this strategy does not imply that policymakers ignore the expected future evolution of speculative activity. If policymakers suspect that a bubble is likely, say, to expand for a time before collapsing, the implications of that possibility for future output and inflation need to be folded into their deliberations. Practically speaking, however, I view our ability to act on such suspicions as limited given how little we know about the dynamics of speculative episodes.Despite its approach to perceived speculative activity, the conventional strategy does recognize that monetary policy has an important influence on asset prices--indeed, this influence is at the heart of the transmission of policy decisions to real activity and inflation. It occurs through standard arbitrage channels, such as the link between interest rates and the discount factor used to value expected future earnings.The second strategy, by comparison, is more activist and attempts to damp speculative activity directly. It was described at length in "Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy," an article published by the ECB last year. I quote from the article: "This approach amounts to a cautious policy of 'leaning against the wind' of an incipient bubble. The central bank would adopt a somewhat tighter policy stance in the face of an inflating asset market than it would otherwise allow if confronted with a similar macroeconomic outlook under more normal market conditions. . . . It would thus possibly tolerate a certain deviation from its price stability objective in the shorter term in exchange for enhanced prospects of preserving price and economic stability in the future."2I am labeling this second approachextra action, as it calls for steps that would not be taken in ordinary circumstances.3Compared with the first approach, the extra-action strategy responds to a perceived speculative boom with tighter monetary policy--and thus lower output and inflation in the near term--with the expectation of significantly mitigating the potential fallout from a possible future bursting of the bubble. Thus, the strategy seeks to trade off the near-certainty of worse macroeconomic performance today for the chance of disproportionally better performance in the future, on the theory that the repercussions of a major market correction could be highly nonlinear. But the extra-action proposal is by no means a bold call for central banks to prick market bubbles. As the ECB article stresses, such an attempt would be extremely dangerous given the risk that a concerted effort at stamping out a speculative boom would lead to outsized interest rate hikes and recession. Rather, the extra-action strategy is intended only to provide some limited insurance against the possibility of highly adverse events occurring down the road.Common GroundI will be talking at length about the differences between the two strategies, but I must stress up front how much they have in common. Both policies aim to achieve the same general objectives of monetary policy, using the same broad analytic framework. Most central banks, I believe, share these basic features of monetary policymaking, notwithstanding important differences in their official mandates and the nature of their economies.At the risk of considerable oversimplification, policymakers can be described as seeking to set policy over time so as to minimize the present value of future deviations of output from potential and inflation from a desired level. Of course, we may not be prepared to write down a specific loss function and say, "There, that's what I'm minimizing." But our deliberative processes and our actions seem broadly consistent with that characterization of the general problem. This statement is true whether our institutions have a specific mandate to keep inflation low and stable and output close to potential, as in the United States, or whether our mandate is defined primarily in terms of stabilizing inflation, as in the euro area. Stabilizing output complements maintaining price stability in the medium to long run, and often in the short run as well.We also can agree that asset prices play critical and complicated roles in determining real activity and inflation--roles that may be changing over time because an increasing share of wealth is market-determined and easily liquified. Movements in stock prices and real estate values affect household wealth and thus consumer spending. Changes in bond prices, stock prices, and exchange rates imply movements in the cost of capital and relative prices that influence investment and foreign trade; exchange rate movements also directly affect the prices of goods and services. Finally, asset prices can affect the value of collateral and thus the provision of credit, thereby influencing aggregate spending. In cases of sharply falling market valuations, these adverse credit-channel effects may even be exacerbated by the deteriorating health of banks and other financial institutions. In sum, asset prices influence the economy in complex and subtle ways over potentially extended periods of time.Finally, I think it fair to say that most central banks, faced with only a limited understanding of asset prices and their interactions with the full economy, engage in a form of risk management when dealing with market booms and busts. In part, they do this because any particular policy under consideration is never associated with a single forecast for the future paths of output and inflation but, instead, with a large set of possible scenarios with differing odds of coming to pass. While no one uses formal Bayesian methods to solve this difficult problem, I think most policymakers do engage in at least an informal weighing of the various possibilities and their implications when setting policy.Three Conditions for Extra Action to Lead to Better OutcomesNow let me turn from areas of agreement to more contentious issues, ones that have a strong bearing on the relative merits of the two strategies. As the ECB article notes, extra action is often seen as a type of insurance. And as with any insurance policy, before you buy you have to ask whether the expected benefits outweigh the costs. As I see it, extra action pays only if three tough conditions are met. First, policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, there must be a fairly high probability that a modestly tighter policy will help to check the further expansion of speculative activity. And finally, the expected improvement in future economic performance that would result from a less expansive bubble must be sizable. You may be thinking that, in stating the three conditions, I have slanted the case with such phrases as "reasonable confidence" and "fairly high probability." But stick with me, and I hope to persuade you that these probabilistic qualifiers are needed to judge the merits of extra action.For the moment, let me set aside the first condition and assume that central banks can distinguish an emerging bubble from improving fundamentals at an early stage. What about the other two conditions? Should we presume that a limited application of restrictive policy would materially restrain the speculative boom and make its eventual unwinding less disruptive for the overall economy?Consider the U.S. stock market boom of the mid-to-late 1990s. The boom was fueled by a sustained acceleration of productivity and an accompanying rise in corporate profits--fundamental changes that justified a major rise in equity prices. How high those prices should have risen was difficult to judge in real time because no one, not investors or central bankers, could be sure how fast profits would grow in the future. In the event, share prices increased more than was justified by improved fundamentals. But overly optimistic expectations for long-run earnings growth were not being driven by easy money, and I see no reason to believe that an extra 50 or even 100 basis points on the funds rate would have had much of a damping effect on investor beliefs in the potential profitability of emerging technologies. At present, we just do not have any empirical evidence of a link between interest rates and corporate equity valuationerrors, as opposed to standard arbitrage effects.In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy. In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4Again, consider the U.S. experience of the late 1990s. When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained. Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily. These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text At the outset, let me stress that I will be expressing my own opinions, which are not necessarily shared by my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.1Two Strategies for Dealing with Market BubblesMost fluctuations in stock prices, real estate values, and other asset prices pose no particular challenge to central banks, as they are just some of the usual factors influencing the outlook for real activity and inflation. But many argue that pronounced booms and busts in asset markets are another matter, especially if actual valuations appear to be misaligned with fundamentals. What should a central bank do when it suspects it faces a major speculative event--one that might be large enough to threaten economic stability when it unwinds? To help frame the discussion, I will focus on two different strategies that have been proposed for dealing with market bubbles.The first approach--which I will label theconventional strategy--calls for central banks to focus exclusively on the stability of prices and economic activity over the next several years. Under this policy, a central bank responds to stock prices, home values, and other asset prices only insofar as they have implications for future output and inflation over the medium term. Importantly, the strategy eschews any attempt to influence the speculative component of asset prices, treating any perceived mis-pricing as, rightly or wrongly, an essentially exogenous process. Following this strategy does not imply that policymakers ignore the expected future evolution of speculative activity. If policymakers suspect that a bubble is likely, say, to expand for a time before collapsing, the implications of that possibility for future output and inflation need to be folded into their deliberations. Practically speaking, however, I view our ability to act on such suspicions as limited given how little we know about the dynamics of speculative episodes.Despite its approach to perceived speculative activity, the conventional strategy does recognize that monetary policy has an important influence on asset prices--indeed, this influence is at the heart of the transmission of policy decisions to real activity and inflation. It occurs through standard arbitrage channels, such as the link between interest rates and the discount factor used to value expected future earnings.The second strategy, by comparison, is more activist and attempts to damp speculative activity directly. It was described at length in "Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy," an article published by the ECB last year. I quote from the article: "This approach amounts to a cautious policy of 'leaning against the wind' of an incipient bubble. The central bank would adopt a somewhat tighter policy stance in the face of an inflating asset market than it would otherwise allow if confronted with a similar macroeconomic outlook under more normal market conditions. . . . It would thus possibly tolerate a certain deviation from its price stability objective in the shorter term in exchange for enhanced prospects of preserving price and economic stability in the future."2I am labeling this second approachextra action, as it calls for steps that would not be taken in ordinary circumstances.3Compared with the first approach, the extra-action strategy responds to a perceived speculative boom with tighter monetary policy--and thus lower output and inflation in the near term--with the expectation of significantly mitigating the potential fallout from a possible future bursting of the bubble. Thus, the strategy seeks to trade off the near-certainty of worse macroeconomic performance today for the chance of disproportionally better performance in the future, on the theory that the repercussions of a major market correction could be highly nonlinear. But the extra-action proposal is by no means a bold call for central banks to prick market bubbles. As the ECB article stresses, such an attempt would be extremely dangerous given the risk that a concerted effort at stamping out a speculative boom would lead to outsized interest rate hikes and recession. Rather, the extra-action strategy is intended only to provide some limited insurance against the possibility of highly adverse events occurring down the road.Common GroundI will be talking at length about the differences between the two strategies, but I must stress up front how much they have in common. Both policies aim to achieve the same general objectives of monetary policy, using the same broad analytic framework. Most central banks, I believe, share these basic features of monetary policymaking, notwithstanding important differences in their official mandates and the nature of their economies.At the risk of considerable oversimplification, policymakers can be described as seeking to set policy over time so as to minimize the present value of future deviations of output from potential and inflation from a desired level. Of course, we may not be prepared to write down a specific loss function and say, "There, that's what I'm minimizing." But our deliberative processes and our actions seem broadly consistent with that characterization of the general problem. This statement is true whether our institutions have a specific mandate to keep inflation low and stable and output close to potential, as in the United States, or whether our mandate is defined primarily in terms of stabilizing inflation, as in the euro area. Stabilizing output complements maintaining price stability in the medium to long run, and often in the short run as well.We also can agree that asset prices play critical and complicated roles in determining real activity and inflation--roles that may be changing over time because an increasing share of wealth is market-determined and easily liquified. Movements in stock prices and real estate values affect household wealth and thus consumer spending. Changes in bond prices, stock prices, and exchange rates imply movements in the cost of capital and relative prices that influence investment and foreign trade; exchange rate movements also directly affect the prices of goods and services. Finally, asset prices can affect the value of collateral and thus the provision of credit, thereby influencing aggregate spending. In cases of sharply falling market valuations, these adverse credit-channel effects may even be exacerbated by the deteriorating health of banks and other financial institutions. In sum, asset prices influence the economy in complex and subtle ways over potentially extended periods of time.Finally, I think it fair to say that most central banks, faced with only a limited understanding of asset prices and their interactions with the full economy, engage in a form of risk management when dealing with market booms and busts. In part, they do this because any particular policy under consideration is never associated with a single forecast for the future paths of output and inflation but, instead, with a large set of possible scenarios with differing odds of coming to pass. While no one uses formal Bayesian methods to solve this difficult problem, I think most policymakers do engage in at least an informal weighing of the various possibilities and their implications when setting policy.Three Conditions for Extra Action to Lead to Better OutcomesNow let me turn from areas of agreement to more contentious issues, ones that have a strong bearing on the relative merits of the two strategies. As the ECB article notes, extra action is often seen as a type of insurance. And as with any insurance policy, before you buy you have to ask whether the expected benefits outweigh the costs. As I see it, extra action pays only if three tough conditions are met. First, policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, there must be a fairly high probability that a modestly tighter policy will help to check the further expansion of speculative activity. And finally, the expected improvement in future economic performance that would result from a less expansive bubble must be sizable. You may be thinking that, in stating the three conditions, I have slanted the case with such phrases as "reasonable confidence" and "fairly high probability." But stick with me, and I hope to persuade you that these probabilistic qualifiers are needed to judge the merits of extra action.For the moment, let me set aside the first condition and assume that central banks can distinguish an emerging bubble from improving fundamentals at an early stage. What about the other two conditions? Should we presume that a limited application of restrictive policy would materially restrain the speculative boom and make its eventual unwinding less disruptive for the overall economy?Consider the U.S. stock market boom of the mid-to-late 1990s. The boom was fueled by a sustained acceleration of productivity and an accompanying rise in corporate profits--fundamental changes that justified a major rise in equity prices. How high those prices should have risen was difficult to judge in real time because no one, not investors or central bankers, could be sure how fast profits would grow in the future. In the event, share prices increased more than was justified by improved fundamentals. But overly optimistic expectations for long-run earnings growth were not being driven by easy money, and I see no reason to believe that an extra 50 or even 100 basis points on the funds rate would have had much of a damping effect on investor beliefs in the potential profitability of emerging technologies. At present, we just do not have any empirical evidence of a link between interest rates and corporate equity valuationerrors, as opposed to standard arbitrage effects.In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy. In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4Again, consider the U.S. experience of the late 1990s. When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained. Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily. These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Two Strategies for Dealing with Market BubblesMost fluctuations in stock prices, real estate values, and other asset prices pose no particular challenge to central banks, as they are just some of the usual factors influencing the outlook for real activity and inflation. But many argue that pronounced booms and busts in asset markets are another matter, especially if actual valuations appear to be misaligned with fundamentals. What should a central bank do when it suspects it faces a major speculative event--one that might be large enough to threaten economic stability when it unwinds? To help frame the discussion, I will focus on two different strategies that have been proposed for dealing with market bubbles.The first approach--which I will label theconventional strategy--calls for central banks to focus exclusively on the stability of prices and economic activity over the next several years. Under this policy, a central bank responds to stock prices, home values, and other asset prices only insofar as they have implications for future output and inflation over the medium term. Importantly, the strategy eschews any attempt to influence the speculative component of asset prices, treating any perceived mis-pricing as, rightly or wrongly, an essentially exogenous process. Following this strategy does not imply that policymakers ignore the expected future evolution of speculative activity. If policymakers suspect that a bubble is likely, say, to expand for a time before collapsing, the implications of that possibility for future output and inflation need to be folded into their deliberations. Practically speaking, however, I view our ability to act on such suspicions as limited given how little we know about the dynamics of speculative episodes.Despite its approach to perceived speculative activity, the conventional strategy does recognize that monetary policy has an important influence on asset prices--indeed, this influence is at the heart of the transmission of policy decisions to real activity and inflation. It occurs through standard arbitrage channels, such as the link between interest rates and the discount factor used to value expected future earnings.The second strategy, by comparison, is more activist and attempts to damp speculative activity directly. It was described at length in "Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy," an article published by the ECB last year. I quote from the article: "This approach amounts to a cautious policy of 'leaning against the wind' of an incipient bubble. The central bank would adopt a somewhat tighter policy stance in the face of an inflating asset market than it would otherwise allow if confronted with a similar macroeconomic outlook under more normal market conditions. . . . It would thus possibly tolerate a certain deviation from its price stability objective in the shorter term in exchange for enhanced prospects of preserving price and economic stability in the future."2I am labeling this second approachextra action, as it calls for steps that would not be taken in ordinary circumstances.3Compared with the first approach, the extra-action strategy responds to a perceived speculative boom with tighter monetary policy--and thus lower output and inflation in the near term--with the expectation of significantly mitigating the potential fallout from a possible future bursting of the bubble. Thus, the strategy seeks to trade off the near-certainty of worse macroeconomic performance today for the chance of disproportionally better performance in the future, on the theory that the repercussions of a major market correction could be highly nonlinear. But the extra-action proposal is by no means a bold call for central banks to prick market bubbles. As the ECB article stresses, such an attempt would be extremely dangerous given the risk that a concerted effort at stamping out a speculative boom would lead to outsized interest rate hikes and recession. Rather, the extra-action strategy is intended only to provide some limited insurance against the possibility of highly adverse events occurring down the road.Common GroundI will be talking at length about the differences between the two strategies, but I must stress up front how much they have in common. Both policies aim to achieve the same general objectives of monetary policy, using the same broad analytic framework. Most central banks, I believe, share these basic features of monetary policymaking, notwithstanding important differences in their official mandates and the nature of their economies.At the risk of considerable oversimplification, policymakers can be described as seeking to set policy over time so as to minimize the present value of future deviations of output from potential and inflation from a desired level. Of course, we may not be prepared to write down a specific loss function and say, "There, that's what I'm minimizing." But our deliberative processes and our actions seem broadly consistent with that characterization of the general problem. This statement is true whether our institutions have a specific mandate to keep inflation low and stable and output close to potential, as in the United States, or whether our mandate is defined primarily in terms of stabilizing inflation, as in the euro area. Stabilizing output complements maintaining price stability in the medium to long run, and often in the short run as well.We also can agree that asset prices play critical and complicated roles in determining real activity and inflation--roles that may be changing over time because an increasing share of wealth is market-determined and easily liquified. Movements in stock prices and real estate values affect household wealth and thus consumer spending. Changes in bond prices, stock prices, and exchange rates imply movements in the cost of capital and relative prices that influence investment and foreign trade; exchange rate movements also directly affect the prices of goods and services. Finally, asset prices can affect the value of collateral and thus the provision of credit, thereby influencing aggregate spending. In cases of sharply falling market valuations, these adverse credit-channel effects may even be exacerbated by the deteriorating health of banks and other financial institutions. In sum, asset prices influence the economy in complex and subtle ways over potentially extended periods of time.Finally, I think it fair to say that most central banks, faced with only a limited understanding of asset prices and their interactions with the full economy, engage in a form of risk management when dealing with market booms and busts. In part, they do this because any particular policy under consideration is never associated with a single forecast for the future paths of output and inflation but, instead, with a large set of possible scenarios with differing odds of coming to pass. While no one uses formal Bayesian methods to solve this difficult problem, I think most policymakers do engage in at least an informal weighing of the various possibilities and their implications when setting policy.Three Conditions for Extra Action to Lead to Better OutcomesNow let me turn from areas of agreement to more contentious issues, ones that have a strong bearing on the relative merits of the two strategies. As the ECB article notes, extra action is often seen as a type of insurance. And as with any insurance policy, before you buy you have to ask whether the expected benefits outweigh the costs. As I see it, extra action pays only if three tough conditions are met. First, policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, there must be a fairly high probability that a modestly tighter policy will help to check the further expansion of speculative activity. And finally, the expected improvement in future economic performance that would result from a less expansive bubble must be sizable. You may be thinking that, in stating the three conditions, I have slanted the case with such phrases as "reasonable confidence" and "fairly high probability." But stick with me, and I hope to persuade you that these probabilistic qualifiers are needed to judge the merits of extra action.For the moment, let me set aside the first condition and assume that central banks can distinguish an emerging bubble from improving fundamentals at an early stage. What about the other two conditions? Should we presume that a limited application of restrictive policy would materially restrain the speculative boom and make its eventual unwinding less disruptive for the overall economy?Consider the U.S. stock market boom of the mid-to-late 1990s. The boom was fueled by a sustained acceleration of productivity and an accompanying rise in corporate profits--fundamental changes that justified a major rise in equity prices. How high those prices should have risen was difficult to judge in real time because no one, not investors or central bankers, could be sure how fast profits would grow in the future. In the event, share prices increased more than was justified by improved fundamentals. But overly optimistic expectations for long-run earnings growth were not being driven by easy money, and I see no reason to believe that an extra 50 or even 100 basis points on the funds rate would have had much of a damping effect on investor beliefs in the potential profitability of emerging technologies. At present, we just do not have any empirical evidence of a link between interest rates and corporate equity valuationerrors, as opposed to standard arbitrage effects.In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy. In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4Again, consider the U.S. experience of the late 1990s. When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained. Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily. These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text The first approach--which I will label theconventional strategy--calls for central banks to focus exclusively on the stability of prices and economic activity over the next several years. Under this policy, a central bank responds to stock prices, home values, and other asset prices only insofar as they have implications for future output and inflation over the medium term. Importantly, the strategy eschews any attempt to influence the speculative component of asset prices, treating any perceived mis-pricing as, rightly or wrongly, an essentially exogenous process. Following this strategy does not imply that policymakers ignore the expected future evolution of speculative activity. If policymakers suspect that a bubble is likely, say, to expand for a time before collapsing, the implications of that possibility for future output and inflation need to be folded into their deliberations. Practically speaking, however, I view our ability to act on such suspicions as limited given how little we know about the dynamics of speculative episodes.Despite its approach to perceived speculative activity, the conventional strategy does recognize that monetary policy has an important influence on asset prices--indeed, this influence is at the heart of the transmission of policy decisions to real activity and inflation. It occurs through standard arbitrage channels, such as the link between interest rates and the discount factor used to value expected future earnings.The second strategy, by comparison, is more activist and attempts to damp speculative activity directly. It was described at length in "Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy," an article published by the ECB last year. I quote from the article: "This approach amounts to a cautious policy of 'leaning against the wind' of an incipient bubble. The central bank would adopt a somewhat tighter policy stance in the face of an inflating asset market than it would otherwise allow if confronted with a similar macroeconomic outlook under more normal market conditions. . . . It would thus possibly tolerate a certain deviation from its price stability objective in the shorter term in exchange for enhanced prospects of preserving price and economic stability in the future."2I am labeling this second approachextra action, as it calls for steps that would not be taken in ordinary circumstances.3Compared with the first approach, the extra-action strategy responds to a perceived speculative boom with tighter monetary policy--and thus lower output and inflation in the near term--with the expectation of significantly mitigating the potential fallout from a possible future bursting of the bubble. Thus, the strategy seeks to trade off the near-certainty of worse macroeconomic performance today for the chance of disproportionally better performance in the future, on the theory that the repercussions of a major market correction could be highly nonlinear. But the extra-action proposal is by no means a bold call for central banks to prick market bubbles. As the ECB article stresses, such an attempt would be extremely dangerous given the risk that a concerted effort at stamping out a speculative boom would lead to outsized interest rate hikes and recession. Rather, the extra-action strategy is intended only to provide some limited insurance against the possibility of highly adverse events occurring down the road.Common GroundI will be talking at length about the differences between the two strategies, but I must stress up front how much they have in common. Both policies aim to achieve the same general objectives of monetary policy, using the same broad analytic framework. Most central banks, I believe, share these basic features of monetary policymaking, notwithstanding important differences in their official mandates and the nature of their economies.At the risk of considerable oversimplification, policymakers can be described as seeking to set policy over time so as to minimize the present value of future deviations of output from potential and inflation from a desired level. Of course, we may not be prepared to write down a specific loss function and say, "There, that's what I'm minimizing." But our deliberative processes and our actions seem broadly consistent with that characterization of the general problem. This statement is true whether our institutions have a specific mandate to keep inflation low and stable and output close to potential, as in the United States, or whether our mandate is defined primarily in terms of stabilizing inflation, as in the euro area. Stabilizing output complements maintaining price stability in the medium to long run, and often in the short run as well.We also can agree that asset prices play critical and complicated roles in determining real activity and inflation--roles that may be changing over time because an increasing share of wealth is market-determined and easily liquified. Movements in stock prices and real estate values affect household wealth and thus consumer spending. Changes in bond prices, stock prices, and exchange rates imply movements in the cost of capital and relative prices that influence investment and foreign trade; exchange rate movements also directly affect the prices of goods and services. Finally, asset prices can affect the value of collateral and thus the provision of credit, thereby influencing aggregate spending. In cases of sharply falling market valuations, these adverse credit-channel effects may even be exacerbated by the deteriorating health of banks and other financial institutions. In sum, asset prices influence the economy in complex and subtle ways over potentially extended periods of time.Finally, I think it fair to say that most central banks, faced with only a limited understanding of asset prices and their interactions with the full economy, engage in a form of risk management when dealing with market booms and busts. In part, they do this because any particular policy under consideration is never associated with a single forecast for the future paths of output and inflation but, instead, with a large set of possible scenarios with differing odds of coming to pass. While no one uses formal Bayesian methods to solve this difficult problem, I think most policymakers do engage in at least an informal weighing of the various possibilities and their implications when setting policy.Three Conditions for Extra Action to Lead to Better OutcomesNow let me turn from areas of agreement to more contentious issues, ones that have a strong bearing on the relative merits of the two strategies. As the ECB article notes, extra action is often seen as a type of insurance. And as with any insurance policy, before you buy you have to ask whether the expected benefits outweigh the costs. As I see it, extra action pays only if three tough conditions are met. First, policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, there must be a fairly high probability that a modestly tighter policy will help to check the further expansion of speculative activity. And finally, the expected improvement in future economic performance that would result from a less expansive bubble must be sizable. You may be thinking that, in stating the three conditions, I have slanted the case with such phrases as "reasonable confidence" and "fairly high probability." But stick with me, and I hope to persuade you that these probabilistic qualifiers are needed to judge the merits of extra action.For the moment, let me set aside the first condition and assume that central banks can distinguish an emerging bubble from improving fundamentals at an early stage. What about the other two conditions? Should we presume that a limited application of restrictive policy would materially restrain the speculative boom and make its eventual unwinding less disruptive for the overall economy?Consider the U.S. stock market boom of the mid-to-late 1990s. The boom was fueled by a sustained acceleration of productivity and an accompanying rise in corporate profits--fundamental changes that justified a major rise in equity prices. How high those prices should have risen was difficult to judge in real time because no one, not investors or central bankers, could be sure how fast profits would grow in the future. In the event, share prices increased more than was justified by improved fundamentals. But overly optimistic expectations for long-run earnings growth were not being driven by easy money, and I see no reason to believe that an extra 50 or even 100 basis points on the funds rate would have had much of a damping effect on investor beliefs in the potential profitability of emerging technologies. At present, we just do not have any empirical evidence of a link between interest rates and corporate equity valuationerrors, as opposed to standard arbitrage effects.In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy. In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4Again, consider the U.S. experience of the late 1990s. When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained. Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily. These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Despite its approach to perceived speculative activity, the conventional strategy does recognize that monetary policy has an important influence on asset prices--indeed, this influence is at the heart of the transmission of policy decisions to real activity and inflation. It occurs through standard arbitrage channels, such as the link between interest rates and the discount factor used to value expected future earnings.The second strategy, by comparison, is more activist and attempts to damp speculative activity directly. It was described at length in "Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy," an article published by the ECB last year. I quote from the article: "This approach amounts to a cautious policy of 'leaning against the wind' of an incipient bubble. The central bank would adopt a somewhat tighter policy stance in the face of an inflating asset market than it would otherwise allow if confronted with a similar macroeconomic outlook under more normal market conditions. . . . It would thus possibly tolerate a certain deviation from its price stability objective in the shorter term in exchange for enhanced prospects of preserving price and economic stability in the future."2I am labeling this second approachextra action, as it calls for steps that would not be taken in ordinary circumstances.3Compared with the first approach, the extra-action strategy responds to a perceived speculative boom with tighter monetary policy--and thus lower output and inflation in the near term--with the expectation of significantly mitigating the potential fallout from a possible future bursting of the bubble. Thus, the strategy seeks to trade off the near-certainty of worse macroeconomic performance today for the chance of disproportionally better performance in the future, on the theory that the repercussions of a major market correction could be highly nonlinear. But the extra-action proposal is by no means a bold call for central banks to prick market bubbles. As the ECB article stresses, such an attempt would be extremely dangerous given the risk that a concerted effort at stamping out a speculative boom would lead to outsized interest rate hikes and recession. Rather, the extra-action strategy is intended only to provide some limited insurance against the possibility of highly adverse events occurring down the road.Common GroundI will be talking at length about the differences between the two strategies, but I must stress up front how much they have in common. Both policies aim to achieve the same general objectives of monetary policy, using the same broad analytic framework. Most central banks, I believe, share these basic features of monetary policymaking, notwithstanding important differences in their official mandates and the nature of their economies.At the risk of considerable oversimplification, policymakers can be described as seeking to set policy over time so as to minimize the present value of future deviations of output from potential and inflation from a desired level. Of course, we may not be prepared to write down a specific loss function and say, "There, that's what I'm minimizing." But our deliberative processes and our actions seem broadly consistent with that characterization of the general problem. This statement is true whether our institutions have a specific mandate to keep inflation low and stable and output close to potential, as in the United States, or whether our mandate is defined primarily in terms of stabilizing inflation, as in the euro area. Stabilizing output complements maintaining price stability in the medium to long run, and often in the short run as well.We also can agree that asset prices play critical and complicated roles in determining real activity and inflation--roles that may be changing over time because an increasing share of wealth is market-determined and easily liquified. Movements in stock prices and real estate values affect household wealth and thus consumer spending. Changes in bond prices, stock prices, and exchange rates imply movements in the cost of capital and relative prices that influence investment and foreign trade; exchange rate movements also directly affect the prices of goods and services. Finally, asset prices can affect the value of collateral and thus the provision of credit, thereby influencing aggregate spending. In cases of sharply falling market valuations, these adverse credit-channel effects may even be exacerbated by the deteriorating health of banks and other financial institutions. In sum, asset prices influence the economy in complex and subtle ways over potentially extended periods of time.Finally, I think it fair to say that most central banks, faced with only a limited understanding of asset prices and their interactions with the full economy, engage in a form of risk management when dealing with market booms and busts. In part, they do this because any particular policy under consideration is never associated with a single forecast for the future paths of output and inflation but, instead, with a large set of possible scenarios with differing odds of coming to pass. While no one uses formal Bayesian methods to solve this difficult problem, I think most policymakers do engage in at least an informal weighing of the various possibilities and their implications when setting policy.Three Conditions for Extra Action to Lead to Better OutcomesNow let me turn from areas of agreement to more contentious issues, ones that have a strong bearing on the relative merits of the two strategies. As the ECB article notes, extra action is often seen as a type of insurance. And as with any insurance policy, before you buy you have to ask whether the expected benefits outweigh the costs. As I see it, extra action pays only if three tough conditions are met. First, policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, there must be a fairly high probability that a modestly tighter policy will help to check the further expansion of speculative activity. And finally, the expected improvement in future economic performance that would result from a less expansive bubble must be sizable. You may be thinking that, in stating the three conditions, I have slanted the case with such phrases as "reasonable confidence" and "fairly high probability." But stick with me, and I hope to persuade you that these probabilistic qualifiers are needed to judge the merits of extra action.For the moment, let me set aside the first condition and assume that central banks can distinguish an emerging bubble from improving fundamentals at an early stage. What about the other two conditions? Should we presume that a limited application of restrictive policy would materially restrain the speculative boom and make its eventual unwinding less disruptive for the overall economy?Consider the U.S. stock market boom of the mid-to-late 1990s. The boom was fueled by a sustained acceleration of productivity and an accompanying rise in corporate profits--fundamental changes that justified a major rise in equity prices. How high those prices should have risen was difficult to judge in real time because no one, not investors or central bankers, could be sure how fast profits would grow in the future. In the event, share prices increased more than was justified by improved fundamentals. But overly optimistic expectations for long-run earnings growth were not being driven by easy money, and I see no reason to believe that an extra 50 or even 100 basis points on the funds rate would have had much of a damping effect on investor beliefs in the potential profitability of emerging technologies. At present, we just do not have any empirical evidence of a link between interest rates and corporate equity valuationerrors, as opposed to standard arbitrage effects.In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy. In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4Again, consider the U.S. experience of the late 1990s. When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained. Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily. These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text The second strategy, by comparison, is more activist and attempts to damp speculative activity directly. It was described at length in "Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy," an article published by the ECB last year. I quote from the article: "This approach amounts to a cautious policy of 'leaning against the wind' of an incipient bubble. The central bank would adopt a somewhat tighter policy stance in the face of an inflating asset market than it would otherwise allow if confronted with a similar macroeconomic outlook under more normal market conditions. . . . It would thus possibly tolerate a certain deviation from its price stability objective in the shorter term in exchange for enhanced prospects of preserving price and economic stability in the future."2I am labeling this second approachextra action, as it calls for steps that would not be taken in ordinary circumstances.3Compared with the first approach, the extra-action strategy responds to a perceived speculative boom with tighter monetary policy--and thus lower output and inflation in the near term--with the expectation of significantly mitigating the potential fallout from a possible future bursting of the bubble. Thus, the strategy seeks to trade off the near-certainty of worse macroeconomic performance today for the chance of disproportionally better performance in the future, on the theory that the repercussions of a major market correction could be highly nonlinear. But the extra-action proposal is by no means a bold call for central banks to prick market bubbles. As the ECB article stresses, such an attempt would be extremely dangerous given the risk that a concerted effort at stamping out a speculative boom would lead to outsized interest rate hikes and recession. Rather, the extra-action strategy is intended only to provide some limited insurance against the possibility of highly adverse events occurring down the road.Common GroundI will be talking at length about the differences between the two strategies, but I must stress up front how much they have in common. Both policies aim to achieve the same general objectives of monetary policy, using the same broad analytic framework. Most central banks, I believe, share these basic features of monetary policymaking, notwithstanding important differences in their official mandates and the nature of their economies.At the risk of considerable oversimplification, policymakers can be described as seeking to set policy over time so as to minimize the present value of future deviations of output from potential and inflation from a desired level. Of course, we may not be prepared to write down a specific loss function and say, "There, that's what I'm minimizing." But our deliberative processes and our actions seem broadly consistent with that characterization of the general problem. This statement is true whether our institutions have a specific mandate to keep inflation low and stable and output close to potential, as in the United States, or whether our mandate is defined primarily in terms of stabilizing inflation, as in the euro area. Stabilizing output complements maintaining price stability in the medium to long run, and often in the short run as well.We also can agree that asset prices play critical and complicated roles in determining real activity and inflation--roles that may be changing over time because an increasing share of wealth is market-determined and easily liquified. Movements in stock prices and real estate values affect household wealth and thus consumer spending. Changes in bond prices, stock prices, and exchange rates imply movements in the cost of capital and relative prices that influence investment and foreign trade; exchange rate movements also directly affect the prices of goods and services. Finally, asset prices can affect the value of collateral and thus the provision of credit, thereby influencing aggregate spending. In cases of sharply falling market valuations, these adverse credit-channel effects may even be exacerbated by the deteriorating health of banks and other financial institutions. In sum, asset prices influence the economy in complex and subtle ways over potentially extended periods of time.Finally, I think it fair to say that most central banks, faced with only a limited understanding of asset prices and their interactions with the full economy, engage in a form of risk management when dealing with market booms and busts. In part, they do this because any particular policy under consideration is never associated with a single forecast for the future paths of output and inflation but, instead, with a large set of possible scenarios with differing odds of coming to pass. While no one uses formal Bayesian methods to solve this difficult problem, I think most policymakers do engage in at least an informal weighing of the various possibilities and their implications when setting policy.Three Conditions for Extra Action to Lead to Better OutcomesNow let me turn from areas of agreement to more contentious issues, ones that have a strong bearing on the relative merits of the two strategies. As the ECB article notes, extra action is often seen as a type of insurance. And as with any insurance policy, before you buy you have to ask whether the expected benefits outweigh the costs. As I see it, extra action pays only if three tough conditions are met. First, policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, there must be a fairly high probability that a modestly tighter policy will help to check the further expansion of speculative activity. And finally, the expected improvement in future economic performance that would result from a less expansive bubble must be sizable. You may be thinking that, in stating the three conditions, I have slanted the case with such phrases as "reasonable confidence" and "fairly high probability." But stick with me, and I hope to persuade you that these probabilistic qualifiers are needed to judge the merits of extra action.For the moment, let me set aside the first condition and assume that central banks can distinguish an emerging bubble from improving fundamentals at an early stage. What about the other two conditions? Should we presume that a limited application of restrictive policy would materially restrain the speculative boom and make its eventual unwinding less disruptive for the overall economy?Consider the U.S. stock market boom of the mid-to-late 1990s. The boom was fueled by a sustained acceleration of productivity and an accompanying rise in corporate profits--fundamental changes that justified a major rise in equity prices. How high those prices should have risen was difficult to judge in real time because no one, not investors or central bankers, could be sure how fast profits would grow in the future. In the event, share prices increased more than was justified by improved fundamentals. But overly optimistic expectations for long-run earnings growth were not being driven by easy money, and I see no reason to believe that an extra 50 or even 100 basis points on the funds rate would have had much of a damping effect on investor beliefs in the potential profitability of emerging technologies. At present, we just do not have any empirical evidence of a link between interest rates and corporate equity valuationerrors, as opposed to standard arbitrage effects.In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy. In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4Again, consider the U.S. experience of the late 1990s. When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained. Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily. These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Compared with the first approach, the extra-action strategy responds to a perceived speculative boom with tighter monetary policy--and thus lower output and inflation in the near term--with the expectation of significantly mitigating the potential fallout from a possible future bursting of the bubble. Thus, the strategy seeks to trade off the near-certainty of worse macroeconomic performance today for the chance of disproportionally better performance in the future, on the theory that the repercussions of a major market correction could be highly nonlinear. But the extra-action proposal is by no means a bold call for central banks to prick market bubbles. As the ECB article stresses, such an attempt would be extremely dangerous given the risk that a concerted effort at stamping out a speculative boom would lead to outsized interest rate hikes and recession. Rather, the extra-action strategy is intended only to provide some limited insurance against the possibility of highly adverse events occurring down the road.Common GroundI will be talking at length about the differences between the two strategies, but I must stress up front how much they have in common. Both policies aim to achieve the same general objectives of monetary policy, using the same broad analytic framework. Most central banks, I believe, share these basic features of monetary policymaking, notwithstanding important differences in their official mandates and the nature of their economies.At the risk of considerable oversimplification, policymakers can be described as seeking to set policy over time so as to minimize the present value of future deviations of output from potential and inflation from a desired level. Of course, we may not be prepared to write down a specific loss function and say, "There, that's what I'm minimizing." But our deliberative processes and our actions seem broadly consistent with that characterization of the general problem. This statement is true whether our institutions have a specific mandate to keep inflation low and stable and output close to potential, as in the United States, or whether our mandate is defined primarily in terms of stabilizing inflation, as in the euro area. Stabilizing output complements maintaining price stability in the medium to long run, and often in the short run as well.We also can agree that asset prices play critical and complicated roles in determining real activity and inflation--roles that may be changing over time because an increasing share of wealth is market-determined and easily liquified. Movements in stock prices and real estate values affect household wealth and thus consumer spending. Changes in bond prices, stock prices, and exchange rates imply movements in the cost of capital and relative prices that influence investment and foreign trade; exchange rate movements also directly affect the prices of goods and services. Finally, asset prices can affect the value of collateral and thus the provision of credit, thereby influencing aggregate spending. In cases of sharply falling market valuations, these adverse credit-channel effects may even be exacerbated by the deteriorating health of banks and other financial institutions. In sum, asset prices influence the economy in complex and subtle ways over potentially extended periods of time.Finally, I think it fair to say that most central banks, faced with only a limited understanding of asset prices and their interactions with the full economy, engage in a form of risk management when dealing with market booms and busts. In part, they do this because any particular policy under consideration is never associated with a single forecast for the future paths of output and inflation but, instead, with a large set of possible scenarios with differing odds of coming to pass. While no one uses formal Bayesian methods to solve this difficult problem, I think most policymakers do engage in at least an informal weighing of the various possibilities and their implications when setting policy.Three Conditions for Extra Action to Lead to Better OutcomesNow let me turn from areas of agreement to more contentious issues, ones that have a strong bearing on the relative merits of the two strategies. As the ECB article notes, extra action is often seen as a type of insurance. And as with any insurance policy, before you buy you have to ask whether the expected benefits outweigh the costs. As I see it, extra action pays only if three tough conditions are met. First, policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, there must be a fairly high probability that a modestly tighter policy will help to check the further expansion of speculative activity. And finally, the expected improvement in future economic performance that would result from a less expansive bubble must be sizable. You may be thinking that, in stating the three conditions, I have slanted the case with such phrases as "reasonable confidence" and "fairly high probability." But stick with me, and I hope to persuade you that these probabilistic qualifiers are needed to judge the merits of extra action.For the moment, let me set aside the first condition and assume that central banks can distinguish an emerging bubble from improving fundamentals at an early stage. What about the other two conditions? Should we presume that a limited application of restrictive policy would materially restrain the speculative boom and make its eventual unwinding less disruptive for the overall economy?Consider the U.S. stock market boom of the mid-to-late 1990s. The boom was fueled by a sustained acceleration of productivity and an accompanying rise in corporate profits--fundamental changes that justified a major rise in equity prices. How high those prices should have risen was difficult to judge in real time because no one, not investors or central bankers, could be sure how fast profits would grow in the future. In the event, share prices increased more than was justified by improved fundamentals. But overly optimistic expectations for long-run earnings growth were not being driven by easy money, and I see no reason to believe that an extra 50 or even 100 basis points on the funds rate would have had much of a damping effect on investor beliefs in the potential profitability of emerging technologies. At present, we just do not have any empirical evidence of a link between interest rates and corporate equity valuationerrors, as opposed to standard arbitrage effects.In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy. In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4Again, consider the U.S. experience of the late 1990s. When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained. Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily. These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Common GroundI will be talking at length about the differences between the two strategies, but I must stress up front how much they have in common. Both policies aim to achieve the same general objectives of monetary policy, using the same broad analytic framework. Most central banks, I believe, share these basic features of monetary policymaking, notwithstanding important differences in their official mandates and the nature of their economies.At the risk of considerable oversimplification, policymakers can be described as seeking to set policy over time so as to minimize the present value of future deviations of output from potential and inflation from a desired level. Of course, we may not be prepared to write down a specific loss function and say, "There, that's what I'm minimizing." But our deliberative processes and our actions seem broadly consistent with that characterization of the general problem. This statement is true whether our institutions have a specific mandate to keep inflation low and stable and output close to potential, as in the United States, or whether our mandate is defined primarily in terms of stabilizing inflation, as in the euro area. Stabilizing output complements maintaining price stability in the medium to long run, and often in the short run as well.We also can agree that asset prices play critical and complicated roles in determining real activity and inflation--roles that may be changing over time because an increasing share of wealth is market-determined and easily liquified. Movements in stock prices and real estate values affect household wealth and thus consumer spending. Changes in bond prices, stock prices, and exchange rates imply movements in the cost of capital and relative prices that influence investment and foreign trade; exchange rate movements also directly affect the prices of goods and services. Finally, asset prices can affect the value of collateral and thus the provision of credit, thereby influencing aggregate spending. In cases of sharply falling market valuations, these adverse credit-channel effects may even be exacerbated by the deteriorating health of banks and other financial institutions. In sum, asset prices influence the economy in complex and subtle ways over potentially extended periods of time.Finally, I think it fair to say that most central banks, faced with only a limited understanding of asset prices and their interactions with the full economy, engage in a form of risk management when dealing with market booms and busts. In part, they do this because any particular policy under consideration is never associated with a single forecast for the future paths of output and inflation but, instead, with a large set of possible scenarios with differing odds of coming to pass. While no one uses formal Bayesian methods to solve this difficult problem, I think most policymakers do engage in at least an informal weighing of the various possibilities and their implications when setting policy.Three Conditions for Extra Action to Lead to Better OutcomesNow let me turn from areas of agreement to more contentious issues, ones that have a strong bearing on the relative merits of the two strategies. As the ECB article notes, extra action is often seen as a type of insurance. And as with any insurance policy, before you buy you have to ask whether the expected benefits outweigh the costs. As I see it, extra action pays only if three tough conditions are met. First, policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, there must be a fairly high probability that a modestly tighter policy will help to check the further expansion of speculative activity. And finally, the expected improvement in future economic performance that would result from a less expansive bubble must be sizable. You may be thinking that, in stating the three conditions, I have slanted the case with such phrases as "reasonable confidence" and "fairly high probability." But stick with me, and I hope to persuade you that these probabilistic qualifiers are needed to judge the merits of extra action.For the moment, let me set aside the first condition and assume that central banks can distinguish an emerging bubble from improving fundamentals at an early stage. What about the other two conditions? Should we presume that a limited application of restrictive policy would materially restrain the speculative boom and make its eventual unwinding less disruptive for the overall economy?Consider the U.S. stock market boom of the mid-to-late 1990s. The boom was fueled by a sustained acceleration of productivity and an accompanying rise in corporate profits--fundamental changes that justified a major rise in equity prices. How high those prices should have risen was difficult to judge in real time because no one, not investors or central bankers, could be sure how fast profits would grow in the future. In the event, share prices increased more than was justified by improved fundamentals. But overly optimistic expectations for long-run earnings growth were not being driven by easy money, and I see no reason to believe that an extra 50 or even 100 basis points on the funds rate would have had much of a damping effect on investor beliefs in the potential profitability of emerging technologies. At present, we just do not have any empirical evidence of a link between interest rates and corporate equity valuationerrors, as opposed to standard arbitrage effects.In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy. In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4Again, consider the U.S. experience of the late 1990s. When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained. Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily. These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text At the risk of considerable oversimplification, policymakers can be described as seeking to set policy over time so as to minimize the present value of future deviations of output from potential and inflation from a desired level. Of course, we may not be prepared to write down a specific loss function and say, "There, that's what I'm minimizing." But our deliberative processes and our actions seem broadly consistent with that characterization of the general problem. This statement is true whether our institutions have a specific mandate to keep inflation low and stable and output close to potential, as in the United States, or whether our mandate is defined primarily in terms of stabilizing inflation, as in the euro area. Stabilizing output complements maintaining price stability in the medium to long run, and often in the short run as well.We also can agree that asset prices play critical and complicated roles in determining real activity and inflation--roles that may be changing over time because an increasing share of wealth is market-determined and easily liquified. Movements in stock prices and real estate values affect household wealth and thus consumer spending. Changes in bond prices, stock prices, and exchange rates imply movements in the cost of capital and relative prices that influence investment and foreign trade; exchange rate movements also directly affect the prices of goods and services. Finally, asset prices can affect the value of collateral and thus the provision of credit, thereby influencing aggregate spending. In cases of sharply falling market valuations, these adverse credit-channel effects may even be exacerbated by the deteriorating health of banks and other financial institutions. In sum, asset prices influence the economy in complex and subtle ways over potentially extended periods of time.Finally, I think it fair to say that most central banks, faced with only a limited understanding of asset prices and their interactions with the full economy, engage in a form of risk management when dealing with market booms and busts. In part, they do this because any particular policy under consideration is never associated with a single forecast for the future paths of output and inflation but, instead, with a large set of possible scenarios with differing odds of coming to pass. While no one uses formal Bayesian methods to solve this difficult problem, I think most policymakers do engage in at least an informal weighing of the various possibilities and their implications when setting policy.Three Conditions for Extra Action to Lead to Better OutcomesNow let me turn from areas of agreement to more contentious issues, ones that have a strong bearing on the relative merits of the two strategies. As the ECB article notes, extra action is often seen as a type of insurance. And as with any insurance policy, before you buy you have to ask whether the expected benefits outweigh the costs. As I see it, extra action pays only if three tough conditions are met. First, policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, there must be a fairly high probability that a modestly tighter policy will help to check the further expansion of speculative activity. And finally, the expected improvement in future economic performance that would result from a less expansive bubble must be sizable. You may be thinking that, in stating the three conditions, I have slanted the case with such phrases as "reasonable confidence" and "fairly high probability." But stick with me, and I hope to persuade you that these probabilistic qualifiers are needed to judge the merits of extra action.For the moment, let me set aside the first condition and assume that central banks can distinguish an emerging bubble from improving fundamentals at an early stage. What about the other two conditions? Should we presume that a limited application of restrictive policy would materially restrain the speculative boom and make its eventual unwinding less disruptive for the overall economy?Consider the U.S. stock market boom of the mid-to-late 1990s. The boom was fueled by a sustained acceleration of productivity and an accompanying rise in corporate profits--fundamental changes that justified a major rise in equity prices. How high those prices should have risen was difficult to judge in real time because no one, not investors or central bankers, could be sure how fast profits would grow in the future. In the event, share prices increased more than was justified by improved fundamentals. But overly optimistic expectations for long-run earnings growth were not being driven by easy money, and I see no reason to believe that an extra 50 or even 100 basis points on the funds rate would have had much of a damping effect on investor beliefs in the potential profitability of emerging technologies. At present, we just do not have any empirical evidence of a link between interest rates and corporate equity valuationerrors, as opposed to standard arbitrage effects.In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy. In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4Again, consider the U.S. experience of the late 1990s. When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained. Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily. These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text We also can agree that asset prices play critical and complicated roles in determining real activity and inflation--roles that may be changing over time because an increasing share of wealth is market-determined and easily liquified. Movements in stock prices and real estate values affect household wealth and thus consumer spending. Changes in bond prices, stock prices, and exchange rates imply movements in the cost of capital and relative prices that influence investment and foreign trade; exchange rate movements also directly affect the prices of goods and services. Finally, asset prices can affect the value of collateral and thus the provision of credit, thereby influencing aggregate spending. In cases of sharply falling market valuations, these adverse credit-channel effects may even be exacerbated by the deteriorating health of banks and other financial institutions. In sum, asset prices influence the economy in complex and subtle ways over potentially extended periods of time.Finally, I think it fair to say that most central banks, faced with only a limited understanding of asset prices and their interactions with the full economy, engage in a form of risk management when dealing with market booms and busts. In part, they do this because any particular policy under consideration is never associated with a single forecast for the future paths of output and inflation but, instead, with a large set of possible scenarios with differing odds of coming to pass. While no one uses formal Bayesian methods to solve this difficult problem, I think most policymakers do engage in at least an informal weighing of the various possibilities and their implications when setting policy.Three Conditions for Extra Action to Lead to Better OutcomesNow let me turn from areas of agreement to more contentious issues, ones that have a strong bearing on the relative merits of the two strategies. As the ECB article notes, extra action is often seen as a type of insurance. And as with any insurance policy, before you buy you have to ask whether the expected benefits outweigh the costs. As I see it, extra action pays only if three tough conditions are met. First, policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, there must be a fairly high probability that a modestly tighter policy will help to check the further expansion of speculative activity. And finally, the expected improvement in future economic performance that would result from a less expansive bubble must be sizable. You may be thinking that, in stating the three conditions, I have slanted the case with such phrases as "reasonable confidence" and "fairly high probability." But stick with me, and I hope to persuade you that these probabilistic qualifiers are needed to judge the merits of extra action.For the moment, let me set aside the first condition and assume that central banks can distinguish an emerging bubble from improving fundamentals at an early stage. What about the other two conditions? Should we presume that a limited application of restrictive policy would materially restrain the speculative boom and make its eventual unwinding less disruptive for the overall economy?Consider the U.S. stock market boom of the mid-to-late 1990s. The boom was fueled by a sustained acceleration of productivity and an accompanying rise in corporate profits--fundamental changes that justified a major rise in equity prices. How high those prices should have risen was difficult to judge in real time because no one, not investors or central bankers, could be sure how fast profits would grow in the future. In the event, share prices increased more than was justified by improved fundamentals. But overly optimistic expectations for long-run earnings growth were not being driven by easy money, and I see no reason to believe that an extra 50 or even 100 basis points on the funds rate would have had much of a damping effect on investor beliefs in the potential profitability of emerging technologies. At present, we just do not have any empirical evidence of a link between interest rates and corporate equity valuationerrors, as opposed to standard arbitrage effects.In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy. In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4Again, consider the U.S. experience of the late 1990s. When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained. Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily. These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Finally, I think it fair to say that most central banks, faced with only a limited understanding of asset prices and their interactions with the full economy, engage in a form of risk management when dealing with market booms and busts. In part, they do this because any particular policy under consideration is never associated with a single forecast for the future paths of output and inflation but, instead, with a large set of possible scenarios with differing odds of coming to pass. While no one uses formal Bayesian methods to solve this difficult problem, I think most policymakers do engage in at least an informal weighing of the various possibilities and their implications when setting policy.Three Conditions for Extra Action to Lead to Better OutcomesNow let me turn from areas of agreement to more contentious issues, ones that have a strong bearing on the relative merits of the two strategies. As the ECB article notes, extra action is often seen as a type of insurance. And as with any insurance policy, before you buy you have to ask whether the expected benefits outweigh the costs. As I see it, extra action pays only if three tough conditions are met. First, policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, there must be a fairly high probability that a modestly tighter policy will help to check the further expansion of speculative activity. And finally, the expected improvement in future economic performance that would result from a less expansive bubble must be sizable. You may be thinking that, in stating the three conditions, I have slanted the case with such phrases as "reasonable confidence" and "fairly high probability." But stick with me, and I hope to persuade you that these probabilistic qualifiers are needed to judge the merits of extra action.For the moment, let me set aside the first condition and assume that central banks can distinguish an emerging bubble from improving fundamentals at an early stage. What about the other two conditions? Should we presume that a limited application of restrictive policy would materially restrain the speculative boom and make its eventual unwinding less disruptive for the overall economy?Consider the U.S. stock market boom of the mid-to-late 1990s. The boom was fueled by a sustained acceleration of productivity and an accompanying rise in corporate profits--fundamental changes that justified a major rise in equity prices. How high those prices should have risen was difficult to judge in real time because no one, not investors or central bankers, could be sure how fast profits would grow in the future. In the event, share prices increased more than was justified by improved fundamentals. But overly optimistic expectations for long-run earnings growth were not being driven by easy money, and I see no reason to believe that an extra 50 or even 100 basis points on the funds rate would have had much of a damping effect on investor beliefs in the potential profitability of emerging technologies. At present, we just do not have any empirical evidence of a link between interest rates and corporate equity valuationerrors, as opposed to standard arbitrage effects.In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy. In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4Again, consider the U.S. experience of the late 1990s. When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained. Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily. These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Three Conditions for Extra Action to Lead to Better OutcomesNow let me turn from areas of agreement to more contentious issues, ones that have a strong bearing on the relative merits of the two strategies. As the ECB article notes, extra action is often seen as a type of insurance. And as with any insurance policy, before you buy you have to ask whether the expected benefits outweigh the costs. As I see it, extra action pays only if three tough conditions are met. First, policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, there must be a fairly high probability that a modestly tighter policy will help to check the further expansion of speculative activity. And finally, the expected improvement in future economic performance that would result from a less expansive bubble must be sizable. You may be thinking that, in stating the three conditions, I have slanted the case with such phrases as "reasonable confidence" and "fairly high probability." But stick with me, and I hope to persuade you that these probabilistic qualifiers are needed to judge the merits of extra action.For the moment, let me set aside the first condition and assume that central banks can distinguish an emerging bubble from improving fundamentals at an early stage. What about the other two conditions? Should we presume that a limited application of restrictive policy would materially restrain the speculative boom and make its eventual unwinding less disruptive for the overall economy?Consider the U.S. stock market boom of the mid-to-late 1990s. The boom was fueled by a sustained acceleration of productivity and an accompanying rise in corporate profits--fundamental changes that justified a major rise in equity prices. How high those prices should have risen was difficult to judge in real time because no one, not investors or central bankers, could be sure how fast profits would grow in the future. In the event, share prices increased more than was justified by improved fundamentals. But overly optimistic expectations for long-run earnings growth were not being driven by easy money, and I see no reason to believe that an extra 50 or even 100 basis points on the funds rate would have had much of a damping effect on investor beliefs in the potential profitability of emerging technologies. At present, we just do not have any empirical evidence of a link between interest rates and corporate equity valuationerrors, as opposed to standard arbitrage effects.In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy. In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4Again, consider the U.S. experience of the late 1990s. When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained. Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily. These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text For the moment, let me set aside the first condition and assume that central banks can distinguish an emerging bubble from improving fundamentals at an early stage. What about the other two conditions? Should we presume that a limited application of restrictive policy would materially restrain the speculative boom and make its eventual unwinding less disruptive for the overall economy?Consider the U.S. stock market boom of the mid-to-late 1990s. The boom was fueled by a sustained acceleration of productivity and an accompanying rise in corporate profits--fundamental changes that justified a major rise in equity prices. How high those prices should have risen was difficult to judge in real time because no one, not investors or central bankers, could be sure how fast profits would grow in the future. In the event, share prices increased more than was justified by improved fundamentals. But overly optimistic expectations for long-run earnings growth were not being driven by easy money, and I see no reason to believe that an extra 50 or even 100 basis points on the funds rate would have had much of a damping effect on investor beliefs in the potential profitability of emerging technologies. At present, we just do not have any empirical evidence of a link between interest rates and corporate equity valuationerrors, as opposed to standard arbitrage effects.In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy. In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4Again, consider the U.S. experience of the late 1990s. When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained. Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily. These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Consider the U.S. stock market boom of the mid-to-late 1990s. The boom was fueled by a sustained acceleration of productivity and an accompanying rise in corporate profits--fundamental changes that justified a major rise in equity prices. How high those prices should have risen was difficult to judge in real time because no one, not investors or central bankers, could be sure how fast profits would grow in the future. In the event, share prices increased more than was justified by improved fundamentals. But overly optimistic expectations for long-run earnings growth were not being driven by easy money, and I see no reason to believe that an extra 50 or even 100 basis points on the funds rate would have had much of a damping effect on investor beliefs in the potential profitability of emerging technologies. At present, we just do not have any empirical evidence of a link between interest rates and corporate equity valuationerrors, as opposed to standard arbitrage effects.In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy. In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4Again, consider the U.S. experience of the late 1990s. When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained. Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily. These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy. In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4Again, consider the U.S. experience of the late 1990s. When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained. Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily. These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Perhaps housing markets differ from equity and bond markets. For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend. If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit. Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal. In any event, empirical evidence on this issue is scanty. More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble. Even then, with the second condition now met, the third condition might not hold: The expected improvement in future macroeconomic performance from moderating the bubble's expansion may not be enough to more than offset the up-front costs of extra action. To explain this statement, I note again that extra action withnear-certaintyweakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for thechanceof better macroeconomic performance in the future.Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost. However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear. Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects. However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S. financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Moreover, the financial sectors of most other developed economies also weathered the worldwide drop in corporate equity values fairly well.Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further. Even in such cases, however, I wonder whether good prudential supervision in advance and prompt action to clean up any lingering structural problems afterward would not be better ways to deal with this possibility. Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s. This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan. But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses. In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place. Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound. By doing so, policymakers should be able to avoid the severe nonlinear dynamics of deflation.Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem. To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts. Now the central bank contemplates taking extra action. In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small. In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand. With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts. Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses. However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation. True, the U.S. high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated. But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals. Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult. And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion. The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate. For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Under extra action, mistakenly identifying a bubble has significant costs. By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose. Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses. But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time. And the mistaken call would have reduced welfare by needlessly inducing fluctuations in the macroeconomy.Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Timing is also an issue. Let us suppose that the evidence is so compelling that policymakers become fairly confident that valuations are excessively rich. Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability. The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits. Such talk might do some good by prompting investors to stop and rethink their assumptions. And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited. But if even one of these tough conditions is not met, then extra action would be more likely to lead to worse macroeconomic performance over time than that achievable with conventional policies that deal expeditiously with the effects of the unwinding of the bubbles when they occur. For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles. However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Asymmetries and Moral HazardProponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts. In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text This argument strikes me as a misreading of history. U.S. monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate. The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk. Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy. Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were. The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions. Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard. It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level. How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come.Footnotes1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text ConclusionMy remarks today have been intended as a salute to Otmar and to all the valuable contributions he has made over the years to my thinking and to that of policymakers around the world. Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship. Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking. Otmar and his colleagues have done this in advancing the case for extra action, and by so doing they have given me a good intellectual workout--and Otmar, I thank you for that. I hope my response has provided a good workout in return. I look forward to continuing the debate and especially the friendship for many years to come. Footnotes 1.David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text 2.European Central Bank (2005),"Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF),Monthly Bulletin(April), p. 58.Return to text 3.The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks. Given this history, I think that using the termextra actionis less confusing.Return to text 4.From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.Return to text 5.Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance. See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004)"Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).Return to text 6.See Alan G. Ahearne, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steven B. Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text 7.As evidence of asymmetry, observers often cite Claudio E.V. Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July). The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession. But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation. In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.Return to text
An interagency notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) that would implement Basel II risk-based capital requirements in the United States for large, internationally active banking organizations was made public Thursday by the Federal Reserve Board. The proposed rule would require the largest internationally active banks to enhance the measurement and management of their risks, including credit risk and operational risk. It also would require these banks to have rigorous processes for assessing overall capital adequacy in relation to their total risk profile and to publicly disclose information regarding their risk profile and capital adequacy. "Given the increasing complexity of the activities at our largest banks, and the related risks of those activities, I fully support efforts to develop a more appropriately risk-sensitive capital framework for those institutions," said Board Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. "The current Basel I framework has become increasingly inadequate for capturing the risks at large, complex U.S. banking organizations." The NPR details the agencies' plan for implementing the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision's new capital accord (Basel II). For banks that meet qualifying criteria, the NPR would replace U.S. rules implementing the Basel Capital Accord of 1988 (Basel I). The NPR builds on an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) issued by the agencies in August 2003. It includes a number of prudential safeguards, including the requirement that a bank satisfactorily complete a four-quarter parallel run period, beginning no sooner than January 1, 2008, before operating under the Basel II framework. Following a successful parallel run, a bank would have to progress through three transitional periods, each of at least one year, during which there would be temporary floors on potential declines in risk-based capital requirements. A bank would need approval from its primary federal supervisor to move to each of the transitional floors, and at the end of the transition period to move to full Basel II. "As a central bank and a supervisor of banks and bank and financial holding companies, the Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that the Basel II framework delivers a strong and risk-sensitive base of capital," said Governor Susan S. Bies. "That is why the proposal contains safeguards to ensure strong capital levels during and after the transition to Basel II, and why we will remain vigilant in monitoring Basel II's impact on an ongoing basis." The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) also are considering the NPR. The Board authorized the staff to publish the NPR in theFederal Registerfor public comment after the other agencies complete their approval processes. For the OCC and OTS, that includes review by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPR), supporting board documents, and remarks
Randall S. Kroszneron Wednesday took the oath of office as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The oath was administered by Chairman Bernanke in the Board Room. President Bush announced his intention to nominate Dr. Kroszner on January 27 and the Senate confirmed him on February 17. Dr. Kroszner was nominated to a seat vacated by the resignation of Edward M. Gramlich on August 31, 2005. The term expires January 31, 2008.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York I would like to thank the Economic Club of New York for inviting me to speak here this evening. I intend to take the opportunity afforded by an audience of experts on global financial markets to address an intriguing financial phenomenon: the fact that, over the past seven quarters or so, tightening monetary policy has been accompanied by long-term yields that have moved only a little on net. Why have long-term interest rates not risen more, as they have done over previous policy tightening cycles? And what implications does this pattern of long-term interest rates have for monetary policy and the economic outlook? As you will see, in my remarks I will do a better job of raising questions than of answering them. In particular, I will conclude that the implications for monetary policy of the recent behavior of long-term yields are not at all clear-cut. I hope you will agree that these questions are nevertheless worthwhile posing, as they are intertwined with a number of important economic and financial issues. I should say at the outset that the views I will express are my own and are not necessarily shared by my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The Federal Reserve's Tightening CycleThe tightening cycle that began at the end of June 2004 is notable in at least four respects. First, its onset was delayed for longer than many observers expected. The FOMC kept policy unusually accommodative for an extended, or should I say for a considerable, period. The goal, as you know, was to help ensure that the economic expansion would be self-sustaining and to protect against a remote risk that the fall in inflation observed during 2003 might culminate in outright deflation--an outcome that could have had potentially serious consequences for the economy and for the efficacy of monetary policy. Indeed, with those concerns in mind, in 2003 the Federal Reserve made explicit for the first time that price stability is a symmetric objective: It is important to avoid inflation that is too low as well as inflation that is too high. A second way in which the most recent experience has been unusual is the extent to which policy actions have been signaled in advance. Both in the months leading up to the initiation of the tightening cycle and during the cycle itself, the statements issued after each meeting of the FOMC provided qualitative guidance about the likely future path of policy and its dependence on economic events. Providing information about the expected path of policy helped to ensure that long-term interest rates and other asset prices did not build in a projected pace of tightening that was more rapid than the Committee itself anticipated, and the statement's focus on the conditionality of future policy actions emphasized the ongoing need for both policymakers and financial market participants to respond to economic news. In retrospect, the clear communication of policy provided notable benefits, in my view, by increasing the effectiveness of monetary policy while minimizing unnecessary volatility in financial markets. Third, policy moved gradually, tightening in one-quarter point increments over fourteen successive meetings. Together with expanded communication, this gradual approach served to stabilize policy expectations and damp market volatility. In addition, the measured pace of rate increases gave the Committee time to observe the progress of the economy and to adjust its plans and communications strategy accordingly.1To be sure, gradualism was possible only because inflation expectations remained contained--testimony to the importance of a central bank's retaining credibility in financial markets and among businesses and households. A fourth interesting aspect of the latest tightening cycle, which is my principal focus this evening, is the behavior of long-term interest rates. Since June 30, 2004, the overnight interest rate has moved up 3-1/2 percentage points, but the ten-year nominal Treasury yield has only edged higher. At less than 4-3/4 percent, that yield is not much above the target federal funds rate of 4-1/2 percent and, indeed, is about even with yields for maturities of one to three years. In the remainder of my remarks I will speculate on the reasons for and consequences of this historically unusual behavior of long-term rates. The Recent Behavior of Longer-Term YieldsSome discussion of the arithmetic of longer-term yields provides a useful perspective on recent developments in bond markets. The ten-year Treasury yield, for example, can be viewed as a weighted average of the current one-year rate and nine one-year forward rates, with the weights depending on the coupon yield of the security. As I will discuss, each of these forward rates can be split further into (1) a portion equal to the one-year spot rate that market participants currently expect to prevail at the corresponding date in the future, and (2) a portion that reflects additional compensation to the bondholder for the risk of holding longer-dated instruments. Current and near-term forward rates are particularly sensitive to monetary policy actions, which directly affect spot short-term interest rates and strongly influence market expectations of where spot rates are likely to stand in the next year or two. Indeed, as we would expect, the recent tightening of policy has been accompanied by increases in both the current one-year rate and next few years' forward rates. For example, since June 2004, the one-year forward rate for the period two to three years in the future has risen almost 1-1/2 percentage points. As the ten-year yield is about unchanged even as its near-term components have risen appreciably, it follows as a matter of arithmetic that its components representing returns that are more distant in time must have fallen. In fact, the one-year forward rate nine years ahead has declined 1-1/2 percentage points over this tightening cycle. Incidentally, by comparing forward rates implied by yields on nominal Treasuries with those implied by Treasury securities that are indexed for inflation, we can infer that about two-thirds of the overall decline in far-distant nominal forward rates over this tightening cycle has been associated with a drop in real yields, with the remainder reflecting a drop in inflation compensation. It is important to note that the marked decline in far-forward interest rates has not been confined to U.S. Treasury securities. The spread in yields between Treasuries and longer-term private securities such as corporate bonds is little changed or is down on net since June 2004, implying that essentially all of the fall in forward rates seen in the Treasury market has occurred in private yields as well. These patterns have also appeared in securities not denominated in dollars. For example, over the same period, longer-term government and swap yields in the United Kingdom and the euro area have moved appreciably lower. Indeed, long-term nominal yields have dropped in a number of countries, often by more than in the United States, and the yield curves in many of these countries are also rather flat or even slightly inverted. Some Reasons for the Decline in Far-Forward RatesWhy have the far-forward rates implied by the term structure of interest rates declined in recent years? Observers have offered two broad (and not mutually exclusive) classes of explanations. One set of explanations holds that bond yields are reacting to current or prospective macroeconomic conditions. Another set focuses on special factors that may have influenced market demands for long-term securities per se, independent of the economic outlook. I will first consider explanations that emphasize possible changes in the net demand for long-term securities and later return to explanations that focus on the link between bond yields and the economic outlook. As I have noted, each of the forward interest rates implicit in the term structure can be usefully decomposed into two parts: (1) the spot interest rate that market participants currently expect to prevail at the corresponding date in the future and (2) the additional compensation that investors require for the risk of holding longer-term instruments, known as the term premium. With the economic outlook held constant, changes in the net demand for long-term securities have their largest effect on the term premium. In particular, if the demand for long-dated securities rises relative to the supply, then investors will generally accept less compensation to hold longer-term instruments--that is, the term premium will decline. To quantify the importance of the shift in the balance of demand and supply and of the consequent change in the term premium, we can appeal to the research literature on the term structure of interest rates. In modern models of the term structure, yields at each horizon are explained by a small number of factors. In some models, these factors can be explicitly tied to observable economic variables, such as inflation; in other models, the factors represent statistical summaries of the data and have no explicit economic interpretations. These factors, in turn, can be used to estimate term premiums at each point in time, although one should clearly acknowledge that the results can be sensitive to various statistical and modeling assumptions. According to several of the most popular models, a substantial portion of the decline in distant-horizon forward rates over recent quarters can be attributed to a drop in term premiums.2Using some of these models, we can further divide the term premium into two parts--a premium for bearing real interest rate risk and a premium for bearing inflation risk. Both of these components have trended lower over time as well, according to the standard models, but the decline in the premium since last June 2004 appears to have been associated mainly with a drop in the compensation for bearing real interest rate risk. At least four possible explanations have been put forth for why the net demand for long-term issues may have increased, lowering the term premium. First, longer-maturity obligations may be more attractive because of more stable inflation, better-anchored inflation expectations, and a reduction in economic volatility more generally. With the benefit of hindsight, we now recognize that an important change occurred in the U.S. economy (and, indeed, in other major industrial economies as well) sometime in the mid-1980s. Since that time, the volatilities of both real GDP growth and inflation have declined significantly, a phenomenon that economists have dubbed the "Great Moderation." I have argued elsewhere that improved monetary policies, which stabilized inflation and better anchored inflation expectations, are an important reason for this positive development; no doubt, structural changes in the economy such as deregulation, improved inventory control methods, and better risk-sharing in financial markets also contributed.3Whatever the reason for the fall in macroeconomic volatility, if investors have come to expect this past performance to continue, they might believe that less compensation for risk--and thus a lower term premium--is required to justify holding longer-term bonds. In that regard, it is interesting to observe that long-term forward rates were also low in the 1950s and 1960s. With long-term inflation expectations apparently anchored at low levels and with the prospect of continued economic stability, market participants may believe that it is appropriate to price bonds for an environment like that which prevailed four or five decades ago. A second possible explanation of the evident decline in the term premium is linked to the increased intervention in currency markets by a number of governments, particularly in Asia. According to this explanation, foreign official institutions, primarily central banks, have invested the bulk of their greatly expanded dollar holdings in U.S. Treasuries and closely substitutable securities, and these demands by the official sector have put downward pressure on yields. This interpretation has some support, including research that I did with two coauthors that found that longer-term yields came under significant downward pressure during episodes of heavy official purchases of dollars in 2004.4And financial-market participants appear to be especially sensitive to any suggestion that foreign official entities may alter their portfolio preferences. However, these observations speak more to the existence of a short-term impact of large purchases and sales--the result of limits to liquidity in the very short run--than to the perhaps more important question of whether those transactions have a lasting effect on yields. On this latter issue, clear evidence is harder to come by. Several pieces of indirect evidence suggest that the long-term effect of foreign purchases on yields may be moderate. Notably, the global market for dollar-denominated bonds is enormous--perhaps around $25 trillion, including dollar-denominated debt issued by other countries as well as debt issued abroad by U.S. residents. In the long run, therefore, the market should be able to absorb purchases and sales of large absolute magnitude with relatively modest changes in yields. Indeed, long-term yields continued to fall over recent quarters even as foreign official holdings of Treasury securities increased at a slower pace than previously. The performance of Treasuries relative to that of other fixed-income instruments also argues against a dominant influence of foreign official portfolio decisions on long-term rates. If foreign official holdings of Treasuries were the source of the decline in their yields, then we would expect to observe increased spreads between yields on Treasury securities and the returns to other types of debt less favored by foreign official holders. But we have not seen a significant widening of private yield spreads relative to Treasuries--quite the contrary--and, as I noted earlier, yields in other industrial economies have fallen as well, in many cases by more than U.S. yields. A reasonable conclusion is that the accumulation of dollar reserves abroad has influenced U.S. yields, but reserve accumulation abroad is not the only, or even the dominant, explanation for their recent behavior. Changes in the management of and accounting for pension funds are a third possible source of a declining term premium. Reforms proposed in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere are widely expected to encourage pension funds to be more fully funded and to take steps to better match the duration of their assets and liabilities. Together with the increased need of aging populations in the industrial countries to prepare for retirement, these changes may have increased the demand for longer-maturity securities. We have seen little direct evidence to date of sizable pension-fund portfolio shifts toward long-duration bonds, at least in the United States. But judging from anecdotal reports, bond investors might be attaching significant odds to scenarios in which pension funds tilt the composition of their portfolios toward such assets substantially over time. Fourth and finally, as investors' demands for long-duration securities may have increased over the past few years, the supply of such securities seems not to have kept pace. The average maturity of outstanding Treasury debt, for example, has dropped by 1‑1/2 years since its peak in 2001, a trend just now beginning to turn with the Treasury's reissuance of the thirty-year bond. Corporations and households, however, have taken advantage of low long-term rates to lengthen the duration of their debt in recent years, which has compensated to some extent for the reduced duration of available Treasury debt. Long-Term Yields and Monetary PolicyWhat does the historically unusual behavior of long-term yields imply for the conduct of monetary policy? The answer, it turns out, depends critically on the source of that behavior. To the extent that the decline in forward rates can be traced to a decline in the term premium, perhaps for one or more of the reasons I have just suggested, the effect is financially stimulative and argues for greater monetary policy restraint, all else being equal. Specifically, if spending depends on long-term interest rates, special factors that lower the spread between short-term and long-term rates will stimulate aggregate demand. Thus, when the term premium declines, a higher short-term rate is required to obtain the long-term rate and the overall mix of financial conditions consistent with maximum sustainable employment and stable prices. However, if the behavior of long-term yields reflects current or prospective economic conditions, the implications for policy may be quite different--indeed, quite the opposite. The simplest case in point is when low or falling long-term yields reflect investor expectations of future economic weakness. Suppose, for example, that investors expect economic activity to slow at some point in the future. If investors expect that weakness to require policy easing in the medium term, they will mark down their projected path of future spot interest rates, lowering far-forward rates and causing the yield curve to flatten or even to invert. Indeed, historically, the slope of the yield curve has tended to decline significantly in advance of recessions. What is the relevance of this scenario for today? Although macroeconomic forecasting is fraught with hazards, I would not interpret the currently very flat yield curve as indicating a significant economic slowdown to come, for several reasons. First, in previous episodes when an inverted yield curve was followed by recession, the level of interest rates was quite high, consistent with considerable financial restraint. This time, both short- and long-term interest rates--in nominal and real terms--are relatively low by historical standards.5Second, as I have already discussed, to the extent that the flattening or inversion of the yield curve is the result of a smaller term premium, the implications for future economic activity are positive rather than negative.6Finally, the yield curve is only one of the financial indicators that researchers have found useful in predicting swings in economic activity. Other indicators that have had empirical success in the past, including corporate risk spreads, would seem to be consistent with continuing solid economic growth. In that regard, the fact that actual and implied volatilities of most financial prices remain subdued suggests that market participants do not harbor significant reservations about the economic outlook. An alternative perspective holds that the recent behavior of interest rates does not presage an economic slowdown but suggests instead that the level of real interest rates consistent with full employment in the long run--the natural interest rate, if you will--has declined. For example, some observers have pointed to factors that may create a longer-term drag on the growth in household spending, including high energy costs, the likelihood of slower growth in house prices, and a possible reversal of recent declines in saving rates. If these drags on the growth of spending do materialize, then a lower real interest rate will be needed to sustain aggregate demand and keep the economy near full employment. To be consistent with a lower long-term real rate, the short-term policy rate might have to be lower than it would otherwise be as well. Given the global nature of the decline in yields, an explanation less centered on the United States might be required. About a year ago, I offered the thesis that a "global saving glut"--an excess, at historically normal real interest rates, of desired global saving over desired global investment--was contributing to the decline in interest rates.7In brief, I argued that this shift reflects the confluence of several forces. On the saving side, the factors include rapid growth in high-saving countries on the Pacific Rim, export-focused economic development strategies that directly or indirectly hold back the growth of domestic demand, and the surge in revenues enjoyed by oil producers. On the investment side, notable factors restraining the global demand for capital include the legacy of the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s, which led to continuing sluggishness in investment in some of those economies, and the slower growth of the workforce in many industrial countries. So long as these factors persist, global equilibrium interest rates (and, consequently, the neutral policy rate) will be lower than they otherwise would be. ConclusionWhat conclusion should we draw? Clearly, bond prices, like other asset prices, incorporate a great deal of information that is potentially very relevant to policymakers. However, the information is not always easy to extract and--as in the current situation--the bottom line for policy appears ambiguous. In particular, to the extent that the recent behavior of long-term rates reflects a declining term premium, the policy rate associated with a given degree of financial stimulus will be higher than usual. But to the extent that long-term rates have been influenced by macroeconomic conditions, including such factors as trends in global saving and investment, the required policy rate will be lower. Given this reality, policymakers are well advised to follow two principles familiar to navigators throughout the ages: First, determine your position frequently. Second, use as many guides or landmarks as are available. In the context of monetary policy, these principles suggest that policymakers should monitor bond yields carefully in judging the current state of the economy--but only in tandem with the signals from other important financial variables; direct readings on spending, production, and prices; and a goodly helping of qualitative information. Ultimately, a robust approach to policymaking requires the use of multiple sources of information and multiple methods of analysis, combined with frequent reality checks. By not tying policy to a small set of forecast indicators, we may sacrifice some degree of simplicity, but we are less likely to be misled when a favored variable behaves in an unusual manner. Footnotes 1.I spoke about this in more detail in "Gradualism," a speech delivered at an economics luncheon co-sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco (Seattle Branch) and the University of Washington, Seattle, May 20, 2004.Return to text 2.Don H. Kim and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), "An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2005-33 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August).Return to text 3.Ben S. Bernanke (2004), "The Great Moderation," speech delivered at the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, D.C., February 20.Return to text 4.Ben S. Bernanke, Brian P. Sack, and Vincent R. Reinhart (2004), "Monetary Policy Alternatives at the Zero Bound: An Empirical Assessment,"Brookings Papers on Economic Analysis(2), pp. 1-100.Return to text 5.This is consistent with empirical work in Ben S. Bernanke and Alan S. Blinder (1992), "The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of Monetary Transmission,"American Economic Review, vol. 82 (September), pp. 901-21. In that paper, we found that the level of the federal funds rate was extremely informative about future movements of real macroeconomic variables.Return to text 6.See the discussion in Jonathan H. Wright (2006), "The Yield Curve and Predicting Recessions," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2006-7 (Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March).Return to text 7.Ben S. Bernanke, "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit," Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005.Return to text
Governor Donald L. Kohn Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, United States Senate Chairman Shelby, Senator Sarbanes, and members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve's views on regulatory relief. The Board commends the Committee for its continued focus and work on this important issue. In particular, I'd like to recognize and thank Senator Crapo and his staff for their ongoing efforts to coordinate the many regulatory relief proposals that have been advanced to date by the federal banking agencies, financial trade associations, and others. The regulatory requirements imposed on our nation's banking organizations have grown over time. Often the impact of these requirements falls hardest on our nation's community banks, which have fewer resources than larger organizations to meet the challenges posed by new or additional regulations. Although the individual requirements and restrictions imposed by federal law may well have been justified at the time of adoption, changes in the marketplace, technology and, indeed, in the federal banking laws themselves may well have altered the balance of the cost-benefit analysis that should underlie each requirement and restriction. Unnecessary regulatory burdens hinder the ability of large and small banking organizations to meet the needs of their customers, operate profitably, innovate, and compete with other financial services providers. That is why the Board periodically reviews its own regulations and why it is so important for Congress to periodically review the federal banking laws to determine whether there are any provisions that may be streamlined or eliminated without compromising the safety and soundness of banking organizations, consumer protections, or other important objectives that Congress has established for the financial system. The Board, working with the other banking agencies, has been, and will continue to be, a strong and active supporter of Congress' regulatory relief efforts. In 2003, the Board provided this Committee with a number of legislative proposals for inclusion in a regulatory relief bill. Since then, in response to requests from Senator Crapo, the Board has reviewed numerous other regulatory relief proposals included in the Matrix of Financial Services Regulatory Relief Proposals (Matrix) compiled by Senator Crapo's staff that may affect the Federal Reserve or the organizations we supervise. As a result of that process, I am pleased to report that the Board now supports more than 35 legislative proposals. These proposals would meaningfully reduce regulatory burden, improve the supervision of banking organizations, or otherwise enhance the federal banking laws without compromising the fundamental goals of bank regulation and supervision. A complete listing and summary of the proposals supported by the Board is included in theappendix to my testimony. We believe these proposals provide an excellent starting point for any regulatory relief legislation, and we look forward to working with the Committee as you develop and perfect such legislation. In my remarks, I will highlight the three items that are the Board's highest regulatory relief priorities. These proposals would allow the Federal Reserve to pay interest on balances held by depository institutions at Reserve Banks, provide the Board greater flexibility in setting reserve requirements, and permit depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits. These proposals may well sound familiar to you and they should. The Board has supported these amendments for many years because we believe each of them would improve the operation of our financial system. I should note that these three amendments form the core of S. 1586, the Interest on Business Checking Act of 2005, which was introduced last year by Senators Hagel, Reed and Snowe. The Board strongly supports passage of S. 1586, either independently or as part of a broader regulatory relief bill. In addition to these priority items, I will highlight a few other legislative proposals that we believe would provide meaningful regulatory relief to banking organizations as well as some steps that the Board has taken on its own to reduce regulatory burden. Finally, I will discuss several matters related to industrial loan companies (ILCs). This topic has been raised by some regulatory relief proposals, but it has much broader policy implications for the structure and supervision of the banking industry. Interest on Reserves and Reserve Requirement Flexibility (Matrix Nos. 1 and 2)The first two of the Board's priority items relate to reserve requirements, which exist to assist the Federal Reserve conduct monetary policy. Federal law currently obliges the Board to establish reserve requirements on certain deposits held at depository institutions and mandates that the Board set the ratio of required reserves on transaction deposits above a certain threshold at between 8 and 14 percent. Because the Federal Reserve does not pay interest on the balances held at Reserve Banks to meet reserve requirements, depositories have an incentive to reduce their required reserve balances to a minimum. To do so, they engage in a variety of reserve avoidance activities, including sweep arrangements that move funds from deposits that are subject to reserve requirements to deposits and money market investments that are not. These sweep programs and similar activities absorb real resources and therefore diminish the efficiency of our banking system. Besides required reserve balances, depository institutions also voluntarily hold two other types of balances in their Reserve Bank accounts--contractual clearing balances and excess reserve balances. A depository institution holds contractual clearing balances when it needs a higher level of balances than its required reserve balances in order to pay checks or make wire transfers out of its account at the Federal Reserve without incurring overnight overdrafts. Currently, such clearing balances do not earn explicit interest, but they do earn implicit interest in the form of credits that may be used to pay for Federal Reserve services, such as check clearing. Excess reserve balances are funds held by depository institutions in their accounts at Reserve Banks in excess of their required reserve and contractual clearing balances. Excess reserve balances currently do not earn explicit or implicit interest. The Board has long supported legislation that would authorize the Federal Reserve to pay depository institutions interest on the balances they hold at Reserve Banks. As we previously have testified, paying interest on required reserve balances would remove a substantial portion of the incentive for depositories to engage in reserve avoidance measures, and the resulting improvements in efficiency should eventually be passed through to bank borrowers and depositors. Having the authority also to pay interest on contractual clearing and excess reserve balances as well as required reserves would enhance the Federal Reserve's ability to efficiently conduct monetary policy. In addition, it would complement another of the Board's proposed amendments, which would give the Board greater flexibility in setting reserve requirements for depository institutions. In order for the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to conduct monetary policy effectively, it is important that a sufficient and predictable demand for balances at the Reserve Banks exist so that the Federal Reserve knows the volume of reserves to supply (or remove) through open market operations to achieve the FOMC's target federal funds rate. Authorizing the Federal Reserve to pay explicit interest on contractual clearing balances could potentially provide a demand for voluntary balances that would be stable enough for monetary policy to be implemented effectively through existing procedures without the need for required reserve balances. In these circumstances, the Board, if authorized, could consider reducing--or even eliminating--reserve requirements, thereby reducing a regulatory burden for all depository institutions, without adversely affecting the Federal Reserve's ability to conduct monetary policy. Having the authority to pay interest on excess reserves also could help mitigate potential volatility in overnight interest rates. If the Federal Reserve was authorized to pay interest on excess reserves, and did so, the rate paid would act as a minimum for overnight interest rates, because banks generally would not lend to other banks at a lower rate than they could earn by keeping their excess funds at a Reserve Bank. Although the Board sees no need to pay interest on excess reserves in the near future, the ability to do so would be a potentially useful addition to the monetary policy toolkit of the Federal Reserve. Interest on Demand Deposits (Matrix No. 3)Another priority item for the Board would repeal the statutory restrictions that currently prohibit depository institutions from paying interest on demand deposits. Repealing these restrictions would improve the overall efficiency of our financial sector, assist small banks in attracting and retaining business deposits, and allow small businesses to earn direct interest on their checking account balances. As a practical matter, these restrictions currently do not impede the payment of interest on consumer deposits because depository institutions generally are permitted to offer individuals interest-bearing negotiable order of withdrawal (NOW) accounts, which are checkable transaction accounts similar to demand deposits. To compete for the liquid assets of businesses, however, banks have been compelled to set up complicated procedures to pay implicit interest on compensating balance accounts and they spend resources--and charge fees--for sweeping the excess demand deposits of businesses into money market investments on a nightly basis. Small banks often do not have the resources to develop the sweep or other programs that are needed to compete for the deposits of business customers. Moreover, from the standpoint of the overall economy, the expenses incurred by institutions of all sizes to implement these programs are a waste of resources and would be unnecessary if institutions were permitted to pay interest on demand deposits directly. The costs incurred by banks in operating these programs are passed on to their large and small business customers and many small businesses do not benefit from these programs. For these reasons, the Board's proposed amendment would allow all depository institutions that have the legal authority to offer demand deposits to pay interest on those deposits. The amendment would eliminate the need for banks to operate, and business customers to pay for, sweep and compensating balance arrangements to pay or earn interest on demand deposits. As I will explain a little later, however, the Board opposes amendments that would separately authorize ILCs that operate outside the supervisory and regulatory framework established for other insured banks to offer, for the first time, transaction accounts to business customers. The Board believes that, once enacted, the authorization for depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits should become effective promptly. S. 1586 would achieve this goal by requiring that the authority to pay interest on demand deposits become effective no later than 90 days after enactment. The Board, however, does not advocate the provisions of S. 1586 or other bills that would allow banks to offer a reservable money market deposit account (MMDA) from which twenty-four transfers a month could be made to other accounts of the same depositor. These provisions would permit banks to sweep balances from demand deposits into MMDAs each night, pay interest on them, and then sweep them back into demand deposits the next day. This type of twenty-four-transfer MMDA likely would be useful only during the transition period before direct interest payments were allowed. Moreover, as the Board has explained in previous testimonies, this type of account would represent an inefficient, more costly and less readily available alternative to interest-bearing demand deposits. De Novo Interstate BranchingThe Board also strongly supports an amendment that would remove outdated barriers to de novo interstate branching by banks. Since enactment of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 (Riegle-Neal Act), all fifty states have permitted banks to expand on an interstate basis through the acquisition of an existing bank in their state. Interstate banking is good for consumers and the economy as well as banks. The creation of new branches helps maintain the competitiveness and dynamism of the American banking industry and improve access to banking services in otherwise under-served markets. It results in better banking services for households and small businesses, lower interest rates on loans, and higher interest rates on deposits. Interstate branching also increases convenience for customers who live, work, and operate across state borders. However, the Riegle-Neal Act permitted banks to open a branch in a new statewithoutacquiring another bank only if the host state enacted legislation that expressly permits entry by de novo branching (an opt-in requirement). To date, twenty-two states and the District of Columbia have enacted some form of opt-in legislation, while twenty-eight states continue to require interstate entry through the acquisition of an existing bank. This limitation on de novo branching is an obstacle to interstate entry for all banks and also creates special problems for small banks seeking to operate across state lines. Moreover, it creates an unlevel playing field between banks and federal savings associations, which have long been allowed to establish de novo branches on an interstate basis. The Board's proposed amendment would remove this last obstacle to full interstate branching for banks and level the playing field between banks and thrifts by allowing banks to establish interstate branches on a de novo basis. The amendment also would remove the parallel provision that allows states to impose a minimum requirement on the age of banks that are acquired by an out-of-state banking organization. While the Board supports expanding the de novo branching authority of banks, the Board continues to believe that Congress shouldnotgrant this new branching authority to ILCs unless the corporate owners of these institutions are subject to the same type of consolidated supervision and activities restrictions as the corporate owners of other full-service insured banks. Small Bank Examination Flexibility (Matrix No. 68)The Board also supports expanding the number of small institutions that may qualify for an extended examination cycle. Federal law currently requires that the appropriate federal banking agency conduct an on-site examination of each insured depository institution at least once every twelve months. The statute, however, permits institutions that have less than $250 million in assets and that meet certain capital, managerial, and other criteria to be examined on an eighteen-month cycle. As the primary federal supervisors for state-chartered banks, the Board and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) may alternate responsibility for conducting these examinations with the appropriate state supervisory authority if the Board or FDIC determines that the state examination carries out the purposes of the statute. The $250 million asset cutoff for an eighteen-month examination cycle has not been raised since 1994. The Board's proposed amendment would raise this asset cap from $250 million to $500 million. Importantly, this change would not exempt any insured depository institution from routine safety and soundness examinations, and would not lengthen the examination cycle for institutions experiencing financial or managerial difficulties. This change is unanimously supported by the federal banking agencies and potentially would allow approximately an additional 1,200 insured depository institutions to qualify for an eighteen-month examination cycle. The Board believes this change would provide meaningful relief to small, financially strong institutions without compromising safety and soundness. The Board's supervisory experience, however, indicates that institutions with assets approaching $1 billion tend to have more complex risk profiles and are more likely to operate business lines on a regional or national basis than institutions with assets of less than $500 million. For these reasons, the Board is not comfortable raising the asset threshold for an eighteen-month examination cycle to $1 billion, as items No. 112 and No. 169 in the Matrix would do. The Board also does not support proposals, such as item No. 42 in the Matrix, that would allow a federal banking agency to extend the examination cycle for a potentially indefinite period of time for institutions of any size. Despite advances in off-site monitoring, the Board continues to believe that regular on-site examinations play a critical role in helping bank supervisors detect and correct asset, risk-management, or internal control problems at an institution before these problems result in claims on the deposit insurance funds. If an agency is experiencing shortages in its examination resources, we believe it would be better to address these constraints through the supplementation of the agency's resources, rather than by extending the mandated frequency of safety and soundness examinations. Other Board Legislative Proposals and Actions to Reduce Regulatory BurdenIn addition to these proposals, the Board supports a variety of other regulatory relief amendments included in the Matrix. These amendments, which are discussed more fully in theAppendix, would among other things:Restore the Board's ability to determine that nonbanking activities are "closely related to banking" for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act) and, thus, permissible for all bank holding companies to conduct directly or through a nonbank subsidiary (Matrix No. 137(a));Streamline the process for insured banks to acquire savings associations and trust companies in interstate merger transactions (Matrix No. 138);Modify the cross-marketing restrictions that apply to the merchant banking and insurance company investments of financial holding companies (Matrix No. 139);Eliminate certain reporting requirements imposed on banks and their executive officers and principal shareholders that do not contribute significantly to the monitoring of insider lending or the safety and soundness of insured depository institutions (Matrix No. 4);Streamline the inter-agency consultation process for transactions under the Bank Merger Act (Matrix No. 5);Shorten the post-approval waiting period for bank acquisitions and mergers where the Attorney General and the relevant federal banking agency agree the transaction will not have a significant adverse effect on competition (Matrix No. 6);Simplify the restrictions governing dividend payments by national and state member banks in a way that would not adversely affect the safety and soundness of member banks (Matrix No. 31); andFacilitate the flow of information during the supervisory process by clarifying that depository institutions and others do not waive any privilege they may have with respect to information when they provide the information to a federal, state or foreign banking authority as part of the supervisory process (Matrix No. 100).In our discussions with banking organizations about regulatory relief, one topic that frequently comes up is the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA). We recognize that provisions of the BSA require considerable effort by the banking industry to obtain, document and provide information to law enforcement. To further promote the uniform application of BSA and anti-money laundering (AML) requirements, the federal banking agencies, working with the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network of the Treasury Department, recently issued a joint BSA/AML Examination Manual that is designed to promote the effective and consistent examination of BSA/AML compliance. The Board will continue to work with our fellow banking agencies and FinCEN to address key issues related to BSA/anti-money laundering compliance. With respect to currency transaction reports (CTRs), we support the efforts of the Treasury Department and others to develop ways of reducing the burdens imposed on banks in a manner that would not adversely affect the ability of banks to manage their risk or unintentionally impede the investigative tools available to law enforcement.Before moving on, I'd like to mention some recent changes that the Board itself has made to its Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement ("Policy Statement") and capital guidelines that we believe should provide significant relief to community banking organizations. The Board adopted the Policy Statement in 1980 to help facilitate the transfer of ownership of small, community-based banks. Currently, the Policy Statement applies to bank holding companies that have consolidated assets of less than $150 million and that meet certain qualitative criteria. These qualitative criteria are designed to ensure that a small bank holding company does not qualify for the Policy Statement if it engages in significant activities outside its supervised bank subsidiaries. Small bank holding companies that qualify for, and operate under, the Policy Statement also are subject to several additional restrictions and conditions that are designed to ensure that they do not present an undue risk to the safety and soundness of their subsidiary banks.Last week, the Board approved an amendment that increases to $500 million the asset size threshold for determining whether a bank holding company may qualify for the Policy Statement and the related exemption from the Board's capital guidelines for bank holding companies. The Board also has proposed to make conforming revisions to its regulatory reporting framework, which should further lower reporting and compliance costs for small bank holding companies. The Board believes these actions properly balance the goals of facilitating the transfer of ownership of small banks, on the one hand, and ensuring capital adequacy and access to necessary supervisory information on the other hand. The Board, however, does not support amendments, like item No. 116 in the Matrix, that potentially would require the Board to raise the asset size threshold in the Policy Statement to $1 billion.Industrial Loan CompaniesAs I noted earlier, the Board strongly supports amendments that would allow depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits and allow banks to open de novo branches on an interstate basis. The Board, however, believes that, because the corporate owners of ILCs operate outside the prudential and legislative framework applicable to the corporate owners of other types of insured banks, ILCs shouldnotbe authorized to offer transaction accounts to business customers or branch de novo across state lines. Our position on these matters is long-standing and based on the broad policy issues presented by the special exemption in current law for ILCs chartered in certain states.ILCs are banks; specifically, they are state-chartered FDIC-insured banks. However, due to a special exemption in the federal BHC Act, any type of company, including a commercial or retail firm, may acquire an ILC in a handful of states--principally Utah, California, and Nevada--and avoid the activity restrictions and consolidated supervisory requirements that apply to bank holding companies.ILCs were first established early in the twentieth century to make small loans to industrial workers. When the special exemption for ILCs initially was granted in 1987, ILCs were still mostly small, local institutions that had only limited deposit-taking and lending powers. For example, in 1987, most ILCs had less than $50 million in assets and the largest ILC had assets of less than $400 million. Moreover, in 1987, the relevant states were not actively chartering new ILCs. Utah, for example, had a moratorium on the chartering of new ILCs at the time the exemption was enacted.However, as the Government Accountability Office (GAO) recently documented, the ILC exemption has been actively exploited in recent years, resulting in a significant change in the character, powers and ownership of ILCs. For example, one ILC operating under the exception now has more than $60billionin assets and more than $52billionin deposits, and an additional nine exempt ILCs each have more than $1 billion in deposits. The aggregate amount of estimated insured deposits held by all ILCs has grown by more than 500 percent since 1999, and the total assets of all ILCs has grown from $3.8 billion in 1987 to $140 billion in 2004. Several large, internationally active commercial companies now own ILCs under this exception and use these banks to support various aspects of their global commercial operations.While only a handful of states have the ability to charter exempt ILCs, there is no limit on the number of exempt ILCs these grandfathered states may charter in the future. In addition, due to the limited restrictions that apply under federal law to the ILCs operating under this exemption, an exempt ILC legally may engage in the full range of commercial, mortgage, credit card and consumer lending activities; offer payment-related services, including Fedwire, automated clearing house (ACH) and check clearing services, to affiliated and unaffiliated persons; and accept time and savings deposits, including certificates of deposit (CDs), from any type of customer.Why does this growth and potential further expansion of ILCs matter? Simply stated, it has the potential to undermine several important policies that Congress has established for the banking system. Let me explain.Congress has established a prudential framework for banking organizations in the United States that is based both on the supervision of insured banksandthe supervision of their corporate owners on a group-wide or consolidated basis. Consolidated supervision refers to the legal framework that provides a supervisor the tools it needs--such as reporting, examination, capital and enforcement authority--to understand, monitor and, when appropriate, restrain the risks associated with an organization's consolidated or group-wide activities. Consolidated supervision of the organizations that control banks not only helps prevent bank failures, it also provides important tools for managing and resolving bank failures if and when they do occur. In fact, following the collapse of Bank of Commerce and Credit International (BCCI), which lacked a single supervisor capable of monitoring its diverse and global activities, Congress amended the BHC Act in 1991 to require that foreign banks demonstrate that they are subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis prior to acquiring a bank in the United States.For a variety of reasons, Congress also has long sought to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce in the United States. This position was reaffirmed by Congress in the Competitive Equality Banking Act of 1987 and again in the GLB Act of 1999. In fact, in each of these acts the Congress took affirmative action to close the main loophole then being used by commercial firms to acquire FDIC-insured depository institutions--the so-called "nonbank bank" loophole in 1987 and the unitary thrift loophole in 1999.ILCs have developed and expanded in recent years outside this framework that governs banking organizations generally. Because of their special exemption in federal law, any type of company may acquire an FDIC-insured ILC that is chartered in certain states without regard to the activity restrictions that Congress has established to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce. The exemption also allows a company to acquire an FDIC-insured bank and avoid the consolidated supervisory framework--including consolidated capital, examination and reporting requirements--that applies to the corporate owners of other full-service insured banks under the BHC Act. In addition, the exemption allows a foreign bank to acquire a U.S. bank engaged in retail banking activities without meeting the requirement under the BHC Act that the foreign bank be subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis in its home country.As insured banks, each ILC is supervised by the FDIC as well as by its chartering state. The Board has never questioned either the need for, or the adequacy of, this supervision of an ILC. However, experience has led Congress to determine that supervision of a full-service insured bank is not sufficient, by itself, to protect the taxpayer and the financial system when the bank operates as part of a larger corporate organization. The FDIC does not have the authority to supervise the corporate owners of ILCs and their affiliates in the same manner that bank holding companies and their nonbank affiliates are supervised under the BHC Act. The GAO recently concluded that, due to these differences in authority, exempt ILCs may pose more risk to the deposit insurance funds than banks operating in a bank holding company structure.The exemption for ILCs in the BHC Act also permits a diversified securities, insurance or financial firm to acquire an FDIC-insured bank without complying with the enhanced capital, managerial and Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) requirements established by Congress in the GLB Act for financial holding companies. In addition, although the USA PATRIOT Act requires the Board to consider the effectiveness of a company's policies in combatting money laundering prior to approving the company's application to acquire a bank, this requirement does not apply to companies that seek to acquire an exempt ILC.Affirmatively granting ILCs the ability to offer transaction accounts to business customers or open de novo branches nationwide would significantly expand the powers of exempt ILCs, increase the attractiveness of the current loophole, and eliminate any vestige of a distinction between ILCs and full-service insured banks. This result would be inconsistent with both the historical functions of ILCs and the terms of their special exemption in current law. These proposals individually and collectively also would exacerbate the competitive advantage that the corporate owners of ILCs have over other banking organizations that operate within the supervisory framework established by Congress.The Board believes that the important principles governing the structure of the nation's banking system--such as the separation of banking and commerce, consolidated supervision, and the supervisory criteria applicable to companies that seek to own or control a bank--should be decided by Congress and, once established, should apply to all organizations that own a bank in a competitively equitable manner. We are concerned that the expansion and exploitation of the ILC exemption is undermining the prudential framework that Congress has carefully crafted and developed for the corporate owners of insured banks. Importantly, these changes also threaten to remove from Congress' hands the ability to determine the direction of our nation's financial system with regard to the mixing of banking and commerce.Congress should not permit the nation's policy on these important issues to be decided for it on a de facto basis through the expansion of a loophole that is available to only one type of institution chartered in a handful of states. Rather than expanding the powers of ILCs that operate under this special exemption in a regulatory relief bill, we believe it is important for Congress separately to conduct a thorough review of the special exemption for ILCs and its potential to change the landscape of our financial system and create an unlevel competitive playing field.ConclusionI appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Board's legislative suggestions and priorities concerning regulatory relief. The Board looks forward to working with the Committee and your staffs in developing and advancing meaningful regulatory relief legislation that is consistent with the nation's public policy objectives.AppendixRegulatory Relief Proposals Supported by theBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemThe Board believes the first 20 items listed below would provide meaningful regulatory relief to banking organizations within the jurisdiction of the Federal Reserve. The remaining 16 items would improve the supervision of banking organizations, facilitate the resolution of failed banks, streamline procedural or other requirements under the federal banking laws, or eliminate outdated provisions of law.Authorize the Federal Reserve to pay interest on balances held at Reserve Banks(Matrix No. 1)Amendment gives the Federal Reserve explicit authority to pay interest on balances held by depository institutions at the Federal Reserve Banks.Grant the Board additional flexibility in establishing reserve requirements(Matrix No. 2)Amendment provides the Federal Reserve with greater flexibility to set the ratio of reserves that a depository institution must maintain against its transaction accounts below the current ranges established by the Monetary Control Act of 1980.Authorize depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits(Matrix No. 3)Amendment repeals the provisions in current law that prohibit depository institutions from paying interest on demand deposits. If adopted, the amendment would allow all depository institutions that have the authority to offer demand deposits to pay interest on those deposits.Ease restrictions on interstate branching and mergers in a competitively equitable manner(Amendment provided to Committee in July 2003)Amendment affirmatively authorizes national and state banks to open de novo branches on an interstate basis. Currently, banks may establish de novo branches in a new state only if the state has affirmatively authorized de novo branching. This existing limitation places banks at a disadvantage to federal savings associations, which currently have the ability to branch de novo on an interstate basis. The amendment also would remove a parallel provision that allows states to impose a minimum requirement on the age of banks that may be acquired by an out-of-state banking organization.The amendment would not allow industrial loan companies (ILCs) that operate under a special exemption in federal law to open de novo branches on a nationwide basis. The corporate owners of these ILCs are not subject to the type of consolidated supervision and activities restrictions that generally apply to the corporate owners of other banks insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Granting exempt ILCs nationwide branching rights also would be inconsistent with the terms of their special exemption in federal law.Small Bank Examination Flexibility(Matrix No. 68)Amendment would expand the number of small institutions that may qualify for an eighteen-month (rather than a twelve-month) safety and soundness examination cycle. Under current law, an insured depository institution may qualify for an extended eighteen-month examination cycle only if the institution has less than $250 million in total assets.See12 U.S.C. § 1820(d). The amendment would raise this asset cap to $500 million, thereby potentially allowing approximately an additional 1,200 institutions to qualify for an extended examination cycle.Modification of the cross-marketing restrictions applicable to merchant banking and insurance company investments(Matrix Nos. 139, 171 and 187)Amendment allows the depository institution subsidiaries of a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities with portfolio companies that are held under the merchant banking authority in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act) to the same extent as such activities are currently permissible for portfolio companies held under the GLB Act's insurance company investment authority. The amendment also would allow the depository institution subsidiaries of a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities with a portfolio company held under either the merchant banking or insurance company investment authority if the financial holding company does not control the portfolio company.Permit the Board to grant exceptions to the attribution rule concerning shares held by a trust for the benefit of a bank holding company or its shareholders or employees(Matrix No. 140)The amendment would allow the Board, in appropriate circumstances, to waive the attribution rule in section 2(g)(2) of the Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act). This attribution rule currently provides that, for purposes of the BHC Act, a company is deemed in all circumstances to own or control any shares that are held by a trust (such as an employee benefit plan) for the benefit of the company or its shareholders or employees. The amendment would allow the Board to waive the rule when, for example, the shares in question are held by a 401(k) plan that is widely held by the bank holding company's employees and the facts indicate that the bank holding company does not have the ability to control the shares held by the plan.Allow insured banks to engage in interstate merger transactions with savings associations and trust companies(Matrix No. 138)The amendment would allow an insured bank to directly acquire, by merger, an insured savings association or uninsured trust company in a different home state without first converting the target savings association or trust company into an insured bank. As under current law, the insured bank would have to be the survivor of the merger.a. Restore Board's authority to determine that new activities are "closely related to banking" and permissible for all bank holding companies(Matrix No. 137a)Amendment would restore the Board's ability to determine that nonbanking activities are "closely related to banking" under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act and, thus, permissible for all bank holding companies, including those that have not elected to become financial holding companies. Bank holding companies would still be required to become a financial holding company to engage in the types of expanded activities authorized by the GLB Act--including full-scope securities underwriting, insurance underwriting, and merchant banking activities--as well as any new activities that the Board determines under the GLB Act are "financial in nature," "incidental to a financial activity" or "complementary to a financial activity."b. Allow bank holding companies to engage in insurance agency activities (Alternative to Item 9.a.)(Matrix No. 137b)Alternative amendment would allow all bank holding companies, including those that have not elected to become financial holding companies, to act asagentin the sale of insurance. Currently, bank holding companies that do not become a financial holding company may engage only in very limited insurance sales activities (primarily involving credit-related insurance). However, mostbanksare permitted to sell any type of insurance, either directly or through a subsidiary. The amendment would rectify this imbalance by permitting all bank holding companies to act as agent in the sale of insurance. Insurance agency activities involve less risk than insurance underwriting and other principal activities. Bank holding companies would continue to be required to become a financial holding company to underwrite insurance (other than credit-related insurance).Shorten the post-approval waiting period for bank mergers and acquisitions where the relevant banking agency and the Attorney General agree the transaction will not have adverse competitive effects(Matrix No. 6)Amendment allows the responsible federal banking agency, with the concurrence of the Attorney General, to reduce the post-approval waiting periods under the Bank Merger Act and BHC Act from fifteen days to as few as five days. The amendment wouldnotalter the time period that a private party has to challenge a banking agency's approval of a transaction for reasons related to the Community Reinvestment Act.Repeal certain reporting requirements imposed on the insiders of insured depository institutions(Matrix No. 4)Amendment repeals the provisions of current law that require: (i) an executive officer of a bank to file a report with the bank's board of directors concerning the officer's indebtedness to other banks; (ii) a member bank to file a separate report each quarter concerning any loans made to its executive officers during the quarter; and (iii) executive officers and principal shareholders of a bank to report to the bank's board of directors any loans received from a correspondent bank. The Board has found that these reporting requirements do not contribute significantly to the monitoring of insider lending. These amendments would not alter the statutory limits or conditions imposed on loans by banks to their insiders.Provide an adjustment for the small depository institutions exception under the Depository Institution Management Interlocks Act (DIMIA)(Matrix No. 49)Currently, the DIMIA generally prohibits a management official of one depository institution from serving as a management official of any other non-affiliated depository institution or depository institution holding company if the institutions or an affiliate of such institutions have offices that are located in the same metropolitan statistical area. The statute provides an exception from this restriction for institutions that have less than $20 million in assets, but this dollar figure has not been updated since 1978. The amendment would increase this amount to $100 million.Simplifying dividend calculations for national and state member banks(Matrix No. 31)Amendment would simplify the process for national and state member banks to pay dividends by eliminating the restrictions that currently allow a national bank or state member bank to pay dividends only if the bank's surplus is equal to or greater than its capital account or the bank has transferred at least 10 percent of its recent net income to its surplus fund. The amendment would not alter the other restrictions in current law that ensure that national and state member banks do not pay excessive dividends. For example, national and state member banks would continue to be prohibited from paying any dividend if such action would cause the bank to become undercapitalized.Authorize member banks to use pass-through reserve accounts(Matrix No. 141)Amendment permits banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System to count as reserves their deposits in other banks that are "passed through" by those banks to the Federal Reserve as required reserve balances. Nonmember banks already are able to use such pass-through reserve accounts.Protection of information provided to banking agencies(Matrix No. 100)Amendment allows a depository institution to share information with a federal, state or foreign bank supervisor as part of the supervisory or regulatory process without waiving any privilege the institution may have with respect to the information. The Board strongly supports broadening the amendment to ensure that other persons, including bank holding companies, foreign banks and Edge or agreement corporations, also may provide information to a federal, state or foreign supervisor as part of the supervisory or regulatory process without waiving any privilege they may have with respect to the information.Repeal of CRA Sunshine requirements(Matrix No. 7)The amendment would repeal the so-called "CRA Sunshine" requirements that were adopted as part of the GLB Act in 1999. These provisions require nongovernmental entities or persons and banking organizations that enter into certain agreements that are in fulfillment of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) to (1) make the agreements available to the public and the appropriate banking agency, and (2) file an annual report with the appropriate banking agency concerning any payments made or received pursuant to the agreement.Flood insurance amendments(Matrix No. 65)These amendments would:(a) Allow lenders to rely on information from licensed surveyors to determine whether a property is in a flood zone, if the flood map is more than ten years old;(b) Increase the "small loan" exception to the flood insurance requirements from $5,000 to $20,000 and adjust this amount periodically based on changes in the Consumer Price Index;(c) Reduce the forty-five-day waiting period required after policy expiration before a lender can "force place" flood insurance by fifteen days to coincide with the thirty-day grace period during which flood insurance coverage continues after policy expiration, which would better enable lenders to avoid gaps in coverage on the relevant collateral; and(d) Give the federal banking agencies discretion to impose civil money penalties on institutions found to have engaged in a pattern or practice of violating the flood insurance requirements.Permit credit card banks to make a limited amount of community development loans for CRA purposes(Matrix No. 179) (Support with Minor Modifications)The amendment would allow a limited-purpose credit card bank--without losing its exemption under the BHC Act--to make and purchase loans that help meet the credit needs of low- and moderate-income persons and neighborhoods or promote economic development by financing small businesses or farms. The aggregate amount of these non-credit card loans could not exceed 5 percent of the bank's capital and surplus.The Board supports this amendment subject to a slight modification. The modification is designed to ensure that any non-credit card loans made by a credit card bank under the amendment are made for eligible community development purposes. Because credit card banks are evaluated for CRA purposes under a special community development test, there is no need to allow them to make non-credit card loans for CRA purposes unless those loans would qualify as community development loans under the CRA.Periodic interagency review of Call Reports(Matrix No. 109)Amendment requires that the federal banking agencies jointly review the Call Report forms at least once every five years to determine if some of the information required by the reports may be eliminated. The federal banking agencies would retain their current authority to determine what information must be included in the Call Reports filed by the institutions under their primary supervision.Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFT Act) notifications(Matrix No. 115, first bullet)Amendment would increase, from 21 days to 30 days, the amount of advance notice an institution must give to a consumer under the EFT Act before the effective date of any changes in the terms of the consumer's account. The amendment would conform the timing provisions of the EFT Act regarding notices of a change in account terms with the similar provisions in the Truth in Savings Act.Technical and conforming amendments related to D.C.-chartered banks(Matrix No. 164)The amendment would make technical and conforming amendments to the federal banking laws to ensure that banks chartered by the District of Columbia are treated as "state" banks consistent with the purposes of the 2004 District of Columbia Omnibus Authorization Act.Electronic Records(Matrix No. 161)This amendment would allow each federal banking agency to preserve the agency's records in electronic or photographic form and determine when such electronic or photographic records may be destroyed. In addition, the amendment would provide that any record maintained electronically or photographically by a federal banking agency in accordance with the agency's regulations shall be considered an original record for all purposes, including submission into evidence in a judicial or administrative proceeding.Ensure protection of confidential information received from foreign supervisory authorities(Matrix No. 46)Amendment ensures that a federal banking agency may keep confidential information received from a foreign regulatory or supervisory authority if public disclosure of the information would violate the laws of the foreign country, and the banking agency obtained the information in connection with the administration and enforcement of federal banking laws or under a memorandum of understanding between the authority and the agency. The amendment would not authorize an agency to withhold information from Congress or in response to a court order in an action brought by the United States or the agency.Eliminate requirement that the reviewing agency request a competitive factors report from the other banking agencies in Bank Merger Act transactions(Matrix Nos. 5 and 69)Amendment would eliminate the requirement that the reviewing agency request a competitive factors report from the other banking agencies on Bank Merger Act transactions. The reviewing agency would, however, continue to be required to (i) conduct a competitive analysis of the proposed merger, and (ii) request a competitive factors report from the Attorney General and provide a copy of this request to the FDIC (when the FDIC is not the reviewing agency).Streamline Bank Merger Act procedural requirements for transactions involving entities that are already under common control(Matrix No. 61)The amendment eliminates the need for the reviewing agency for a bank merger involving affiliated entities to request a report on the competitive factors associated with the transaction from the other banking agencies and the Attorney General. The amendment also would eliminate the post-approval waiting period for Bank Merger Act transactions involving affiliated entities. The merger of depository institutions that already are under common control typically does not have any impact on competition.Repeal requirement that the Board approve removal actions brought by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)(Matrix No. 32)Amendment repeals the requirement that the Board approve removal actions brought by the OCC against institution-affiliated parties of a national bank.Clarify and confirm the ability of the banking agencies to enforce conditions imposed in Change in Bank Control ("CIBC") Act Notices(Matrix No. 147)Amendment confirms the existing authority of a federal banking agency to enforce a written condition imposed on a depository institution or an institution-affiliated party in connection with a notice filed under the CIBC Act.Expand factors that the banking agencies may consider in evaluating CIBC Act notices(Matrix No. 40 and No. 146)Amendment expands the factors the federal banking agencies may consider in determining whether to disapprove a notice under the CIBC Act to include the financial condition and future prospects of the depository institution involved in the transaction. The amendment also would allow the agencies to extend the time period for processing CIBC Act notice (up to an additional 90 days) if the agency determined that additional time is needed to analyze any plans the notificant may have to make major changes in the business, corporate structure, or management of the institution.Enforcing conditions imposed by another banking agency(Matrix No. 148)Amendment would allow the appropriate federal banking agency for a depository institution, bank holding company or savings and loan holding company to enforce a written condition imposed on the institution or company by another federal banking agency. This would allow, for example, the Board (as the appropriate agency for a state member bank) to enforce a condition imposed on a state member bank by the FDIC in connection with the bank's application for deposit insurance.The Board supports the amendment subject to a minor modification. The modification is designed to clarify that, regardless of what agency imposes a condition on a depository institution or holding company, only the appropriate federal banking agency for the depository institution or holding company has the authority to enforce the condition against the depository institution or holding company. (As under current law, the FDIC would retain its "back-up" authority under section 8(t) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (FDI Act) to take action against an insured depository institution if certain conditions are met.)Eliminate the special treatment of holding companies that control only ILCs and credit card banks under the cross-guarantee and "golden parachute" provisions of the FDI Act(Matrix Nos. 151 and 152)Amendment would modify the cross-guarantee provisions of the FDI Act (12 U.S.C. § 1815(e)) to cover insured depository institutions whenever they are controlled by the same company and even if the parent company is not a bank holding company or a savings and loan holding company. In addition, the amendment would modify the "golden parachute" provisions of the FDI Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(k)) to cover a company that owns an insured depository institution, but that is not a bank holding company or savings and loan holding company. Currently, these provisions do not apply to a company that owns one or more ILCs or credit card banks, but that is not otherwise a bank holding company or savings and loan holding company.While the Board supports these limited changes, the Board notes that these amendments wouldnotalter the much more significant exemption for ILCs from the definition of "bank" in the BHC Act. The exemption for certain ILCs in the BHC Act permits a company to own an FDIC-insured ILC and avoid the activity restrictions and consolidated supervisory requirements that generally apply to the corporate owners of other insured banks.Contractual arrangements with a failed bank(Matrix No. 155)Amendment would prohibit a party, for 90 days after the FDIC is appointed receiver or conservator for an insured depository institution, from exercising any contractual right the party may have to terminate, accelerate or declare a default under a contract with the failed institution, or obtain possession of collateral pledged under such a contract, unless the FDIC consented to the action.Barring convicted felons from participating in the affairs of an uninsured depository institution(Matrix No. 38)Amendment extends touninsurednational banks, state member banks and U.S. branches of a foreign bank the provisions of section 19 of the FDI Act, which automatically prohibits a person that has been convicted of a criminal offense involving dishonesty, a breach of trust or money laundering from participating in the affairs of an insured depository institutions. The amendment also would allow the OCC or Board, as appropriate, to waive this prohibition as it applies to an uninsured bank or branch, just as the FDIC currently has the authority to waive this prohibition as it applies to insured banks.Restricting the ability of convicted individuals to participate in the affairs of a bank holding company or Edge Act or agreement corporation(Matrix No. 142)Amendment would prohibit a person convicted of a criminal offense involving dishonesty, breach of trust, or money laundering from participating in the affairs of a bank holding company (other than a foreign bank) or an Edge Act or agreement corporation without the consent of the Board. The amendment also would provide the Board with greater discretion to prevent individuals convicted of crimes involving dishonesty or a breach of trust from participating in the affairs of a nonbank subsidiary of a bank holding company.Enhancing the ability of the banking agencies to suspend or remove bad actors(Matrix No. 43 and No. 150)Amendment revises section 8(g) of the FDI Act, which currently allows the appropriate Federal banking agency to suspend a person from participating in the affairs of a depository institution, bank holding company or savings and loan holding company if the person has beenchargedwith the commission of certain crimes involving dishonesty, a breach of trust or money laundering. The amendment would prohibit a person who has been suspended from service at one depository institution, bank holding company or savings and loan holding company from becoming employed by another depository institution or holding company during the length of the suspension order. In addition, the amendment would clarify that a person may be suspended under section 8(g) even if the person was charged with the relevant crime before becoming affiliated with the depository institution or holding company in question.Clarify application of section 8(i) of the FDI Act(Matrix No. 144)Amendment clarifies that a federal banking agency may take enforcement action against a person for conduct that occurred during his or her affiliation with a banking organization regardless of whether the enforcement action is initiated through a notice or an order.Elimination of outdated provisions of the BHC Act(Matrix No. 143)Amendment eliminates certain outdated provisions of the BHC Act that no longer have any effect. Before moving on, I'd like to mention some recent changes that the Board itself has made to its Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement ("Policy Statement") and capital guidelines that we believe should provide significant relief to community banking organizations. The Board adopted the Policy Statement in 1980 to help facilitate the transfer of ownership of small, community-based banks. Currently, the Policy Statement applies to bank holding companies that have consolidated assets of less than $150 million and that meet certain qualitative criteria. These qualitative criteria are designed to ensure that a small bank holding company does not qualify for the Policy Statement if it engages in significant activities outside its supervised bank subsidiaries. Small bank holding companies that qualify for, and operate under, the Policy Statement also are subject to several additional restrictions and conditions that are designed to ensure that they do not present an undue risk to the safety and soundness of their subsidiary banks. Last week, the Board approved an amendment that increases to $500 million the asset size threshold for determining whether a bank holding company may qualify for the Policy Statement and the related exemption from the Board's capital guidelines for bank holding companies. The Board also has proposed to make conforming revisions to its regulatory reporting framework, which should further lower reporting and compliance costs for small bank holding companies. The Board believes these actions properly balance the goals of facilitating the transfer of ownership of small banks, on the one hand, and ensuring capital adequacy and access to necessary supervisory information on the other hand. The Board, however, does not support amendments, like item No. 116 in the Matrix, that potentially would require the Board to raise the asset size threshold in the Policy Statement to $1 billion. Industrial Loan CompaniesAs I noted earlier, the Board strongly supports amendments that would allow depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits and allow banks to open de novo branches on an interstate basis. The Board, however, believes that, because the corporate owners of ILCs operate outside the prudential and legislative framework applicable to the corporate owners of other types of insured banks, ILCs shouldnotbe authorized to offer transaction accounts to business customers or branch de novo across state lines. Our position on these matters is long-standing and based on the broad policy issues presented by the special exemption in current law for ILCs chartered in certain states. ILCs are banks; specifically, they are state-chartered FDIC-insured banks. However, due to a special exemption in the federal BHC Act, any type of company, including a commercial or retail firm, may acquire an ILC in a handful of states--principally Utah, California, and Nevada--and avoid the activity restrictions and consolidated supervisory requirements that apply to bank holding companies. ILCs were first established early in the twentieth century to make small loans to industrial workers. When the special exemption for ILCs initially was granted in 1987, ILCs were still mostly small, local institutions that had only limited deposit-taking and lending powers. For example, in 1987, most ILCs had less than $50 million in assets and the largest ILC had assets of less than $400 million. Moreover, in 1987, the relevant states were not actively chartering new ILCs. Utah, for example, had a moratorium on the chartering of new ILCs at the time the exemption was enacted. However, as the Government Accountability Office (GAO) recently documented, the ILC exemption has been actively exploited in recent years, resulting in a significant change in the character, powers and ownership of ILCs. For example, one ILC operating under the exception now has more than $60billionin assets and more than $52billionin deposits, and an additional nine exempt ILCs each have more than $1 billion in deposits. The aggregate amount of estimated insured deposits held by all ILCs has grown by more than 500 percent since 1999, and the total assets of all ILCs has grown from $3.8 billion in 1987 to $140 billion in 2004. Several large, internationally active commercial companies now own ILCs under this exception and use these banks to support various aspects of their global commercial operations. While only a handful of states have the ability to charter exempt ILCs, there is no limit on the number of exempt ILCs these grandfathered states may charter in the future. In addition, due to the limited restrictions that apply under federal law to the ILCs operating under this exemption, an exempt ILC legally may engage in the full range of commercial, mortgage, credit card and consumer lending activities; offer payment-related services, including Fedwire, automated clearing house (ACH) and check clearing services, to affiliated and unaffiliated persons; and accept time and savings deposits, including certificates of deposit (CDs), from any type of customer. Why does this growth and potential further expansion of ILCs matter? Simply stated, it has the potential to undermine several important policies that Congress has established for the banking system. Let me explain. Congress has established a prudential framework for banking organizations in the United States that is based both on the supervision of insured banksandthe supervision of their corporate owners on a group-wide or consolidated basis. Consolidated supervision refers to the legal framework that provides a supervisor the tools it needs--such as reporting, examination, capital and enforcement authority--to understand, monitor and, when appropriate, restrain the risks associated with an organization's consolidated or group-wide activities. Consolidated supervision of the organizations that control banks not only helps prevent bank failures, it also provides important tools for managing and resolving bank failures if and when they do occur. In fact, following the collapse of Bank of Commerce and Credit International (BCCI), which lacked a single supervisor capable of monitoring its diverse and global activities, Congress amended the BHC Act in 1991 to require that foreign banks demonstrate that they are subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis prior to acquiring a bank in the United States. For a variety of reasons, Congress also has long sought to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce in the United States. This position was reaffirmed by Congress in the Competitive Equality Banking Act of 1987 and again in the GLB Act of 1999. In fact, in each of these acts the Congress took affirmative action to close the main loophole then being used by commercial firms to acquire FDIC-insured depository institutions--the so-called "nonbank bank" loophole in 1987 and the unitary thrift loophole in 1999. ILCs have developed and expanded in recent years outside this framework that governs banking organizations generally. Because of their special exemption in federal law, any type of company may acquire an FDIC-insured ILC that is chartered in certain states without regard to the activity restrictions that Congress has established to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce. The exemption also allows a company to acquire an FDIC-insured bank and avoid the consolidated supervisory framework--including consolidated capital, examination and reporting requirements--that applies to the corporate owners of other full-service insured banks under the BHC Act. In addition, the exemption allows a foreign bank to acquire a U.S. bank engaged in retail banking activities without meeting the requirement under the BHC Act that the foreign bank be subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis in its home country. As insured banks, each ILC is supervised by the FDIC as well as by its chartering state. The Board has never questioned either the need for, or the adequacy of, this supervision of an ILC. However, experience has led Congress to determine that supervision of a full-service insured bank is not sufficient, by itself, to protect the taxpayer and the financial system when the bank operates as part of a larger corporate organization. The FDIC does not have the authority to supervise the corporate owners of ILCs and their affiliates in the same manner that bank holding companies and their nonbank affiliates are supervised under the BHC Act. The GAO recently concluded that, due to these differences in authority, exempt ILCs may pose more risk to the deposit insurance funds than banks operating in a bank holding company structure. The exemption for ILCs in the BHC Act also permits a diversified securities, insurance or financial firm to acquire an FDIC-insured bank without complying with the enhanced capital, managerial and Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) requirements established by Congress in the GLB Act for financial holding companies. In addition, although the USA PATRIOT Act requires the Board to consider the effectiveness of a company's policies in combatting money laundering prior to approving the company's application to acquire a bank, this requirement does not apply to companies that seek to acquire an exempt ILC. Affirmatively granting ILCs the ability to offer transaction accounts to business customers or open de novo branches nationwide would significantly expand the powers of exempt ILCs, increase the attractiveness of the current loophole, and eliminate any vestige of a distinction between ILCs and full-service insured banks. This result would be inconsistent with both the historical functions of ILCs and the terms of their special exemption in current law. These proposals individually and collectively also would exacerbate the competitive advantage that the corporate owners of ILCs have over other banking organizations that operate within the supervisory framework established by Congress. The Board believes that the important principles governing the structure of the nation's banking system--such as the separation of banking and commerce, consolidated supervision, and the supervisory criteria applicable to companies that seek to own or control a bank--should be decided by Congress and, once established, should apply to all organizations that own a bank in a competitively equitable manner. We are concerned that the expansion and exploitation of the ILC exemption is undermining the prudential framework that Congress has carefully crafted and developed for the corporate owners of insured banks. Importantly, these changes also threaten to remove from Congress' hands the ability to determine the direction of our nation's financial system with regard to the mixing of banking and commerce. Congress should not permit the nation's policy on these important issues to be decided for it on a de facto basis through the expansion of a loophole that is available to only one type of institution chartered in a handful of states. Rather than expanding the powers of ILCs that operate under this special exemption in a regulatory relief bill, we believe it is important for Congress separately to conduct a thorough review of the special exemption for ILCs and its potential to change the landscape of our financial system and create an unlevel competitive playing field. ConclusionI appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Board's legislative suggestions and priorities concerning regulatory relief. The Board looks forward to working with the Committee and your staffs in developing and advancing meaningful regulatory relief legislation that is consistent with the nation's public policy objectives. Regulatory Relief Proposals Supported by theBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemThe Board believes the first 20 items listed below would provide meaningful regulatory relief to banking organizations within the jurisdiction of the Federal Reserve. The remaining 16 items would improve the supervision of banking organizations, facilitate the resolution of failed banks, streamline procedural or other requirements under the federal banking laws, or eliminate outdated provisions of law.Authorize the Federal Reserve to pay interest on balances held at Reserve Banks(Matrix No. 1)Amendment gives the Federal Reserve explicit authority to pay interest on balances held by depository institutions at the Federal Reserve Banks.Grant the Board additional flexibility in establishing reserve requirements(Matrix No. 2)Amendment provides the Federal Reserve with greater flexibility to set the ratio of reserves that a depository institution must maintain against its transaction accounts below the current ranges established by the Monetary Control Act of 1980.Authorize depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits(Matrix No. 3)Amendment repeals the provisions in current law that prohibit depository institutions from paying interest on demand deposits. If adopted, the amendment would allow all depository institutions that have the authority to offer demand deposits to pay interest on those deposits.Ease restrictions on interstate branching and mergers in a competitively equitable manner(Amendment provided to Committee in July 2003)Amendment affirmatively authorizes national and state banks to open de novo branches on an interstate basis. Currently, banks may establish de novo branches in a new state only if the state has affirmatively authorized de novo branching. This existing limitation places banks at a disadvantage to federal savings associations, which currently have the ability to branch de novo on an interstate basis. The amendment also would remove a parallel provision that allows states to impose a minimum requirement on the age of banks that may be acquired by an out-of-state banking organization.The amendment would not allow industrial loan companies (ILCs) that operate under a special exemption in federal law to open de novo branches on a nationwide basis. The corporate owners of these ILCs are not subject to the type of consolidated supervision and activities restrictions that generally apply to the corporate owners of other banks insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Granting exempt ILCs nationwide branching rights also would be inconsistent with the terms of their special exemption in federal law.Small Bank Examination Flexibility(Matrix No. 68)Amendment would expand the number of small institutions that may qualify for an eighteen-month (rather than a twelve-month) safety and soundness examination cycle. Under current law, an insured depository institution may qualify for an extended eighteen-month examination cycle only if the institution has less than $250 million in total assets.See12 U.S.C. § 1820(d). The amendment would raise this asset cap to $500 million, thereby potentially allowing approximately an additional 1,200 institutions to qualify for an extended examination cycle.Modification of the cross-marketing restrictions applicable to merchant banking and insurance company investments(Matrix Nos. 139, 171 and 187)Amendment allows the depository institution subsidiaries of a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities with portfolio companies that are held under the merchant banking authority in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act) to the same extent as such activities are currently permissible for portfolio companies held under the GLB Act's insurance company investment authority. The amendment also would allow the depository institution subsidiaries of a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities with a portfolio company held under either the merchant banking or insurance company investment authority if the financial holding company does not control the portfolio company.Permit the Board to grant exceptions to the attribution rule concerning shares held by a trust for the benefit of a bank holding company or its shareholders or employees(Matrix No. 140)The amendment would allow the Board, in appropriate circumstances, to waive the attribution rule in section 2(g)(2) of the Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act). This attribution rule currently provides that, for purposes of the BHC Act, a company is deemed in all circumstances to own or control any shares that are held by a trust (such as an employee benefit plan) for the benefit of the company or its shareholders or employees. The amendment would allow the Board to waive the rule when, for example, the shares in question are held by a 401(k) plan that is widely held by the bank holding company's employees and the facts indicate that the bank holding company does not have the ability to control the shares held by the plan.Allow insured banks to engage in interstate merger transactions with savings associations and trust companies(Matrix No. 138)The amendment would allow an insured bank to directly acquire, by merger, an insured savings association or uninsured trust company in a different home state without first converting the target savings association or trust company into an insured bank. As under current law, the insured bank would have to be the survivor of the merger.a. Restore Board's authority to determine that new activities are "closely related to banking" and permissible for all bank holding companies(Matrix No. 137a)Amendment would restore the Board's ability to determine that nonbanking activities are "closely related to banking" under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act and, thus, permissible for all bank holding companies, including those that have not elected to become financial holding companies. Bank holding companies would still be required to become a financial holding company to engage in the types of expanded activities authorized by the GLB Act--including full-scope securities underwriting, insurance underwriting, and merchant banking activities--as well as any new activities that the Board determines under the GLB Act are "financial in nature," "incidental to a financial activity" or "complementary to a financial activity."b. Allow bank holding companies to engage in insurance agency activities (Alternative to Item 9.a.)(Matrix No. 137b)Alternative amendment would allow all bank holding companies, including those that have not elected to become financial holding companies, to act asagentin the sale of insurance. Currently, bank holding companies that do not become a financial holding company may engage only in very limited insurance sales activities (primarily involving credit-related insurance). However, mostbanksare permitted to sell any type of insurance, either directly or through a subsidiary. The amendment would rectify this imbalance by permitting all bank holding companies to act as agent in the sale of insurance. Insurance agency activities involve less risk than insurance underwriting and other principal activities. Bank holding companies would continue to be required to become a financial holding company to underwrite insurance (other than credit-related insurance).Shorten the post-approval waiting period for bank mergers and acquisitions where the relevant banking agency and the Attorney General agree the transaction will not have adverse competitive effects(Matrix No. 6)Amendment allows the responsible federal banking agency, with the concurrence of the Attorney General, to reduce the post-approval waiting periods under the Bank Merger Act and BHC Act from fifteen days to as few as five days. The amendment wouldnotalter the time period that a private party has to challenge a banking agency's approval of a transaction for reasons related to the Community Reinvestment Act.Repeal certain reporting requirements imposed on the insiders of insured depository institutions(Matrix No. 4)Amendment repeals the provisions of current law that require: (i) an executive officer of a bank to file a report with the bank's board of directors concerning the officer's indebtedness to other banks; (ii) a member bank to file a separate report each quarter concerning any loans made to its executive officers during the quarter; and (iii) executive officers and principal shareholders of a bank to report to the bank's board of directors any loans received from a correspondent bank. The Board has found that these reporting requirements do not contribute significantly to the monitoring of insider lending. These amendments would not alter the statutory limits or conditions imposed on loans by banks to their insiders.Provide an adjustment for the small depository institutions exception under the Depository Institution Management Interlocks Act (DIMIA)(Matrix No. 49)Currently, the DIMIA generally prohibits a management official of one depository institution from serving as a management official of any other non-affiliated depository institution or depository institution holding company if the institutions or an affiliate of such institutions have offices that are located in the same metropolitan statistical area. The statute provides an exception from this restriction for institutions that have less than $20 million in assets, but this dollar figure has not been updated since 1978. The amendment would increase this amount to $100 million.Simplifying dividend calculations for national and state member banks(Matrix No. 31)Amendment would simplify the process for national and state member banks to pay dividends by eliminating the restrictions that currently allow a national bank or state member bank to pay dividends only if the bank's surplus is equal to or greater than its capital account or the bank has transferred at least 10 percent of its recent net income to its surplus fund. The amendment would not alter the other restrictions in current law that ensure that national and state member banks do not pay excessive dividends. For example, national and state member banks would continue to be prohibited from paying any dividend if such action would cause the bank to become undercapitalized.Authorize member banks to use pass-through reserve accounts(Matrix No. 141)Amendment permits banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System to count as reserves their deposits in other banks that are "passed through" by those banks to the Federal Reserve as required reserve balances. Nonmember banks already are able to use such pass-through reserve accounts.Protection of information provided to banking agencies(Matrix No. 100)Amendment allows a depository institution to share information with a federal, state or foreign bank supervisor as part of the supervisory or regulatory process without waiving any privilege the institution may have with respect to the information. The Board strongly supports broadening the amendment to ensure that other persons, including bank holding companies, foreign banks and Edge or agreement corporations, also may provide information to a federal, state or foreign supervisor as part of the supervisory or regulatory process without waiving any privilege they may have with respect to the information.Repeal of CRA Sunshine requirements(Matrix No. 7)The amendment would repeal the so-called "CRA Sunshine" requirements that were adopted as part of the GLB Act in 1999. These provisions require nongovernmental entities or persons and banking organizations that enter into certain agreements that are in fulfillment of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) to (1) make the agreements available to the public and the appropriate banking agency, and (2) file an annual report with the appropriate banking agency concerning any payments made or received pursuant to the agreement.Flood insurance amendments(Matrix No. 65)These amendments would:(a) Allow lenders to rely on information from licensed surveyors to determine whether a property is in a flood zone, if the flood map is more than ten years old;(b) Increase the "small loan" exception to the flood insurance requirements from $5,000 to $20,000 and adjust this amount periodically based on changes in the Consumer Price Index;(c) Reduce the forty-five-day waiting period required after policy expiration before a lender can "force place" flood insurance by fifteen days to coincide with the thirty-day grace period during which flood insurance coverage continues after policy expiration, which would better enable lenders to avoid gaps in coverage on the relevant collateral; and(d) Give the federal banking agencies discretion to impose civil money penalties on institutions found to have engaged in a pattern or practice of violating the flood insurance requirements.Permit credit card banks to make a limited amount of community development loans for CRA purposes(Matrix No. 179) (Support with Minor Modifications)The amendment would allow a limited-purpose credit card bank--without losing its exemption under the BHC Act--to make and purchase loans that help meet the credit needs of low- and moderate-income persons and neighborhoods or promote economic development by financing small businesses or farms. The aggregate amount of these non-credit card loans could not exceed 5 percent of the bank's capital and surplus.The Board supports this amendment subject to a slight modification. The modification is designed to ensure that any non-credit card loans made by a credit card bank under the amendment are made for eligible community development purposes. Because credit card banks are evaluated for CRA purposes under a special community development test, there is no need to allow them to make non-credit card loans for CRA purposes unless those loans would qualify as community development loans under the CRA.Periodic interagency review of Call Reports(Matrix No. 109)Amendment requires that the federal banking agencies jointly review the Call Report forms at least once every five years to determine if some of the information required by the reports may be eliminated. The federal banking agencies would retain their current authority to determine what information must be included in the Call Reports filed by the institutions under their primary supervision.Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFT Act) notifications(Matrix No. 115, first bullet)Amendment would increase, from 21 days to 30 days, the amount of advance notice an institution must give to a consumer under the EFT Act before the effective date of any changes in the terms of the consumer's account. The amendment would conform the timing provisions of the EFT Act regarding notices of a change in account terms with the similar provisions in the Truth in Savings Act.Technical and conforming amendments related to D.C.-chartered banks(Matrix No. 164)The amendment would make technical and conforming amendments to the federal banking laws to ensure that banks chartered by the District of Columbia are treated as "state" banks consistent with the purposes of the 2004 District of Columbia Omnibus Authorization Act.Electronic Records(Matrix No. 161)This amendment would allow each federal banking agency to preserve the agency's records in electronic or photographic form and determine when such electronic or photographic records may be destroyed. In addition, the amendment would provide that any record maintained electronically or photographically by a federal banking agency in accordance with the agency's regulations shall be considered an original record for all purposes, including submission into evidence in a judicial or administrative proceeding.Ensure protection of confidential information received from foreign supervisory authorities(Matrix No. 46)Amendment ensures that a federal banking agency may keep confidential information received from a foreign regulatory or supervisory authority if public disclosure of the information would violate the laws of the foreign country, and the banking agency obtained the information in connection with the administration and enforcement of federal banking laws or under a memorandum of understanding between the authority and the agency. The amendment would not authorize an agency to withhold information from Congress or in response to a court order in an action brought by the United States or the agency.Eliminate requirement that the reviewing agency request a competitive factors report from the other banking agencies in Bank Merger Act transactions(Matrix Nos. 5 and 69)Amendment would eliminate the requirement that the reviewing agency request a competitive factors report from the other banking agencies on Bank Merger Act transactions. The reviewing agency would, however, continue to be required to (i) conduct a competitive analysis of the proposed merger, and (ii) request a competitive factors report from the Attorney General and provide a copy of this request to the FDIC (when the FDIC is not the reviewing agency).Streamline Bank Merger Act procedural requirements for transactions involving entities that are already under common control(Matrix No. 61)The amendment eliminates the need for the reviewing agency for a bank merger involving affiliated entities to request a report on the competitive factors associated with the transaction from the other banking agencies and the Attorney General. The amendment also would eliminate the post-approval waiting period for Bank Merger Act transactions involving affiliated entities. The merger of depository institutions that already are under common control typically does not have any impact on competition.Repeal requirement that the Board approve removal actions brought by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)(Matrix No. 32)Amendment repeals the requirement that the Board approve removal actions brought by the OCC against institution-affiliated parties of a national bank.Clarify and confirm the ability of the banking agencies to enforce conditions imposed in Change in Bank Control ("CIBC") Act Notices(Matrix No. 147)Amendment confirms the existing authority of a federal banking agency to enforce a written condition imposed on a depository institution or an institution-affiliated party in connection with a notice filed under the CIBC Act.Expand factors that the banking agencies may consider in evaluating CIBC Act notices(Matrix No. 40 and No. 146)Amendment expands the factors the federal banking agencies may consider in determining whether to disapprove a notice under the CIBC Act to include the financial condition and future prospects of the depository institution involved in the transaction. The amendment also would allow the agencies to extend the time period for processing CIBC Act notice (up to an additional 90 days) if the agency determined that additional time is needed to analyze any plans the notificant may have to make major changes in the business, corporate structure, or management of the institution.Enforcing conditions imposed by another banking agency(Matrix No. 148)Amendment would allow the appropriate federal banking agency for a depository institution, bank holding company or savings and loan holding company to enforce a written condition imposed on the institution or company by another federal banking agency. This would allow, for example, the Board (as the appropriate agency for a state member bank) to enforce a condition imposed on a state member bank by the FDIC in connection with the bank's application for deposit insurance.The Board supports the amendment subject to a minor modification. The modification is designed to clarify that, regardless of what agency imposes a condition on a depository institution or holding company, only the appropriate federal banking agency for the depository institution or holding company has the authority to enforce the condition against the depository institution or holding company. (As under current law, the FDIC would retain its "back-up" authority under section 8(t) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (FDI Act) to take action against an insured depository institution if certain conditions are met.)Eliminate the special treatment of holding companies that control only ILCs and credit card banks under the cross-guarantee and "golden parachute" provisions of the FDI Act(Matrix Nos. 151 and 152)Amendment would modify the cross-guarantee provisions of the FDI Act (12 U.S.C. § 1815(e)) to cover insured depository institutions whenever they are controlled by the same company and even if the parent company is not a bank holding company or a savings and loan holding company. In addition, the amendment would modify the "golden parachute" provisions of the FDI Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(k)) to cover a company that owns an insured depository institution, but that is not a bank holding company or savings and loan holding company. Currently, these provisions do not apply to a company that owns one or more ILCs or credit card banks, but that is not otherwise a bank holding company or savings and loan holding company.While the Board supports these limited changes, the Board notes that these amendments wouldnotalter the much more significant exemption for ILCs from the definition of "bank" in the BHC Act. The exemption for certain ILCs in the BHC Act permits a company to own an FDIC-insured ILC and avoid the activity restrictions and consolidated supervisory requirements that generally apply to the corporate owners of other insured banks.Contractual arrangements with a failed bank(Matrix No. 155)Amendment would prohibit a party, for 90 days after the FDIC is appointed receiver or conservator for an insured depository institution, from exercising any contractual right the party may have to terminate, accelerate or declare a default under a contract with the failed institution, or obtain possession of collateral pledged under such a contract, unless the FDIC consented to the action.Barring convicted felons from participating in the affairs of an uninsured depository institution(Matrix No. 38)Amendment extends touninsurednational banks, state member banks and U.S. branches of a foreign bank the provisions of section 19 of the FDI Act, which automatically prohibits a person that has been convicted of a criminal offense involving dishonesty, a breach of trust or money laundering from participating in the affairs of an insured depository institutions. The amendment also would allow the OCC or Board, as appropriate, to waive this prohibition as it applies to an uninsured bank or branch, just as the FDIC currently has the authority to waive this prohibition as it applies to insured banks.Restricting the ability of convicted individuals to participate in the affairs of a bank holding company or Edge Act or agreement corporation(Matrix No. 142)Amendment would prohibit a person convicted of a criminal offense involving dishonesty, breach of trust, or money laundering from participating in the affairs of a bank holding company (other than a foreign bank) or an Edge Act or agreement corporation without the consent of the Board. The amendment also would provide the Board with greater discretion to prevent individuals convicted of crimes involving dishonesty or a breach of trust from participating in the affairs of a nonbank subsidiary of a bank holding company.Enhancing the ability of the banking agencies to suspend or remove bad actors(Matrix No. 43 and No. 150)Amendment revises section 8(g) of the FDI Act, which currently allows the appropriate Federal banking agency to suspend a person from participating in the affairs of a depository institution, bank holding company or savings and loan holding company if the person has beenchargedwith the commission of certain crimes involving dishonesty, a breach of trust or money laundering. The amendment would prohibit a person who has been suspended from service at one depository institution, bank holding company or savings and loan holding company from becoming employed by another depository institution or holding company during the length of the suspension order. In addition, the amendment would clarify that a person may be suspended under section 8(g) even if the person was charged with the relevant crime before becoming affiliated with the depository institution or holding company in question.Clarify application of section 8(i) of the FDI Act(Matrix No. 144)Amendment clarifies that a federal banking agency may take enforcement action against a person for conduct that occurred during his or her affiliation with a banking organization regardless of whether the enforcement action is initiated through a notice or an order.Elimination of outdated provisions of the BHC Act(Matrix No. 143)Amendment eliminates certain outdated provisions of the BHC Act that no longer have any effect. The Board believes the first 20 items listed below would provide meaningful regulatory relief to banking organizations within the jurisdiction of the Federal Reserve. The remaining 16 items would improve the supervision of banking organizations, facilitate the resolution of failed banks, streamline procedural or other requirements under the federal banking laws, or eliminate outdated provisions of law. Amendment gives the Federal Reserve explicit authority to pay interest on balances held by depository institutions at the Federal Reserve Banks. Amendment provides the Federal Reserve with greater flexibility to set the ratio of reserves that a depository institution must maintain against its transaction accounts below the current ranges established by the Monetary Control Act of 1980. Amendment repeals the provisions in current law that prohibit depository institutions from paying interest on demand deposits. If adopted, the amendment would allow all depository institutions that have the authority to offer demand deposits to pay interest on those deposits. Amendment affirmatively authorizes national and state banks to open de novo branches on an interstate basis. Currently, banks may establish de novo branches in a new state only if the state has affirmatively authorized de novo branching. This existing limitation places banks at a disadvantage to federal savings associations, which currently have the ability to branch de novo on an interstate basis. The amendment also would remove a parallel provision that allows states to impose a minimum requirement on the age of banks that may be acquired by an out-of-state banking organization. The amendment would not allow industrial loan companies (ILCs) that operate under a special exemption in federal law to open de novo branches on a nationwide basis. The corporate owners of these ILCs are not subject to the type of consolidated supervision and activities restrictions that generally apply to the corporate owners of other banks insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Granting exempt ILCs nationwide branching rights also would be inconsistent with the terms of their special exemption in federal law. Amendment would expand the number of small institutions that may qualify for an eighteen-month (rather than a twelve-month) safety and soundness examination cycle. Under current law, an insured depository institution may qualify for an extended eighteen-month examination cycle only if the institution has less than $250 million in total assets.See12 U.S.C. § 1820(d). The amendment would raise this asset cap to $500 million, thereby potentially allowing approximately an additional 1,200 institutions to qualify for an extended examination cycle. Amendment allows the depository institution subsidiaries of a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities with portfolio companies that are held under the merchant banking authority in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act) to the same extent as such activities are currently permissible for portfolio companies held under the GLB Act's insurance company investment authority. The amendment also would allow the depository institution subsidiaries of a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities with a portfolio company held under either the merchant banking or insurance company investment authority if the financial holding company does not control the portfolio company. The amendment would allow the Board, in appropriate circumstances, to waive the attribution rule in section 2(g)(2) of the Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act). This attribution rule currently provides that, for purposes of the BHC Act, a company is deemed in all circumstances to own or control any shares that are held by a trust (such as an employee benefit plan) for the benefit of the company or its shareholders or employees. The amendment would allow the Board to waive the rule when, for example, the shares in question are held by a 401(k) plan that is widely held by the bank holding company's employees and the facts indicate that the bank holding company does not have the ability to control the shares held by the plan. The amendment would allow an insured bank to directly acquire, by merger, an insured savings association or uninsured trust company in a different home state without first converting the target savings association or trust company into an insured bank. As under current law, the insured bank would have to be the survivor of the merger. Amendment would restore the Board's ability to determine that nonbanking activities are "closely related to banking" under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act and, thus, permissible for all bank holding companies, including those that have not elected to become financial holding companies. Bank holding companies would still be required to become a financial holding company to engage in the types of expanded activities authorized by the GLB Act--including full-scope securities underwriting, insurance underwriting, and merchant banking activities--as well as any new activities that the Board determines under the GLB Act are "financial in nature," "incidental to a financial activity" or "complementary to a financial activity." Alternative amendment would allow all bank holding companies, including those that have not elected to become financial holding companies, to act asagentin the sale of insurance. Currently, bank holding companies that do not become a financial holding company may engage only in very limited insurance sales activities (primarily involving credit-related insurance). However, mostbanksare permitted to sell any type of insurance, either directly or through a subsidiary. The amendment would rectify this imbalance by permitting all bank holding companies to act as agent in the sale of insurance. Insurance agency activities involve less risk than insurance underwriting and other principal activities. Bank holding companies would continue to be required to become a financial holding company to underwrite insurance (other than credit-related insurance). Amendment allows the responsible federal banking agency, with the concurrence of the Attorney General, to reduce the post-approval waiting periods under the Bank Merger Act and BHC Act from fifteen days to as few as five days. The amendment wouldnotalter the time period that a private party has to challenge a banking agency's approval of a transaction for reasons related to the Community Reinvestment Act. Amendment repeals the provisions of current law that require: (i) an executive officer of a bank to file a report with the bank's board of directors concerning the officer's indebtedness to other banks; (ii) a member bank to file a separate report each quarter concerning any loans made to its executive officers during the quarter; and (iii) executive officers and principal shareholders of a bank to report to the bank's board of directors any loans received from a correspondent bank. The Board has found that these reporting requirements do not contribute significantly to the monitoring of insider lending. These amendments would not alter the statutory limits or conditions imposed on loans by banks to their insiders. Currently, the DIMIA generally prohibits a management official of one depository institution from serving as a management official of any other non-affiliated depository institution or depository institution holding company if the institutions or an affiliate of such institutions have offices that are located in the same metropolitan statistical area. The statute provides an exception from this restriction for institutions that have less than $20 million in assets, but this dollar figure has not been updated since 1978. The amendment would increase this amount to $100 million. Amendment would simplify the process for national and state member banks to pay dividends by eliminating the restrictions that currently allow a national bank or state member bank to pay dividends only if the bank's surplus is equal to or greater than its capital account or the bank has transferred at least 10 percent of its recent net income to its surplus fund. The amendment would not alter the other restrictions in current law that ensure that national and state member banks do not pay excessive dividends. For example, national and state member banks would continue to be prohibited from paying any dividend if such action would cause the bank to become undercapitalized. Amendment permits banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System to count as reserves their deposits in other banks that are "passed through" by those banks to the Federal Reserve as required reserve balances. Nonmember banks already are able to use such pass-through reserve accounts. Amendment allows a depository institution to share information with a federal, state or foreign bank supervisor as part of the supervisory or regulatory process without waiving any privilege the institution may have with respect to the information. The Board strongly supports broadening the amendment to ensure that other persons, including bank holding companies, foreign banks and Edge or agreement corporations, also may provide information to a federal, state or foreign supervisor as part of the supervisory or regulatory process without waiving any privilege they may have with respect to the information. The amendment would repeal the so-called "CRA Sunshine" requirements that were adopted as part of the GLB Act in 1999. These provisions require nongovernmental entities or persons and banking organizations that enter into certain agreements that are in fulfillment of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) to (1) make the agreements available to the public and the appropriate banking agency, and (2) file an annual report with the appropriate banking agency concerning any payments made or received pursuant to the agreement. These amendments would: (a) Allow lenders to rely on information from licensed surveyors to determine whether a property is in a flood zone, if the flood map is more than ten years old; (b) Increase the "small loan" exception to the flood insurance requirements from $5,000 to $20,000 and adjust this amount periodically based on changes in the Consumer Price Index; (c) Reduce the forty-five-day waiting period required after policy expiration before a lender can "force place" flood insurance by fifteen days to coincide with the thirty-day grace period during which flood insurance coverage continues after policy expiration, which would better enable lenders to avoid gaps in coverage on the relevant collateral; and (d) Give the federal banking agencies discretion to impose civil money penalties on institutions found to have engaged in a pattern or practice of violating the flood insurance requirements. The amendment would allow a limited-purpose credit card bank--without losing its exemption under the BHC Act--to make and purchase loans that help meet the credit needs of low- and moderate-income persons and neighborhoods or promote economic development by financing small businesses or farms. The aggregate amount of these non-credit card loans could not exceed 5 percent of the bank's capital and surplus. The Board supports this amendment subject to a slight modification. The modification is designed to ensure that any non-credit card loans made by a credit card bank under the amendment are made for eligible community development purposes. Because credit card banks are evaluated for CRA purposes under a special community development test, there is no need to allow them to make non-credit card loans for CRA purposes unless those loans would qualify as community development loans under the CRA. Amendment requires that the federal banking agencies jointly review the Call Report forms at least once every five years to determine if some of the information required by the reports may be eliminated. The federal banking agencies would retain their current authority to determine what information must be included in the Call Reports filed by the institutions under their primary supervision. Amendment would increase, from 21 days to 30 days, the amount of advance notice an institution must give to a consumer under the EFT Act before the effective date of any changes in the terms of the consumer's account. The amendment would conform the timing provisions of the EFT Act regarding notices of a change in account terms with the similar provisions in the Truth in Savings Act. The amendment would make technical and conforming amendments to the federal banking laws to ensure that banks chartered by the District of Columbia are treated as "state" banks consistent with the purposes of the 2004 District of Columbia Omnibus Authorization Act. This amendment would allow each federal banking agency to preserve the agency's records in electronic or photographic form and determine when such electronic or photographic records may be destroyed. In addition, the amendment would provide that any record maintained electronically or photographically by a federal banking agency in accordance with the agency's regulations shall be considered an original record for all purposes, including submission into evidence in a judicial or administrative proceeding. Amendment ensures that a federal banking agency may keep confidential information received from a foreign regulatory or supervisory authority if public disclosure of the information would violate the laws of the foreign country, and the banking agency obtained the information in connection with the administration and enforcement of federal banking laws or under a memorandum of understanding between the authority and the agency. The amendment would not authorize an agency to withhold information from Congress or in response to a court order in an action brought by the United States or the agency. Amendment would eliminate the requirement that the reviewing agency request a competitive factors report from the other banking agencies on Bank Merger Act transactions. The reviewing agency would, however, continue to be required to (i) conduct a competitive analysis of the proposed merger, and (ii) request a competitive factors report from the Attorney General and provide a copy of this request to the FDIC (when the FDIC is not the reviewing agency). The amendment eliminates the need for the reviewing agency for a bank merger involving affiliated entities to request a report on the competitive factors associated with the transaction from the other banking agencies and the Attorney General. The amendment also would eliminate the post-approval waiting period for Bank Merger Act transactions involving affiliated entities. The merger of depository institutions that already are under common control typically does not have any impact on competition. Amendment repeals the requirement that the Board approve removal actions brought by the OCC against institution-affiliated parties of a national bank. Amendment confirms the existing authority of a federal banking agency to enforce a written condition imposed on a depository institution or an institution-affiliated party in connection with a notice filed under the CIBC Act. Amendment expands the factors the federal banking agencies may consider in determining whether to disapprove a notice under the CIBC Act to include the financial condition and future prospects of the depository institution involved in the transaction. The amendment also would allow the agencies to extend the time period for processing CIBC Act notice (up to an additional 90 days) if the agency determined that additional time is needed to analyze any plans the notificant may have to make major changes in the business, corporate structure, or management of the institution. Amendment would allow the appropriate federal banking agency for a depository institution, bank holding company or savings and loan holding company to enforce a written condition imposed on the institution or company by another federal banking agency. This would allow, for example, the Board (as the appropriate agency for a state member bank) to enforce a condition imposed on a state member bank by the FDIC in connection with the bank's application for deposit insurance. The Board supports the amendment subject to a minor modification. The modification is designed to clarify that, regardless of what agency imposes a condition on a depository institution or holding company, only the appropriate federal banking agency for the depository institution or holding company has the authority to enforce the condition against the depository institution or holding company. (As under current law, the FDIC would retain its "back-up" authority under section 8(t) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (FDI Act) to take action against an insured depository institution if certain conditions are met.) Amendment would modify the cross-guarantee provisions of the FDI Act (12 U.S.C. § 1815(e)) to cover insured depository institutions whenever they are controlled by the same company and even if the parent company is not a bank holding company or a savings and loan holding company. In addition, the amendment would modify the "golden parachute" provisions of the FDI Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(k)) to cover a company that owns an insured depository institution, but that is not a bank holding company or savings and loan holding company. Currently, these provisions do not apply to a company that owns one or more ILCs or credit card banks, but that is not otherwise a bank holding company or savings and loan holding company. While the Board supports these limited changes, the Board notes that these amendments wouldnotalter the much more significant exemption for ILCs from the definition of "bank" in the BHC Act. The exemption for certain ILCs in the BHC Act permits a company to own an FDIC-insured ILC and avoid the activity restrictions and consolidated supervisory requirements that generally apply to the corporate owners of other insured banks. Amendment would prohibit a party, for 90 days after the FDIC is appointed receiver or conservator for an insured depository institution, from exercising any contractual right the party may have to terminate, accelerate or declare a default under a contract with the failed institution, or obtain possession of collateral pledged under such a contract, unless the FDIC consented to the action. Amendment extends touninsurednational banks, state member banks and U.S. branches of a foreign bank the provisions of section 19 of the FDI Act, which automatically prohibits a person that has been convicted of a criminal offense involving dishonesty, a breach of trust or money laundering from participating in the affairs of an insured depository institutions. The amendment also would allow the OCC or Board, as appropriate, to waive this prohibition as it applies to an uninsured bank or branch, just as the FDIC currently has the authority to waive this prohibition as it applies to insured banks. Amendment would prohibit a person convicted of a criminal offense involving dishonesty, breach of trust, or money laundering from participating in the affairs of a bank holding company (other than a foreign bank) or an Edge Act or agreement corporation without the consent of the Board. The amendment also would provide the Board with greater discretion to prevent individuals convicted of crimes involving dishonesty or a breach of trust from participating in the affairs of a nonbank subsidiary of a bank holding company. Amendment revises section 8(g) of the FDI Act, which currently allows the appropriate Federal banking agency to suspend a person from participating in the affairs of a depository institution, bank holding company or savings and loan holding company if the person has beenchargedwith the commission of certain crimes involving dishonesty, a breach of trust or money laundering. The amendment would prohibit a person who has been suspended from service at one depository institution, bank holding company or savings and loan holding company from becoming employed by another depository institution or holding company during the length of the suspension order. In addition, the amendment would clarify that a person may be suspended under section 8(g) even if the person was charged with the relevant crime before becoming affiliated with the depository institution or holding company in question. Amendment clarifies that a federal banking agency may take enforcement action against a person for conduct that occurred during his or her affiliation with a banking organization regardless of whether the enforcement action is initiated through a notice or an order. Amendment eliminates certain outdated provisions of the BHC Act that no longer have any effect.
Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. To the Financial Stability Forum, International Accounting Standards Board, and International Federation of Accountants Roundtable on Financial Reporting and Auditing, Paris, France (via videoconference on February 16) It is a pleasure to join you for this joint Roundtable on Financial Reporting and Auditing. As chairman of the Financial Stability Forum, I would like to express my appreciation to all of you that are participating in this roundtable as distinguished speakers or in other roles. In addition, I appreciate the very good partnership that we have had with the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and International Federation of Accountants (IFAC)), and with our host, the World Bank, in preparing for this gathering. Since our last joint Roundtable in October 2004, much has transpired in the international accounting and auditing arenas. Indeed, 2005 was a very big implementation year for international standards around the world. The topics of this Roundtable--dealing with the experience of implementing IASB and IFAC standards and related regulatory challenges, international convergence and harmonization, issues associated with using fair values in the financial reporting model, and risks and vulnerabilities arising from the financial reporting chain--all reflect the interconnectedness of accounting, auditing, and regulation and the need to consider these issues from the unique perspectives that all of you bring to the table. It is very important that this type of constructive dialogue continues to take place among the many key stakeholders in the financial reporting chain. The focus of the roundtable--international financial reporting and auditing--continues to gain increased attention from members of the international regulatory community such as the Financial Stability Forum, the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), and the Basel Committee as well as from national supervisors, standards setters, banks, investors, analysts, auditors, and many others. As we all know, in recent years, accounting and auditing scandals and other developments have found their way onto the front pages of your daily newspapers in ways rarely seen before. These challenging developments have led to a new resolve on the part of governmental, regulatory, and business leaders that there must be a reinforcement and improvement of standards-setting processes and a return to sound accounting, auditing, and disclosure practices by companies and their auditors. The unprecedented problems of a few years ago fueled efforts to help restore investor confidence in U.S. and European capital markets through legislative reforms affecting both the accounting profession and corporate management and directors. For example, these efforts led to, for example, the enactment of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in the United States which set the stage for a new audit oversight authority--the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board--to regulate, inspect, report on, and in some cases enforce penalties against auditors and led to new requirements for corporate management to maintain strong internal controls and to make periodic public reports on the adequacy of their companies' internal controls. In the European Union, the Eighth Directive and other initiatives were undertaken in recognition of the important role of audit oversight authorities. These initiatives seek to strengthen accounting standards, internal controls, and transparency. But long before these legislative initiatives were being considered, steps were taken to establish independent international standards-setting frameworks for both accounting and auditing standards, as reflected by the creation of the IASB in 2001 and the IFAC International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (or IAASB). Both of these standards-setting processes have been reviewed and enhanced over time and continue to be subject to improvements. In his keynote speech earlier today, Michel Prada shared with you IOSCO's initiatives to address international accounting and auditing issues. It is clear that IOSCO has played a very important role in these arenas for many years. Likewise, central banks and banking supervisors have taken steps to enhance their focus on accounting and auditing matters that affect institutions they supervise. During the mid-1990s, the Basel Committee started to devote more resources to developing principles that would help shape and improve bank disclosure, supervisory reporting, and accounting practices. Moreover, the committee recognized that it was also important to support high-quality standards-setting processes. With the formation of the Accounting Task Force by the Basel Committee in 1997, the Basel Committee began to participate more actively in processes for setting accounting and auditing standards. This participation led to the development of enhanced accounting guidance on financial instruments and more comprehensive bank audit guidance. The IAIS has also shown a strong interest in the development of sound international accounting and auditing standards, as evidenced by its participation in the IASB's Insurance Working Group and the recent Group of Thirty (G-30) effort to enhance the transparency of reinsurance activities. All of these positive efforts by regulators and supervisors reflect a growing recognition that sound accounting policies and meaningful public disclosure by banking and other financial organizations and by nonbanking companies can improve market discipline. With sufficient, accurate, and relevant information, market participants can better evaluate counterparty risks and adjust the availability and pricing of funds to promote better allocation of financial resources. Thus, more-effective market discipline can, in a sense, "regulate" the risk-taking activities of banks and other firms in ways that can complement supervision and regulation of financial institutions and foster stable financial markets. The concept of market discipline has assumed greater importance among international banking supervisors with the publication of the new International Capital Framework, called Basel II, which seeks to strengthen the market's ability to aid bank supervisors in regulating capital adequacy. As you know, in addition to pillars on risk-based capital requirements (pillar 1) and risk-based supervision (pillar 2), Basel II includes the very important pillar 3, which addresses disclosure of risks and capital adequacy to enhance market discipline. This approach to capital regulation, with its market-discipline component, signals that sound accounting and disclosure will continue to be important parts of the global bank supervisory approach for many years to come. In addition to disclosure and market discipline, supervisors and regulators around the world recognize the need for stronger audit and control standards for financial services firms and other companies. The quality of management information and supervisory and financial reporting is dramatically affected by internal control systems, including internal audit programs and reviews by external auditors. Sound supervisory and financial reporting, good internal controls, and quality audits are becoming more important to financial services regulators because they directly affect regulators' ability to promptly identify institutions in distress and work toward a satisfactory resolution. This shared understanding of the importance of sound audit and control practices led to an unprecedented level of cooperation among the international regulatory community--in this case, IOSCO, the Basel Committee, the IAIS, the European Commission (EC), the World Bank, and the Financial Stability Forum, which came to be known as the Monitoring Group. Working together, they were able to develop a common position on reforms. This common position served as a basis for dialogue with the leadership of IFAC about establishing a credible independent oversight authority to help enhance the integrity and objectivity of the IAASB's international audit-standards-setting processes. This led to the creation of the new Public Interest Oversight Board of IFAC, which is now busy assuming its new responsibilities. The Public Interest Oversight Board (PIOB) should, over time, lead to enhanced audit standards and practices around the world. The Financial Stability Forum is pleased to have been a strong supporter of this initiative, and I am happy to see that the PIOB is represented at this roundtable today together with the leaders of IFAC and many Monitoring Group representatives. The Financial Stability Forum has taken a close interest in national and international efforts to strengthen confidence in financial reporting frameworks. Stronger and more-convergent national systems bring clear financial stability and efficiency benefits. The forum's efforts have included a focus on the global-standards-setting activities of the IASB on the accounting side and the IAASB on the auditing side. The goal of global standards in both areas will require a high degree of convergence between U.S. and international standards, and efforts toward full commonality are well underway. The forum's interest reflects the strong recognition of its members that the potential financial stability and efficiency benefits are significant: high-quality global accounting standards can lead to enhanced transparency that will improve market discipline and foster stable financial markets. Likewise, external audits performed in accordance with high-quality global audit standards can ensure that financial statements are reliable, transparent, and useful to the marketplace, thus enhancing market confidence. I am sure that we all want to see, over time, a restoration of public confidence in the quality of financial reporting and auditing, and I hope that dialogue--such as that taking place at this roundtable--and the initiatives of standards setters, can lead to standards that are fully understandable to preparers, users, and auditors; that avoid undue complexity and implementation costs; and that truly contribute to transparency. Let me also stress the need to continue to implement approaches that not only improve international accounting and audit standards, but also encourage, through the implementation and enforcement of these standards, an enhancement in actual international accounting and audit practices. However, like any professional undertaking, developing accounting and auditing standards and practices can be complicated, and gaining a shared understanding of the implications for the financial reporting chain and for financial stability can take time. Therefore, I am pleased to see that the Financial Stability Forum, the IASB, and IFAC conducted this roundtable on important financial reporting and auditing matters and that you are taking the time to contribute to the exchange of valuable information on key issues. I hope that this roundtable will continue to foster constructive dialogue among the many key stakeholders represented here and that this type of dialogue will continue after the roundtable has ended.
Federal regulators today releasedEvolution of a Prototype Financial Privacy Notice, a report by Kleimann Communication Group summarizing consumer research commissioned by the regulators as part of their ongoing efforts to develop improved financial privacy notices. The report's release concludes the first phase of an interagency project by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Trade Commission, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission to explore alternatives for financial privacy notices that would be easier for consumers to read, understand, and use than many of the notices consumers currently receive from financial institutions. These six agencies were among those that jointly issued regulations in 2000 implementing the financial privacy provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, but survey data indicate that many consumers neither read nor understand the notices financial institutions provide under those regulations. The report's findings indicate that it is possible for financial privacy notices to include all of the information required by law in a short document that consumers can readily understand. The report fully describes the extensive research that underlies these findings and the development of a prototype simplified privacy notice. Over a 12-month period, researchers conducted focus groups and in-depth individual interviews with consumers throughout the United States. Based on consumers' reactions to sample privacy notices, the researchers modified content and design to create notices in a tabular format that improved consumers' ability to read, understand, and use the notices, as well as to compare the information sharing practices of different financial institutions. The report concludes that consumers need a context for understanding information in financial privacy notices. The research shows that while there is a general awareness of information sharing practices, most consumers do not understand them. According to the report, consumers are overwhelmed by complex information, and simplification of financial privacy notices enhances consumers' ability to read the notices and make informed choices about the use of their personal information. The research also demonstrates that consumers more easily understand the important information in the notice when good design reinforces the content. The six agencies, together with the Office of Thrift Supervision, will fund a second phase of the project, to be contracted separately. This research will involve interviewing a much larger group of consumers throughout the United States to measure the effectiveness of the prototype and other examples of notices. The agencies have deferred consideration of policy action with respect to financial privacy notices until the next phase of consumer testing is completed. At that time, the agencies expect to consider a full range of options for improving financial privacy notices in light of all their consumer research. The agencies' efforts to improve these notices complement efforts to improve the effectiveness of privacy notices worldwide, as well as other government efforts to improve financial literacy.
Rich Spillenkothen, the director of the Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, will retire on June 30 after thirty years of service with the Federal Reserve Board, including nearly fifteen years as the director of the division. "Rich has led the Board’s supervision program during periods of unparalleled growth, innovation, deregulation, and consolidation in the American banking system, as well as through a number of financial system and banking shocks,” said Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. “During Rich’s tenure, the Federal Reserve’s approach to banking supervision has evolved significantly. His leadership in the supervision of risk management and capital adequacy form a sound basis for the future work of financial supervisors everywhere." Mr. Spillenkothen is the senior Federal Reserve Board official with responsibility for banking supervision and regulation. He serves on the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and is the chairman of the Association of Supervisors of Banks of the Americas. He also represents the Federal Reserve on domestic interagency policy and coordination committees, including the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council’s Supervision Task Force. Mr. Spillenkothen joined the Federal Reserve in 1976 in the Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation and held various other management positions in the Division prior to being appointed the director in 1991. Mr. Spillenkothen played a leading role in the Federal Reserve’s efforts to strengthen and modernize its approach to banking supervision. In particular, Mr. Spillenkothen was a leader in international efforts to harmonize prudential standards and in the promotion of enhanced capital assessments and risk management at the largest, most complex financial organizations.
Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the OpRisk USA 2006 Conference, New York, New York I would like to thank the sponsors of OpRisk USA for providing an opportunity for bankers, regulators, consultants, and other interested parties to share their perspectives on operational-risk management. Today, I will speak about the importance of risk management and its relationship to capital. I will also touch on the broad objectives of effective operational-risk management and offer specific observations on some of the challenges of operational-risk quantification. In addition, I will describe the current status of the Basel II process. Importance of Risk ManagementOver the past several decades, we have witnessed substantial changes in the U.S. banking industry, particularly at our largest institutions. These very large entities have broad geographic reach, operate in many lines of business, and offer a wide array of complex products and services. The largest institutions have moved away from the traditional banking strategy of holding assets on the balance sheet and have adopted strategies that emphasize redistribution of assets and active management of risks. The risk-management techniques employed by banking organizations continue to improve and adapt to the ever-changing financial landscape. The Federal Reserve, in its role as both a bank supervisor and the nation's central bank, has an obvious interest in maintaining the stability of the banking industry and the financial system as a whole. We, along with our counterparts at the other U.S. bank and thrift regulatory agencies, are responsible for ensuring that banking institutions operate in a safe and sound manner and have strong capital levels. But with the advent of very large banking organizations that engage in a wide variety of business activities--some of them quite complex--the Federal Reserve has become even more interested in ensuring that banking organizations understand the risks of these activities. For their part, bankers continue to improve the risk-management and risk-measurement processes at their institutions, and regulators have supported these efforts. Banks themselves have created many of the new techniques to improve their risk management and internal economic capital measures in order to be more effective competitors and to control and manage their losses. By more clearly defining risk exposures and identifying the causes of and controls for their losses, bank management can more effectively integrate decisions about risk-taking into their strategic and tactical decisionmaking. Banks that integrate risk measurement into their business-line goals often find that this effort helps them to implement their strategic plans more effectively. Ideally, an institution should use a systematic approach to identify and measure its risk exposures; however, even the best processes for evaluating and measuring risk suffer if flawed data are used. To conduct a credible internal analysis of relevant risks, institutions should identify which risks can generally be quantified and which ones cannot. When risk measurements are based on scarce or incomplete data, or on unproven quantitative tools, institutions might need to use sensitivity analyses, stress tests, or scenario analyses to a greater extent in order to develop meaningful risk measures. Banks that wish to remain competitive must keep up with the latest developments in risk measurement and management. Bankers must ensure that their models keep up with current practice and continue to capture risks accurately, especially as new activities and new products are introduced. Similarly, the supervisory community needs to keep up with developments in banking and finance. We consider this vitally important because banking is and will remain a highly dynamic industry. Supervisors will have to pay attention to evolving sound practices and ensure that new regulations do not unduly inhibit banks from adopting new banking practices and financial instruments. Our focus on balancing developments in the industry with safe and sound operations at institutions is increasingly important, given the growing complexity, sophistication, and concentration of today's banking system. And with the advent of Basel II, which is intended to update capital rules for large, internationally active U.S. banking organizations, supervisors must become even more involved in understanding emerging sound practices in risk measurement and management. One of the most important sound practices for a banking organization is the tying of risk exposures to capital. Banks that use similar risk models can have very different risk exposures. That is why the Basel II approach to capital is so important. Basel II provides a framework in which the risk level banks choose to accept is reflected in their capital. Banks with higher loss exposures will be required to hold more capital than those who have lower risk appetites. This provides a strong relationship with risk management, in that returns earned in riskier business lines will necessarily be higher to cover the cost of the additional capital held. Operational-Risk ManagementFocusing now on operational risk, one of the most substantial changes in the U.S. banking industry in recent years is the movement of the largest organizations toward fee-based revenue streams. These new activities include securitizing loan portfolios, with the bank retaining responsibility for loan servicing; buying and selling financial instruments for customers; and other business lines that generate revenue by charging customers transaction and account processing fees. These activities generate little balance-sheet exposure, but they present the potential for large losses if the complex systems and financial deals associated with them are not managed in a sound manner. Operational risks are also becoming more important in the large, complex financial institution as more technology and automated processes are used in all areas of operations. When banks used manual processes, errors were confined to the limited area where the employee worked. But in a modern technology setting, factors such as breakdowns in controls, errors in software code, and processing stream interruptions can have enterprisewide effects on the performance of the organization. Recent history provides us with ample evidence that operational risk can be significant. Large financial institutions have reported operational losses from breakdowns in operating controls that, in some cases, have exceeded their credit- or market-related losses. In the area of legal risk, for example, many institutions have learned that failing to identify and promptly correct problems can result in losses that significantly exceed management's initial expectations. Over the past decade, large financial institutions have experienced more than 100 operational loss events in excess of $100 million each; some of these individual operational losses, resulting from fraud, rogue trading, and settlements stemming from questionable business practices, have exceeded $1 billion. An effective operational-risk management framework, therefore, is essential for identifying and managing operational risks. As you know, analysts at the main rating agencies are placing increasing importance on operational risk when they assess a bank's credit ratings. We believe effective operational-risk management has both quantitative and qualitative components and that reliance on solely quantitative or solely qualitative approaches is no longer appropriate. What remains critically important is how these approaches are combined in the implementation of an effective process for identifying, measuring, managing, and controlling operational risk throughout an organization. Effective operational-risk measurement tools enable the executive management at the largest banking organizations to make better risk-and-return decisions, thereby enhancing the return on their institution's capital investments. By considering operational risk as part of their assessment of capital requirements and true profitability, corporate decisionmakers can better decide which business lines to invest in or shut down. The organization further benefits when operational-risk measurement is integrated with the management processes of individual business units, because this helps communicate risk-management issues to the business lines. The allocation of operational-risk capital to these units provides them with a financial incentive to reduce the chance of operational losses. Hard numbers, linked to specific risks, also allow business lines to more accurately price their products. Some banking organizations are already benefiting by factoring operational-risk measurement and management into pricing decisions, strategic planning processes, portfolio management activities, management reporting metrics, and decisions regarding incentive compensation. There are potential longer-term benefits as well, including: a reduction in operational losses as control weaknesses are identified and improved; fewer errors and breaks in customer service, which can lead to higher customer satisfaction and retention; stronger information security and customer data privacy; higher credit ratings, and increased operational efficiency. One objective of Basel II is to enhance practices at our largest and most complex banking organizations for identifying operational risk exposures and ensuring that these exposures are appropriately supported by regulatory capital. Importantly, the advanced measurement approach (AMA) for operational risk under Basel II allows banks to use a framework that relies on their own qualifying methodologies for identifying operational-loss events and measuring risk exposure in order to determine their operational-risk regulatory capital requirements. In this way, the AMA gives banks the flexibility to continue developing and incorporating evolving sound practices for operational-risk measurement and management into their AMA frameworks. Challenges to Operational-Risk Quantification under Basel IIIn the context of Basel II, it has often been argued that measuring operational risk is much more difficult than measuring market or credit risk; however, any model intended to capture unexpected loss has its challenges. For example, market-risk models can be violated when the price of financial products moves in a way that is outside of the historical norm. Credit-risk models need to consider downturn estimates for loss given default, which can depend on the severity of the economic downturn and the price of collateral. Similarly, operational-risk models need to address potential losses that may not have occurred during the short period that most institutions have been collecting internal operational-loss data. This absence of a robust time series of internal operational-loss data is one factor that makes operational-risk modeling particularly challenging. To address the difficulties presented by the very nature of operational risk, the designers of operational-risk measurement frameworks have had to be innovative. For example, we have seen frameworks that use scenario analyses, risk self-assessments, and the judgment of senior business managers in innovative ways. We have also seen creativity in the melding of internal and external loss data to guide thinking about internal loss exposures. Perhaps most significantly, we have seen some truly innovative thinking about ways to integrate operational-risk measurement into the broader framework of operational-risk management. I would like to offer some specific observations on a couple of key challenges relating to operational-risk quantification. First, with respect to operational-loss data, Basel II banks face the challenge of establishing credible operational-loss databases that they can use in determining their regulatory capital requirement for operational risk. The advanced approaches under Basel II create a link between regulatory capital and risk management. Banks using an AMA for operational risk will be required to adopt more-formal, quantitative risk-measurement and risk-management procedures and processes. For example, Basel II establishes standards for data collection and the systematic use of the information collected. These standards are consistent with broader supervisory expectations that high-quality risk management at large complex organizations depends on credible data--and not just for Basel II. Data are needed for all models and risk measures used in financial services, including credit-scoring models, market-based measures such as KMV, and value-at-risk and other economic capital models. The emphasis in Basel II on improved data standards, therefore, should not be interpreted solely as a requirement to determine regulatory capital standards but rather as a foundation for risk-management practices that will strengthen the value of the banking franchise. As I mentioned earlier, regulators view capital from the perspective of ensuring safety and soundness in the financial system. But individual financial institutions generally focus on capital, in particular economic capital, as a means for evaluating the profitability of their activities, defining their risk appetite, and setting risk limits. Although the goals differ, there are important linkages between firms' efforts to quantify operational-risk capital for regulatory capital purposes and for strategic decisionmaking. To the extent the operational-loss data considered in banks' internal economic capital models appropriately reflect the banks' risk exposures, banks should be able to leverage their economic capital data collection efforts to measure their operational-risk exposure under an AMA. This leverage is also consistent with the Basel II objective of better aligning regulatory capital with banks' internal economic capital. The second challenge I wanted to touch on is banks' integration of insurance in their processes for quantifying operational risk. As many of you are aware, Basel II contains a provision whereby banks using an advanced measurement approach for operational risk could adjust their calculated operational-risk exposure to reflect reductions due to operational-risk mitigants, such as insurance, subject to certain limitations. According to the Basel II framework, a bank's risk-mitigation calculations must reflect the bank's insurance coverage in a manner that is transparent in its relationship to, and consistent with, the actual likelihood and impact of loss used in the bank's overall determination of its operational-risk capital. To the extent banks want to reduce their operational-risk capital charge through the use of insurance, banks must analyze and demonstrate the relationship between specific losses and the ability to collect from the insurer. At the time of the Loss Data Collection Exercise, banks that incorporated insurance benefits into their operational risk capital calculations appeared to do so through an ex-post adjustment to their capital figure in the aggregate, rather than by embedding the specific effects of insurance into the AMA modeling process itself. We expect operational risk managers to work closely with their insurance managers to make better decisions about insurance coverage. This should include clear communication of the nature of individual loss exposures and consideration of the availability of insurance coverage for particular risks. While work remains for those banks that are building their AMA frameworks, we have seen, and continue to see, significant progress in these AMA development efforts. One indication of this progress can be seen in the results of the Loss Data Collection Exercise. This exercise resulted in the submission of over one million internal operational-loss event observations by participating institutions. As you know, internal loss-event data are a key input for determining an institution's regulatory capital requirement for operational risk. These data have provided the agencies with invaluable insights about the comprehensiveness of data at individual institutions. The agencies have provided feedback to participating institutions that should help them in their continuing AMA development efforts. In addition, the agencies continue to analyze the loss data in an effort to provide the industry with additional insights relating to operational-risk quantification. Proposed Revisions to Regulatory Capital RegimeI have referred to certain parts of the Basel II framework in my remarks so far, mostly relating to operational risk and the AMA. Now I would like to give a brief update on where we stand with implementing Basel II in the United States, as well as with amending the current Basel I regime. First of all, you may have heard that tomorrow the Federal Reserve Board plans to review a draft of the interagency Basel II notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) at a public meeting, meaning that a draft NPR will also be made available to the public at that time. The final NPR is expected to be issued in theFederal Registerafter all of the U.S. banking agencies complete their review and approval processes, meaning it will then be "officially" out for comment. We are pleased that the agencies have reached agreement on the draft NPR, since, as you know, we have spent substantial time and considerable effort on the document. We also recognize the extent to which the industry, Congress, and others have anticipated the release of this document--and the greater detail it contains about Basel II in the United States. Of course, we look forward to hearing feedback on the NPR. Your comments and those from others will contribute importantly to the assessment of Basel II objectives and its implementation, and will help us as we develop the framework further. Reasons for Pursuing Basel III think it is helpful, as we anticipate release of the NPR, to review the reasons we are developing U.S. proposals for Basel II. The current Basel I capital framework, adopted nearly twenty years ago, has served us well but has become increasingly inadequate for large, internationally active banks offering ever-more complex and sophisticated products and services. We need a revised capital framework for these banks, and we believe that Basel II is such a framework. One of the major ways in which Basel II should improve safety and soundness is by more closely linking capital requirements to risk. The current Basel I measures are not very risk sensitive and do not provide meaningful measures to bankers, supervisors, or the marketplace for complex banking organizations. Under Basel I, it is possible for two banks with dramatically different risk profiles to have the same minimum capital requirement, and a bank's capital requirement does not reflect deterioration in asset quality. In addition, the balance-sheet focus of Basel I does not adequately capture risks of certain off-balance-sheet transactions and fee-based activity--for example, the operational risk embedded in the services from which many large U.S. institutions generate a good portion of their revenues. In addition to enhancing the meaningfulness of regulatory capital measures, Basel II should make the financial system safer by substantially improving risk management at banks. Basel II builds on the risk-management approaches of well-managed banks and creates incentives for banks to move toward leading risk-measurement and risk-management practices; we have already seen some progress in risk management at many institutions in the United States and around the globe as a result of discussions about and preparations for Basel II. The new framework is also much more consistent with the internal capital measures that institutions use to manage their business. Basel II can also provide supervisors with a more conceptually consistent and more transparent framework for assessing the linkage of risk and capital over time at our most complex institutions; identifying which institutions have deficiencies; and, ultimately, evaluating systemic risk in the banking system. Therefore, Basel II establishes a more coherent relationship between how supervisors assess regulatory capital and how they supervise the banks, enabling examiners to better evaluate whether banks are holding prudent capital levels, given their risk profiles, and to better understand differences across institutions. Compared with the current framework, Basel II is more able to accommodate new products and transaction types and to provide meaningful capital measures for the risks embedded therein. As the central bank and the supervisor of banks, bank holding companies, and financial holding companies, the Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that the Basel II framework delivers a strong and risk-sensitive base of capital. That is why we support safeguards to ensure strong capital levels during the transition to Basel II, and why we will remain vigilant in monitoring the ongoing impact of Basel II. This means that duringandafter the transition to Basel II, supervisors will rely on ongoing, detailed analyses to continuously evaluate the results of the new framework and ensure prudent levels of capital. To be quite clear, the Federal Reserve believes that strong capital is fundamentally important to the health of our banking system. We believe Basel II will be a strong contributor to our tradition of ensuring that U.S. banks maintain capital levels that provide an appropriate cushion against risk-taking. As we have stated before, we will continue to use existing prudential measures to complement Basel II. For example, the current leverage ratio requirement--a ratio of capital to total assets--will remain unchanged for all banks, whether or not they are subject to the Basel II framework. Also, supervisors will continue to enforce existing prompt-corrective-action-requirements in response to declines in capital. Both the leverage ratio and prompt corrective action are fully consistent with Basel II. Proposed Amendments to Basel IBefore I end my remarks about regulatory capital, I would like to offer some thoughts about ongoing efforts to revise existing regulatory capital rules, known as Basel I. First of all, we expect only one or two dozen banks to move to Basel II in the near term. That is, the vast majority of U.S. banks would be able to continue operating safely and soundly under Basel I, as it is amended through the rulemaking process. The Basel I framework already has been amended more than twenty times in response to changes in the banking industry and a better understanding of the risks in individual products and services. The agencies believe that now is another appropriate time to amend the Basel I rules. Concerns have been raised about potential competitive inequities between Basel II banks and Basel I banks. We take these concerns seriously. In an effort to mitigate those concerns, regulators have proposed changes to enhance the risk sensitivity of U.S. Basel I rules and remain vigilant about potential competitive distortions that might be created by introducing Basel II rules. We are also mindful that amendments to Basel I should not be too complex or too burdensome for the multitude of smaller banks to which the revised rules will apply. Additionally, we recognize the need to have full transparency about Basel II proposals and proposed Basel I amendments. Accordingly, we expect to have overlapping comment periods for both the Basel II NPR and the proposed Basel I amendments. The intent is to allow banks and others to review both NPRs before both sets of rules are finalized. In that way, bankers from potential opt-in institutions and from those not planning to move to Basel II can evaluate the potential impact of Basel II in light of the proposed Basel I amendments. In fact, we want all interested parties to compare, contrast, and comment on the two proposals in overlapping time frames. At this point, we are still reviewing the comments received on the ANPR for amendments to Basel I (the comment period ended in mid-January). The agencies are developing their proposals for Basel I amendments, on the basis of comments received, and hope to have a Basel I NPR this summer. ConclusionAs prudent supervisors, we need to ensure that banks have strong capital levels--whether banks operate under our current rules, revisions to our current rules, or Basel II. Our focus will continue to be on ensuring that risk-management processes are appropriate for operations of each institution and that those risk systems operate effectively. Our challenge as regulators is to work with the industry in developing an effective capital framework. We envision Basel II as a significant step toward a more risk-sensitive capital framework. We strongly encourage you to comment on all aspects of the Basel II NPR, so that we have a well-informed basis for further development of the Basel II framework.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur. Civitas BankGroup, Inc., Franklin, Tenn.Written Agreement dated April 21, 2005Terminated February 21, 2006
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve’s public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur. New Asia Bank, Chicago, Ill.(formerly known as NAB Bank)Written Agreement dated May 21, 2003Terminated February 27, 2006