The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Board) on Monday announced the adoption of final joint rules to implement the “broker” exceptions for banks under Section 3(a)(4) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. These exceptions were adopted as part of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 (GLB Act). The SEC and the Board approved the final rules at separate open meetings held on September 19, 2007, and September 24, 2007, respectively. The Board and SEC issued proposed rules for comment in December 2006. The final rules are similar to the proposed rules in overall scope and approach. In response to comments, the agencies also have modified the rules in several important respects to make the rules more workable and less burdensome. These changes are discussed in detail in the attached notice, which will be published in theFederal Registershortly. The rules define the scope of securities activities that banks may conduct without registering with the SEC as a securities broker and implement the most important “broker” exceptions for banks adopted by the GLB Act. Specifically, the rules implement the statutory exceptions that allow a bank, subject to certain conditions, to continue to conduct securities transactions for its customers as part of the bank’s trust and fiduciary, custodial and deposit “sweep” functions, and to refer customers to a securities broker-dealer pursuant to a networking arrangement with the broker-dealer. The rules are designed to accommodate the business practices of banks and to protect investors. In developing these rules, the agencies consulted extensively with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of Thrift Supervision. Banks do not have to start complying with the rules until the first day of their fiscal year commencing after September 30, 2008. TheFederal Registernotice is attached. Statement by Governor Randall S. Kroszner Federal Register Notice353 KB PDF|TEXT
The federal bank and thrift agencies issued final rules on Friday expanding the range of small institutions eligible for an extended 18-month on-site examination cycle. The final rules allow well-capitalized and well-managed banks and savings associations with up to $500 million in total assets and a composite CAMELS rating of 1 or 2 to qualify for an 18-month (rather than a 12-month) on-site examination cycle. Until recently, only institutions with less than $250 million in total assets could qualify for an extended 18-month on-site examination cycle. The final rules also make parallel changes to the agencies’ regulations governing the on-site examination cycle for U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks consistent with the International Banking Act of 1978. The final rules, which are identical to the proposed interim rules the agencies issued for public comment in April, implement section 605 of the Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2006 and related provisions from the International Banking Act, both of which are already effective. The final rules, issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision, are attached. The final rules are effective upon publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. Federal Register Notice55 KB PDF|TEXT
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Conference on the Asian Financial Crisis Revisited, San Francisco, California(via videoconference) Good morning. I am delighted to be speaking to you today at the second of a pair of excellent conferences that the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco has organized on the tenth anniversary of the Asian financial crisis. Janet Yellen and her staff deserve kudos for focusing our attention on this important topic and I feel honored for the invitation to speak today.1IntroductionBefore moving to the main topic, I would like to reinforce remarks made last week by Chairman Bernanke on the recent turbulence in financial markets. In the United States we have seen a fairly sharp downturn in housing markets, and in recent weeks there have been growing investor concerns about mortgage credit performance, particularly with subprime mortgages. If current conditions persist in mortgage markets, the demand for homes could weaken further, with possible implications for the broader economy. And financial stress has not been limited just to mortgage markets, but has spread to other markets. In general, a shift in risk attitudes has interacted with heightened concerns about credit risks and uncertainty about how to evaluate those risks. Fortunately, this recent period of turbulence in financial markets has occurred at a time when U.S. commercial banks are strongly capitalized, reflecting years of robust profits.As the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve seeks to promote general financial stability and to help to ensure that financial markets operate in an orderly manner. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve has taken some steps in recent weeks to provide liquidity and to promote the orderly functioning of markets. We continue to follow these developments in financial markets closely, particularly those that may have a broad impact on real economic activity.Today I plan to offer some thoughts about ways to analyze and assess the impact of banking crises on real economic activity. Others at this conference will be addressing some of the specifics of the Asian financial crisis in 1997-98 and the status of economies and financial systems of Asian countries today, so I believe I can best contribute by setting up a conceptual and empirical framework that can be applied to various types of financial crises, including Asia in 1997-98.Much of what I plan to discuss is based on a paper I published earlier this year with colleagues at the International Monetary Fund and World Bank, Luc Laeven and Daniela Klingbiel, titled "Banking Crises, Financial Dependence, and Growth".2In particular, this research focuses on a key question for policy, namely, through what channels can financial turmoil have an impact on real economic activity? We study the effect of different types of crises on the performance of various sectors and firms in economies with differing levels of development of their banking and financial systems. Surprisingly, little systematic empirical work had been done detailing the mechanisms by which financial crises can generate problems in the real economy.3I will provide a brief overview of these results and then draw some lessons that policymakers might keep in mind when considering ways to help prevent and mitigate future crises.As a final introductory thought, I want to note that my remarks today on banking crises relate to research conducted on a range of countries, many of them emerging-market countries, and are not a commentary on current financial conditions or on the health of the U.S. banking system, which, as I noted above, is quite good.Framework for Assessing and Analyzing Banking CrisesFinancial crises can assume various forms. I am going to focus primarily on financial crises involving the banking sector and do so for several reasons. First, banks play a prominent role in the credit intermediation process in most countries, providing funding to firms beyond the cash flow provided by their normal operations. Banks also typically serve as custodian of a significant portion of household saving. In many Asian countries, for example, banks play a key role in channeling credit to firms--particularly those firms not able to acquire funding from capital markets or other sources--and also hold substantial consumer deposits.In addition, much of the literature on financial crises indicates that crises involving the banking sector can lead to disruptions in the real economy. The definition of banking crisis I will use today, consistent with the definition in our recent paper, is an episode during which the capital of the banking sector has been depleted due to loan losses, resulting in a negative net worth of the banking sector.4Therefore, the use of the term "banking crisis" in our research refers to major disruptions in a country's banking system, not just minor downturns or disturbances. By focusing on banking crises in our research paper, we were able to isolate the impact of banks on the provision of credit and liquidity to firms during times of distress. I believe that combining this type of empirical research on banking crises with practical experience from bank supervisors and market participants, such as those attending this conference, helps us all to understand and address the problems associated with banking crises--and perhaps even to help to prevent them.Much work has been done on how financial intermediaries and financial markets facilitate investment by firms and, hence, promote economic growth.5Financial intermediaries and financial markets are generally thought to reduce information asymmetry problems that can make raising external funds difficult and expensive for firms. Well-functioning and well-developed financial intermediaries and markets thus should particularly benefit firms that rely most heavily on external funding to finance their growth.6Conversely--and this is the novel aspect of our research--crises in the financial sector thus should have a disproportionately negative impact on firms that rely heavily on external sources of finance.In particular, we investigate whether the impact of a banking crisis on sectors dependent on external sources of financing varies with the level of development of the financial system. If the banking system is the key element allowing firms that depend heavily upon external funding sources to finance their growth, then an impairment of these intermediaries--in a system where such intermediaries are important--should have a disproportionate contractionary impact on precisely those sectors that flourished in "normal" times, due to their reliance on banks. Thus, an important element of our analysis is the level of development of a country's financial system, that is, whether it is "deep" (more developed) or "shallow" (less developed).7To address these issues, we gathered data from thirty-eight developed and developing countries that have experienced a banking crisis during the last quarter century.8We documented clear linkages between the state of the banking system and the performance of the real economy. More specifically, we find that in well-developed and deep financial systems, sectors highly dependent on external sources of funding tend to experience a greater contraction during a banking crisis than do externally dependent sectors in countries with shallower financial systems. In other words, sectors of the real economy that rely heavily on external finance (that is, do not fund capital expenditures through cash flow) tend to experience a substantially slower growth of value added during a banking crisis than those sectors that do not rely so heavily on external funding. This effect is more pronounced in countries with more developed financial systems. Our results hold for a wide group of countries and over a long time span, but as I note below, have particular relevance to emerging market countries.While these results are consistent with a so-called credit channel impact of banking crises on real economic activity, there are further implications of the "credit channel" view that we explore in more detail. Among firms that depend heavily on outside financing, young firms with short histories and firms with a large fraction of hard-to-measure intangible assets, for example, may have particular difficulties raising funds from the market due to information problems. Instead, such firms would tend to depend heavily on banks and other intermediaries for funding. Consistent with this, we find a greater negative impact of banking crises on growth for industries dominated by young firms that are highly dependent on external finance and for industries with high levels of intangible assets.While all of these results are consistent with a "credit channel" view of the impact of banking crises on real economic activity, we certainly need to explore some alternative explanations before drawing final conclusions. In particular, many factors may be correlated with the level of financial development of a country, so we want to make sure that the level of financial development is not simply standing in for something else. The differences in financial development, for example, can arise from historical, political, cultural, and legal reasons. There is a well-developed literature emphasizing, for instance, that the nature of a country's legal system and the manner in which laws are enforced can have an effect on the development of its financial system.9Similarly, other country-specific factors also might have an influence on how financial institutions and markets behave. If one of these factors, rather than financial development, is driving the results, we might have to interpret those results differently.As a way to try to address such questions of interpretation, we controlled for the quality of the political and legal institutions in the countries included in our data analysis. We found that our results still hold, namely that a banking crisis has a more pronounced effect on a country's economy when its financial system is more developed and when its firms rely more on external finance, even after taking into account a variety of proxies for the differences in the quality of institutions and legal structures across countries.Furthermore, we explored differences in the effect of banking crises on countries based on their overall levels of development. In other words, we wanted to assess separately the impact of banking crises in less-developed countries versus more-developed countries since, of course, overall economic development and financial sector development tend to be correlated. Interestingly, when we remove Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries from our sample, the effects of banking crises were more pronounced, indicating that banking crises in emerging market countries likely do more harm to the overall economy than in developed countries.Interestingly, our research also provides evidence that crises affecting the banking sector can have a more serious impact on the real economy than alternative economic disruptions such as economic contractions or shocks such as currency crises.10That is, banking crises have represented a unique shock to a country's financial system. These results suggest that the "credit channel" effects on real economic activity we document are operating through the banking system.In short, the results highlight that a healthy banking system generally contributes to strong economic growth, and banking crises can present a substantial drag on the real economy. This underscores why we consider it important to analyze the economic impact of financial crises involving the banking sector, and to mitigate potential drivers of such crises. Indeed, in the case of Asia a decade ago, the trouble experienced by the region's banks, given their dominant role in Asian financial systems, created disruptions that spread across Asia. Problems in the real economies of Asian countries would likely not have been so great had the banking systems been stronger.So far I have been discussing results that focus on the real growth impact on sectors or industries. We were able to obtain data on the impact on individual firms but for a smaller sample than for the sectors or industries. We use a variety of measures for individual firm performance, such as real growth in sales, real growth in earnings before interest and taxes, and real stock market returns. The results are the same as in the sectoral level data I described above: The performance of firms heavily dependent upon external sources of funding is disproportionately negatively affected in deep financial systems during periods of banking crisis.In addition to providing microeconomic support for the credit channel view, individual firm data also allow us to examine important hypotheses about the impact that transparency and public disclosure by individual firms can have to mitigate the effects of banking crises on those firms. One author, using data from the Asian crisis, has investigated the relationship between stock market performance and quality of public disclosure.11Our recent paper also delved into this issue by using certain proxies for individual firm disclosure practices, such as having a listing in the United States (hence disclosing by U.S. standards) or by being audited by one of the major international accounting firms. Our results suggested that greater public disclosure had a favorable impact on stock market performance, both during the crisis period as well as afterward. Indeed, there is a large literature supporting the idea that a country can benefit by promoting transparency and disclosure. But I know that there is still ongoing debate about the effects of globalization on financial markets and economies and I believe that further research and discussion about the benefits of openness and transparency are worthwhile. Perhaps a discussion on this topic will ensue at this conference over the next two days.I will pose one final topic before moving on to some policy suggestions. I believe it is important to try to understand the long-term impact of a crisis on the financial system and the real economy. In particular, it is useful to examine whether a particularly deep crisis or a recent one may have effects on participants in that country during the next crisis. Interestingly, our recent work provided some evidence that past crises do not necessarily create a stoppage of bank credit to firms once "normal" times returned, but when the next crisis occurred, its impact on growth was usually deeper in magnitude.Thoughts on Preventing and Managing Banking CrisesHaving raised some issues for consideration about banking crises--and having tried to provide some answers, where possible--I would now like to offer some thoughts that policymakers may consider as they try to prevent and manage banking crises. I note that market participants should also consider these ideas, since it is not just policymakers who can learn lessons from past crises.First, one of the major lessons to be learned from past banking crises is the importance of a healthy banking system. Maintaining a safe and sound banking system, given the key role that banks play in most financial systems, contributes to the health of a country's overall economy. Most countries do this by some form of banking supervision, generally accepting that the added protection to the banking system in the form of supervision is worth the costs of the regulatory burden. Effective banking supervision has helped foster a banking system in the United States that today is safe, sound, and well-capitalized.One of the ways that bank supervisors can help promote a healthy banking system is to focus banks on the development of improved risk-management techniques. Indeed, identifying, assessing, and promoting sound risk-management practices have become central elements of good supervisory practice. Bankers should ensure that their risk-management practices include a focus on less likely outcomes, not just the most common ones, and that the bank is being adequately compensated for the risk it is bearing. The use of exercises such as stress tests and scenario analyses can help bankers identify certain points of vulnerability that may arise during potential downturns.In some countries, bank supervisors have an explicit responsibility to ensure that banks adhere to existing laws and maintain and implement appropriate consumer protection policies. For example, in the United States the federal banking agencies play an important role in fostering not just a safe and sound banking system, but also one that is diverse and fair in meeting the needs of consumers.Good banking supervision is vital to the health of banks, particularly when the banking system has some type of government support--for example, either explicit or implicit deposit insurance. But ensuring a safe and sound banking system that is also competitive and profitable has its challenges. Clearly, banking supervision on its own can create some distortions or burden, so it is also very important to let market forces work as much as possible, with reliance on market participants--in their role as depositors, counterparties, creditors, and shareholders--to exercise discipline on banks. Policymakers have to find the right balance between the more visible hand of government supervision and the invisible hand of market forces.Second, pursuing sound macroeconomic policies is another way for policymakers to help prevent banking and financial crises. For instance, it is beneficial to have sound and sustainable monetary and fiscal policy to provide a stable operating environment for entrepreneurs and financial institutions and markets. Many past crises were precipitated either by an external shock affecting an already vulnerable financial system or by market participants targeting vulnerabilities in certain markets or in certain institutions or governments. History has taught us that if a condition or policy looks unsustainable, it most likely is and market forces will eventually bring it to an end. To paraphrase Herb Stein, if a policy cannot go on forever, it won't!Third, I referred earlier to research on the benefits of disclosure and transparency. Our analysis contributes to the evidence that having an open and transparent financial system and economy, accompanied by reliable and accurate accounting standards, generally benefits a country and its market participants. A core principle of economics is that markets are more competitive, and therefore more efficient, when accurate information is available to both consumers and suppliers. Information is thus critical to the effective functioning of financial markets: timely and accurate financial information about markets, market participants, and governments is important for all actors to be able to make informed decisions. This is of course true during normal times, but perhaps more so during a crisis when market participants and governments are sometimes trying to determine where problems lie and how severe they might be. Lack of information can present additional problems during a crisis, and incorrect or incomplete information provided by firms, governments, and other institutions can severely undermine their credibility, worsening the problem.ConclusionThese conferences on the Asian crisis serve as excellent forums to analyze the events of ten years ago and share views on ways to prevent and mitigate future crises. They also allow market participants to offer feedback on past policy steps, including which past policies helped and which ones hindered. Policymakers and market participants must remember that preventing and mitigating financial crises requires a blend of sharp analysis, keen judgment, practical experience, and rigorous understanding of how markets work--in both normal times and times of stress.I have tried to provide a framework for analyzing the impact of banking crises on real economic activity, described some results analyzing crises from around the world during the last quarter century, and offered three policy lessons: the importance of a healthy banking system, of sound macroeconomic policy, and of high levels of transparency and disclosure. This is by no means an exhaustive list but I hope it can provide a useful starting point for the discussions that will take place during the rest of the day.As a final thought, I counsel policymakers and market participants alike to remember that no two crises are the same. Recall that the Asian crisis of 1997-98 actually manifested itself differently across Asian countries, with each country having its own set of problems and needing to find its own solutions. In other words, there is never a single remedy to each crisis and each brings its own surprises and risks. Clearly, we can all learn a lot from past crises--which is the value in holding conferences like this one. But we should not assume that past remedies will fully solve the next set of problems or address all future risks. The key is to take lessons from the past and tailor them appropriately to future situations of potential distress.ReferencesBeck, T., Levine, R., Loayza, N. (2000)."Finance and the Sources of Growth,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 58, pp. 261–300.Braun, M., Larrain, B., (2005)."Finance and the Business Cycle: International, Inter-industry Evidence."Journal of Finance,vol. 60 (June), pp. 1097–1128.Caprio, G., Klingbiel, D. (2002)."Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Financial Crises."In: Klingebiel, D., Laeven, L. (Eds.),Managing the Real and Fiscal Effects of Banking Crises. World Bank Discussion Paper No. 428, Washington, DC, pp. 31–49.King, R.G., Levine, R. (1993)."Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right."Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 153, pp. 717–738.Kroszner, R.S., Strahan, P.E. (2005). "Regulation and Deregulation of the U.S. Banking Industry: Causes, Consequences, and Implications for the Future. In: Rose, N. (Ed.),Economics of Regulation. NBER Conference Volume, Forthcoming.Kroszner, Randall and Luc Laeven and Daniela Klingbiel (2007)."Banking Crises, Financial Dependence, and Growth, Journal of Financial Economics,"vol. 87 (April), pp. 187-228.La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W. (1998). "Law and Finance,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 106, pp. 1113–1155.Levine, R. (1997)."Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda (371 KB PDF),"Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 35, pp. 688–726.Levine, R. (2005). "Finance and Growth." In: Aghion, P., Durlauf, S. (Eds.),Handbook of Economic Growth. Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Forthcoming.Milesi-Ferretti, G.M., Razin, A. (1998)."Current account reversals and currency crises: empirical regularities (176 KB PDF)."NBER Working Paper No. 6620, Cambridge, MA.Mitton, T. (2002)."A Cross-Firm Analysis of the Impact of Corporate Governance on the East Asian Financial Crisis,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 64, pp. 215–241.Rajan, R.G., Zingales, L. (1998)."Financial Dependence and Growth,"American Economic Review, vol. 88, pp. 559–596.Footnotes1.The views I express today are, of course, my own and do not necessarily represent those of the Board of Governors or the Federal Reserve System.Return to text2.Kroszner, Laeven, and Klingbiel (2007).Return to text3.Our paper provides a literature review.Return to text4.Caprio and Klingbiel (2002).Return to text5.See Levine (1997, 2005) and Kroszner and Strahan (2005) for overviews.Return to text6.One measure of financial or external dependence is the fraction of capital expenditures not financing with cash flows from operations. See Rajan and Zingales (1998).Return to text7.In our recent research paper, the proxy for depth of the financial system is the ratio of private credit to gross domestic product.Return to text8.Clearly, determining the precise timing of crises is difficult, both in terms of identifying the beginning and the end of a crisis. In our research we experimented with alternative definitions of crisis windows, expanding and contracting the length of the crisis, pre-crisis, and post-crisis periods as well as the gap between the crisis and the pre- and postcrisis periods; our results are not sensitive to the alternative definitions.Return to text9.La Porta et al (1998).Return to text10.For our definition of economic contractions, see Braun and Larrain (2005); for our definition of currency crises, see Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (1998).Return to text11.Mitton (2002).Return to text IntroductionBefore moving to the main topic, I would like to reinforce remarks made last week by Chairman Bernanke on the recent turbulence in financial markets. In the United States we have seen a fairly sharp downturn in housing markets, and in recent weeks there have been growing investor concerns about mortgage credit performance, particularly with subprime mortgages. If current conditions persist in mortgage markets, the demand for homes could weaken further, with possible implications for the broader economy. And financial stress has not been limited just to mortgage markets, but has spread to other markets. In general, a shift in risk attitudes has interacted with heightened concerns about credit risks and uncertainty about how to evaluate those risks. Fortunately, this recent period of turbulence in financial markets has occurred at a time when U.S. commercial banks are strongly capitalized, reflecting years of robust profits.As the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve seeks to promote general financial stability and to help to ensure that financial markets operate in an orderly manner. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve has taken some steps in recent weeks to provide liquidity and to promote the orderly functioning of markets. We continue to follow these developments in financial markets closely, particularly those that may have a broad impact on real economic activity.Today I plan to offer some thoughts about ways to analyze and assess the impact of banking crises on real economic activity. Others at this conference will be addressing some of the specifics of the Asian financial crisis in 1997-98 and the status of economies and financial systems of Asian countries today, so I believe I can best contribute by setting up a conceptual and empirical framework that can be applied to various types of financial crises, including Asia in 1997-98.Much of what I plan to discuss is based on a paper I published earlier this year with colleagues at the International Monetary Fund and World Bank, Luc Laeven and Daniela Klingbiel, titled "Banking Crises, Financial Dependence, and Growth".2In particular, this research focuses on a key question for policy, namely, through what channels can financial turmoil have an impact on real economic activity? We study the effect of different types of crises on the performance of various sectors and firms in economies with differing levels of development of their banking and financial systems. Surprisingly, little systematic empirical work had been done detailing the mechanisms by which financial crises can generate problems in the real economy.3I will provide a brief overview of these results and then draw some lessons that policymakers might keep in mind when considering ways to help prevent and mitigate future crises.As a final introductory thought, I want to note that my remarks today on banking crises relate to research conducted on a range of countries, many of them emerging-market countries, and are not a commentary on current financial conditions or on the health of the U.S. banking system, which, as I noted above, is quite good.Framework for Assessing and Analyzing Banking CrisesFinancial crises can assume various forms. I am going to focus primarily on financial crises involving the banking sector and do so for several reasons. First, banks play a prominent role in the credit intermediation process in most countries, providing funding to firms beyond the cash flow provided by their normal operations. Banks also typically serve as custodian of a significant portion of household saving. In many Asian countries, for example, banks play a key role in channeling credit to firms--particularly those firms not able to acquire funding from capital markets or other sources--and also hold substantial consumer deposits.In addition, much of the literature on financial crises indicates that crises involving the banking sector can lead to disruptions in the real economy. The definition of banking crisis I will use today, consistent with the definition in our recent paper, is an episode during which the capital of the banking sector has been depleted due to loan losses, resulting in a negative net worth of the banking sector.4Therefore, the use of the term "banking crisis" in our research refers to major disruptions in a country's banking system, not just minor downturns or disturbances. By focusing on banking crises in our research paper, we were able to isolate the impact of banks on the provision of credit and liquidity to firms during times of distress. I believe that combining this type of empirical research on banking crises with practical experience from bank supervisors and market participants, such as those attending this conference, helps us all to understand and address the problems associated with banking crises--and perhaps even to help to prevent them.Much work has been done on how financial intermediaries and financial markets facilitate investment by firms and, hence, promote economic growth.5Financial intermediaries and financial markets are generally thought to reduce information asymmetry problems that can make raising external funds difficult and expensive for firms. Well-functioning and well-developed financial intermediaries and markets thus should particularly benefit firms that rely most heavily on external funding to finance their growth.6Conversely--and this is the novel aspect of our research--crises in the financial sector thus should have a disproportionately negative impact on firms that rely heavily on external sources of finance.In particular, we investigate whether the impact of a banking crisis on sectors dependent on external sources of financing varies with the level of development of the financial system. If the banking system is the key element allowing firms that depend heavily upon external funding sources to finance their growth, then an impairment of these intermediaries--in a system where such intermediaries are important--should have a disproportionate contractionary impact on precisely those sectors that flourished in "normal" times, due to their reliance on banks. Thus, an important element of our analysis is the level of development of a country's financial system, that is, whether it is "deep" (more developed) or "shallow" (less developed).7To address these issues, we gathered data from thirty-eight developed and developing countries that have experienced a banking crisis during the last quarter century.8We documented clear linkages between the state of the banking system and the performance of the real economy. More specifically, we find that in well-developed and deep financial systems, sectors highly dependent on external sources of funding tend to experience a greater contraction during a banking crisis than do externally dependent sectors in countries with shallower financial systems. In other words, sectors of the real economy that rely heavily on external finance (that is, do not fund capital expenditures through cash flow) tend to experience a substantially slower growth of value added during a banking crisis than those sectors that do not rely so heavily on external funding. This effect is more pronounced in countries with more developed financial systems. Our results hold for a wide group of countries and over a long time span, but as I note below, have particular relevance to emerging market countries.While these results are consistent with a so-called credit channel impact of banking crises on real economic activity, there are further implications of the "credit channel" view that we explore in more detail. Among firms that depend heavily on outside financing, young firms with short histories and firms with a large fraction of hard-to-measure intangible assets, for example, may have particular difficulties raising funds from the market due to information problems. Instead, such firms would tend to depend heavily on banks and other intermediaries for funding. Consistent with this, we find a greater negative impact of banking crises on growth for industries dominated by young firms that are highly dependent on external finance and for industries with high levels of intangible assets.While all of these results are consistent with a "credit channel" view of the impact of banking crises on real economic activity, we certainly need to explore some alternative explanations before drawing final conclusions. In particular, many factors may be correlated with the level of financial development of a country, so we want to make sure that the level of financial development is not simply standing in for something else. The differences in financial development, for example, can arise from historical, political, cultural, and legal reasons. There is a well-developed literature emphasizing, for instance, that the nature of a country's legal system and the manner in which laws are enforced can have an effect on the development of its financial system.9Similarly, other country-specific factors also might have an influence on how financial institutions and markets behave. If one of these factors, rather than financial development, is driving the results, we might have to interpret those results differently.As a way to try to address such questions of interpretation, we controlled for the quality of the political and legal institutions in the countries included in our data analysis. We found that our results still hold, namely that a banking crisis has a more pronounced effect on a country's economy when its financial system is more developed and when its firms rely more on external finance, even after taking into account a variety of proxies for the differences in the quality of institutions and legal structures across countries.Furthermore, we explored differences in the effect of banking crises on countries based on their overall levels of development. In other words, we wanted to assess separately the impact of banking crises in less-developed countries versus more-developed countries since, of course, overall economic development and financial sector development tend to be correlated. Interestingly, when we remove Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries from our sample, the effects of banking crises were more pronounced, indicating that banking crises in emerging market countries likely do more harm to the overall economy than in developed countries.Interestingly, our research also provides evidence that crises affecting the banking sector can have a more serious impact on the real economy than alternative economic disruptions such as economic contractions or shocks such as currency crises.10That is, banking crises have represented a unique shock to a country's financial system. These results suggest that the "credit channel" effects on real economic activity we document are operating through the banking system.In short, the results highlight that a healthy banking system generally contributes to strong economic growth, and banking crises can present a substantial drag on the real economy. This underscores why we consider it important to analyze the economic impact of financial crises involving the banking sector, and to mitigate potential drivers of such crises. Indeed, in the case of Asia a decade ago, the trouble experienced by the region's banks, given their dominant role in Asian financial systems, created disruptions that spread across Asia. Problems in the real economies of Asian countries would likely not have been so great had the banking systems been stronger.So far I have been discussing results that focus on the real growth impact on sectors or industries. We were able to obtain data on the impact on individual firms but for a smaller sample than for the sectors or industries. We use a variety of measures for individual firm performance, such as real growth in sales, real growth in earnings before interest and taxes, and real stock market returns. The results are the same as in the sectoral level data I described above: The performance of firms heavily dependent upon external sources of funding is disproportionately negatively affected in deep financial systems during periods of banking crisis.In addition to providing microeconomic support for the credit channel view, individual firm data also allow us to examine important hypotheses about the impact that transparency and public disclosure by individual firms can have to mitigate the effects of banking crises on those firms. One author, using data from the Asian crisis, has investigated the relationship between stock market performance and quality of public disclosure.11Our recent paper also delved into this issue by using certain proxies for individual firm disclosure practices, such as having a listing in the United States (hence disclosing by U.S. standards) or by being audited by one of the major international accounting firms. Our results suggested that greater public disclosure had a favorable impact on stock market performance, both during the crisis period as well as afterward. Indeed, there is a large literature supporting the idea that a country can benefit by promoting transparency and disclosure. But I know that there is still ongoing debate about the effects of globalization on financial markets and economies and I believe that further research and discussion about the benefits of openness and transparency are worthwhile. Perhaps a discussion on this topic will ensue at this conference over the next two days.I will pose one final topic before moving on to some policy suggestions. I believe it is important to try to understand the long-term impact of a crisis on the financial system and the real economy. In particular, it is useful to examine whether a particularly deep crisis or a recent one may have effects on participants in that country during the next crisis. Interestingly, our recent work provided some evidence that past crises do not necessarily create a stoppage of bank credit to firms once "normal" times returned, but when the next crisis occurred, its impact on growth was usually deeper in magnitude.Thoughts on Preventing and Managing Banking CrisesHaving raised some issues for consideration about banking crises--and having tried to provide some answers, where possible--I would now like to offer some thoughts that policymakers may consider as they try to prevent and manage banking crises. I note that market participants should also consider these ideas, since it is not just policymakers who can learn lessons from past crises.First, one of the major lessons to be learned from past banking crises is the importance of a healthy banking system. Maintaining a safe and sound banking system, given the key role that banks play in most financial systems, contributes to the health of a country's overall economy. Most countries do this by some form of banking supervision, generally accepting that the added protection to the banking system in the form of supervision is worth the costs of the regulatory burden. Effective banking supervision has helped foster a banking system in the United States that today is safe, sound, and well-capitalized.One of the ways that bank supervisors can help promote a healthy banking system is to focus banks on the development of improved risk-management techniques. Indeed, identifying, assessing, and promoting sound risk-management practices have become central elements of good supervisory practice. Bankers should ensure that their risk-management practices include a focus on less likely outcomes, not just the most common ones, and that the bank is being adequately compensated for the risk it is bearing. The use of exercises such as stress tests and scenario analyses can help bankers identify certain points of vulnerability that may arise during potential downturns.In some countries, bank supervisors have an explicit responsibility to ensure that banks adhere to existing laws and maintain and implement appropriate consumer protection policies. For example, in the United States the federal banking agencies play an important role in fostering not just a safe and sound banking system, but also one that is diverse and fair in meeting the needs of consumers.Good banking supervision is vital to the health of banks, particularly when the banking system has some type of government support--for example, either explicit or implicit deposit insurance. But ensuring a safe and sound banking system that is also competitive and profitable has its challenges. Clearly, banking supervision on its own can create some distortions or burden, so it is also very important to let market forces work as much as possible, with reliance on market participants--in their role as depositors, counterparties, creditors, and shareholders--to exercise discipline on banks. Policymakers have to find the right balance between the more visible hand of government supervision and the invisible hand of market forces.Second, pursuing sound macroeconomic policies is another way for policymakers to help prevent banking and financial crises. For instance, it is beneficial to have sound and sustainable monetary and fiscal policy to provide a stable operating environment for entrepreneurs and financial institutions and markets. Many past crises were precipitated either by an external shock affecting an already vulnerable financial system or by market participants targeting vulnerabilities in certain markets or in certain institutions or governments. History has taught us that if a condition or policy looks unsustainable, it most likely is and market forces will eventually bring it to an end. To paraphrase Herb Stein, if a policy cannot go on forever, it won't!Third, I referred earlier to research on the benefits of disclosure and transparency. Our analysis contributes to the evidence that having an open and transparent financial system and economy, accompanied by reliable and accurate accounting standards, generally benefits a country and its market participants. A core principle of economics is that markets are more competitive, and therefore more efficient, when accurate information is available to both consumers and suppliers. Information is thus critical to the effective functioning of financial markets: timely and accurate financial information about markets, market participants, and governments is important for all actors to be able to make informed decisions. This is of course true during normal times, but perhaps more so during a crisis when market participants and governments are sometimes trying to determine where problems lie and how severe they might be. Lack of information can present additional problems during a crisis, and incorrect or incomplete information provided by firms, governments, and other institutions can severely undermine their credibility, worsening the problem.ConclusionThese conferences on the Asian crisis serve as excellent forums to analyze the events of ten years ago and share views on ways to prevent and mitigate future crises. They also allow market participants to offer feedback on past policy steps, including which past policies helped and which ones hindered. Policymakers and market participants must remember that preventing and mitigating financial crises requires a blend of sharp analysis, keen judgment, practical experience, and rigorous understanding of how markets work--in both normal times and times of stress.I have tried to provide a framework for analyzing the impact of banking crises on real economic activity, described some results analyzing crises from around the world during the last quarter century, and offered three policy lessons: the importance of a healthy banking system, of sound macroeconomic policy, and of high levels of transparency and disclosure. This is by no means an exhaustive list but I hope it can provide a useful starting point for the discussions that will take place during the rest of the day.As a final thought, I counsel policymakers and market participants alike to remember that no two crises are the same. Recall that the Asian crisis of 1997-98 actually manifested itself differently across Asian countries, with each country having its own set of problems and needing to find its own solutions. In other words, there is never a single remedy to each crisis and each brings its own surprises and risks. Clearly, we can all learn a lot from past crises--which is the value in holding conferences like this one. But we should not assume that past remedies will fully solve the next set of problems or address all future risks. The key is to take lessons from the past and tailor them appropriately to future situations of potential distress.ReferencesBeck, T., Levine, R., Loayza, N. (2000)."Finance and the Sources of Growth,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 58, pp. 261–300.Braun, M., Larrain, B., (2005)."Finance and the Business Cycle: International, Inter-industry Evidence."Journal of Finance,vol. 60 (June), pp. 1097–1128.Caprio, G., Klingbiel, D. (2002)."Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Financial Crises."In: Klingebiel, D., Laeven, L. (Eds.),Managing the Real and Fiscal Effects of Banking Crises. World Bank Discussion Paper No. 428, Washington, DC, pp. 31–49.King, R.G., Levine, R. (1993)."Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right."Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 153, pp. 717–738.Kroszner, R.S., Strahan, P.E. (2005). "Regulation and Deregulation of the U.S. Banking Industry: Causes, Consequences, and Implications for the Future. In: Rose, N. (Ed.),Economics of Regulation. NBER Conference Volume, Forthcoming.Kroszner, Randall and Luc Laeven and Daniela Klingbiel (2007)."Banking Crises, Financial Dependence, and Growth, Journal of Financial Economics,"vol. 87 (April), pp. 187-228.La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W. (1998). "Law and Finance,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 106, pp. 1113–1155.Levine, R. (1997)."Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda (371 KB PDF),"Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 35, pp. 688–726.Levine, R. (2005). "Finance and Growth." In: Aghion, P., Durlauf, S. (Eds.),Handbook of Economic Growth. Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Forthcoming.Milesi-Ferretti, G.M., Razin, A. (1998)."Current account reversals and currency crises: empirical regularities (176 KB PDF)."NBER Working Paper No. 6620, Cambridge, MA.Mitton, T. (2002)."A Cross-Firm Analysis of the Impact of Corporate Governance on the East Asian Financial Crisis,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 64, pp. 215–241.Rajan, R.G., Zingales, L. (1998)."Financial Dependence and Growth,"American Economic Review, vol. 88, pp. 559–596.Footnotes1.The views I express today are, of course, my own and do not necessarily represent those of the Board of Governors or the Federal Reserve System.Return to text2.Kroszner, Laeven, and Klingbiel (2007).Return to text3.Our paper provides a literature review.Return to text4.Caprio and Klingbiel (2002).Return to text5.See Levine (1997, 2005) and Kroszner and Strahan (2005) for overviews.Return to text6.One measure of financial or external dependence is the fraction of capital expenditures not financing with cash flows from operations. See Rajan and Zingales (1998).Return to text7.In our recent research paper, the proxy for depth of the financial system is the ratio of private credit to gross domestic product.Return to text8.Clearly, determining the precise timing of crises is difficult, both in terms of identifying the beginning and the end of a crisis. In our research we experimented with alternative definitions of crisis windows, expanding and contracting the length of the crisis, pre-crisis, and post-crisis periods as well as the gap between the crisis and the pre- and postcrisis periods; our results are not sensitive to the alternative definitions.Return to text9.La Porta et al (1998).Return to text10.For our definition of economic contractions, see Braun and Larrain (2005); for our definition of currency crises, see Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (1998).Return to text11.Mitton (2002).Return to text IntroductionBefore moving to the main topic, I would like to reinforce remarks made last week by Chairman Bernanke on the recent turbulence in financial markets. In the United States we have seen a fairly sharp downturn in housing markets, and in recent weeks there have been growing investor concerns about mortgage credit performance, particularly with subprime mortgages. If current conditions persist in mortgage markets, the demand for homes could weaken further, with possible implications for the broader economy. And financial stress has not been limited just to mortgage markets, but has spread to other markets. In general, a shift in risk attitudes has interacted with heightened concerns about credit risks and uncertainty about how to evaluate those risks. Fortunately, this recent period of turbulence in financial markets has occurred at a time when U.S. commercial banks are strongly capitalized, reflecting years of robust profits. As the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve seeks to promote general financial stability and to help to ensure that financial markets operate in an orderly manner. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve has taken some steps in recent weeks to provide liquidity and to promote the orderly functioning of markets. We continue to follow these developments in financial markets closely, particularly those that may have a broad impact on real economic activity. Today I plan to offer some thoughts about ways to analyze and assess the impact of banking crises on real economic activity. Others at this conference will be addressing some of the specifics of the Asian financial crisis in 1997-98 and the status of economies and financial systems of Asian countries today, so I believe I can best contribute by setting up a conceptual and empirical framework that can be applied to various types of financial crises, including Asia in 1997-98. Much of what I plan to discuss is based on a paper I published earlier this year with colleagues at the International Monetary Fund and World Bank, Luc Laeven and Daniela Klingbiel, titled "Banking Crises, Financial Dependence, and Growth".2In particular, this research focuses on a key question for policy, namely, through what channels can financial turmoil have an impact on real economic activity? We study the effect of different types of crises on the performance of various sectors and firms in economies with differing levels of development of their banking and financial systems. Surprisingly, little systematic empirical work had been done detailing the mechanisms by which financial crises can generate problems in the real economy.3I will provide a brief overview of these results and then draw some lessons that policymakers might keep in mind when considering ways to help prevent and mitigate future crises. As a final introductory thought, I want to note that my remarks today on banking crises relate to research conducted on a range of countries, many of them emerging-market countries, and are not a commentary on current financial conditions or on the health of the U.S. banking system, which, as I noted above, is quite good. Framework for Assessing and Analyzing Banking CrisesFinancial crises can assume various forms. I am going to focus primarily on financial crises involving the banking sector and do so for several reasons. First, banks play a prominent role in the credit intermediation process in most countries, providing funding to firms beyond the cash flow provided by their normal operations. Banks also typically serve as custodian of a significant portion of household saving. In many Asian countries, for example, banks play a key role in channeling credit to firms--particularly those firms not able to acquire funding from capital markets or other sources--and also hold substantial consumer deposits. In addition, much of the literature on financial crises indicates that crises involving the banking sector can lead to disruptions in the real economy. The definition of banking crisis I will use today, consistent with the definition in our recent paper, is an episode during which the capital of the banking sector has been depleted due to loan losses, resulting in a negative net worth of the banking sector.4Therefore, the use of the term "banking crisis" in our research refers to major disruptions in a country's banking system, not just minor downturns or disturbances. By focusing on banking crises in our research paper, we were able to isolate the impact of banks on the provision of credit and liquidity to firms during times of distress. I believe that combining this type of empirical research on banking crises with practical experience from bank supervisors and market participants, such as those attending this conference, helps us all to understand and address the problems associated with banking crises--and perhaps even to help to prevent them. Much work has been done on how financial intermediaries and financial markets facilitate investment by firms and, hence, promote economic growth.5Financial intermediaries and financial markets are generally thought to reduce information asymmetry problems that can make raising external funds difficult and expensive for firms. Well-functioning and well-developed financial intermediaries and markets thus should particularly benefit firms that rely most heavily on external funding to finance their growth.6Conversely--and this is the novel aspect of our research--crises in the financial sector thus should have a disproportionately negative impact on firms that rely heavily on external sources of finance. In particular, we investigate whether the impact of a banking crisis on sectors dependent on external sources of financing varies with the level of development of the financial system. If the banking system is the key element allowing firms that depend heavily upon external funding sources to finance their growth, then an impairment of these intermediaries--in a system where such intermediaries are important--should have a disproportionate contractionary impact on precisely those sectors that flourished in "normal" times, due to their reliance on banks. Thus, an important element of our analysis is the level of development of a country's financial system, that is, whether it is "deep" (more developed) or "shallow" (less developed).7 To address these issues, we gathered data from thirty-eight developed and developing countries that have experienced a banking crisis during the last quarter century.8We documented clear linkages between the state of the banking system and the performance of the real economy. More specifically, we find that in well-developed and deep financial systems, sectors highly dependent on external sources of funding tend to experience a greater contraction during a banking crisis than do externally dependent sectors in countries with shallower financial systems. In other words, sectors of the real economy that rely heavily on external finance (that is, do not fund capital expenditures through cash flow) tend to experience a substantially slower growth of value added during a banking crisis than those sectors that do not rely so heavily on external funding. This effect is more pronounced in countries with more developed financial systems. Our results hold for a wide group of countries and over a long time span, but as I note below, have particular relevance to emerging market countries. While these results are consistent with a so-called credit channel impact of banking crises on real economic activity, there are further implications of the "credit channel" view that we explore in more detail. Among firms that depend heavily on outside financing, young firms with short histories and firms with a large fraction of hard-to-measure intangible assets, for example, may have particular difficulties raising funds from the market due to information problems. Instead, such firms would tend to depend heavily on banks and other intermediaries for funding. Consistent with this, we find a greater negative impact of banking crises on growth for industries dominated by young firms that are highly dependent on external finance and for industries with high levels of intangible assets. While all of these results are consistent with a "credit channel" view of the impact of banking crises on real economic activity, we certainly need to explore some alternative explanations before drawing final conclusions. In particular, many factors may be correlated with the level of financial development of a country, so we want to make sure that the level of financial development is not simply standing in for something else. The differences in financial development, for example, can arise from historical, political, cultural, and legal reasons. There is a well-developed literature emphasizing, for instance, that the nature of a country's legal system and the manner in which laws are enforced can have an effect on the development of its financial system.9Similarly, other country-specific factors also might have an influence on how financial institutions and markets behave. If one of these factors, rather than financial development, is driving the results, we might have to interpret those results differently. As a way to try to address such questions of interpretation, we controlled for the quality of the political and legal institutions in the countries included in our data analysis. We found that our results still hold, namely that a banking crisis has a more pronounced effect on a country's economy when its financial system is more developed and when its firms rely more on external finance, even after taking into account a variety of proxies for the differences in the quality of institutions and legal structures across countries. Furthermore, we explored differences in the effect of banking crises on countries based on their overall levels of development. In other words, we wanted to assess separately the impact of banking crises in less-developed countries versus more-developed countries since, of course, overall economic development and financial sector development tend to be correlated. Interestingly, when we remove Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries from our sample, the effects of banking crises were more pronounced, indicating that banking crises in emerging market countries likely do more harm to the overall economy than in developed countries. Interestingly, our research also provides evidence that crises affecting the banking sector can have a more serious impact on the real economy than alternative economic disruptions such as economic contractions or shocks such as currency crises.10That is, banking crises have represented a unique shock to a country's financial system. These results suggest that the "credit channel" effects on real economic activity we document are operating through the banking system. In short, the results highlight that a healthy banking system generally contributes to strong economic growth, and banking crises can present a substantial drag on the real economy. This underscores why we consider it important to analyze the economic impact of financial crises involving the banking sector, and to mitigate potential drivers of such crises. Indeed, in the case of Asia a decade ago, the trouble experienced by the region's banks, given their dominant role in Asian financial systems, created disruptions that spread across Asia. Problems in the real economies of Asian countries would likely not have been so great had the banking systems been stronger. So far I have been discussing results that focus on the real growth impact on sectors or industries. We were able to obtain data on the impact on individual firms but for a smaller sample than for the sectors or industries. We use a variety of measures for individual firm performance, such as real growth in sales, real growth in earnings before interest and taxes, and real stock market returns. The results are the same as in the sectoral level data I described above: The performance of firms heavily dependent upon external sources of funding is disproportionately negatively affected in deep financial systems during periods of banking crisis. In addition to providing microeconomic support for the credit channel view, individual firm data also allow us to examine important hypotheses about the impact that transparency and public disclosure by individual firms can have to mitigate the effects of banking crises on those firms. One author, using data from the Asian crisis, has investigated the relationship between stock market performance and quality of public disclosure.11Our recent paper also delved into this issue by using certain proxies for individual firm disclosure practices, such as having a listing in the United States (hence disclosing by U.S. standards) or by being audited by one of the major international accounting firms. Our results suggested that greater public disclosure had a favorable impact on stock market performance, both during the crisis period as well as afterward. Indeed, there is a large literature supporting the idea that a country can benefit by promoting transparency and disclosure. But I know that there is still ongoing debate about the effects of globalization on financial markets and economies and I believe that further research and discussion about the benefits of openness and transparency are worthwhile. Perhaps a discussion on this topic will ensue at this conference over the next two days. I will pose one final topic before moving on to some policy suggestions. I believe it is important to try to understand the long-term impact of a crisis on the financial system and the real economy. In particular, it is useful to examine whether a particularly deep crisis or a recent one may have effects on participants in that country during the next crisis. Interestingly, our recent work provided some evidence that past crises do not necessarily create a stoppage of bank credit to firms once "normal" times returned, but when the next crisis occurred, its impact on growth was usually deeper in magnitude. Thoughts on Preventing and Managing Banking CrisesHaving raised some issues for consideration about banking crises--and having tried to provide some answers, where possible--I would now like to offer some thoughts that policymakers may consider as they try to prevent and manage banking crises. I note that market participants should also consider these ideas, since it is not just policymakers who can learn lessons from past crises. First, one of the major lessons to be learned from past banking crises is the importance of a healthy banking system. Maintaining a safe and sound banking system, given the key role that banks play in most financial systems, contributes to the health of a country's overall economy. Most countries do this by some form of banking supervision, generally accepting that the added protection to the banking system in the form of supervision is worth the costs of the regulatory burden. Effective banking supervision has helped foster a banking system in the United States that today is safe, sound, and well-capitalized. One of the ways that bank supervisors can help promote a healthy banking system is to focus banks on the development of improved risk-management techniques. Indeed, identifying, assessing, and promoting sound risk-management practices have become central elements of good supervisory practice. Bankers should ensure that their risk-management practices include a focus on less likely outcomes, not just the most common ones, and that the bank is being adequately compensated for the risk it is bearing. The use of exercises such as stress tests and scenario analyses can help bankers identify certain points of vulnerability that may arise during potential downturns. In some countries, bank supervisors have an explicit responsibility to ensure that banks adhere to existing laws and maintain and implement appropriate consumer protection policies. For example, in the United States the federal banking agencies play an important role in fostering not just a safe and sound banking system, but also one that is diverse and fair in meeting the needs of consumers. Good banking supervision is vital to the health of banks, particularly when the banking system has some type of government support--for example, either explicit or implicit deposit insurance. But ensuring a safe and sound banking system that is also competitive and profitable has its challenges. Clearly, banking supervision on its own can create some distortions or burden, so it is also very important to let market forces work as much as possible, with reliance on market participants--in their role as depositors, counterparties, creditors, and shareholders--to exercise discipline on banks. Policymakers have to find the right balance between the more visible hand of government supervision and the invisible hand of market forces. Second, pursuing sound macroeconomic policies is another way for policymakers to help prevent banking and financial crises. For instance, it is beneficial to have sound and sustainable monetary and fiscal policy to provide a stable operating environment for entrepreneurs and financial institutions and markets. Many past crises were precipitated either by an external shock affecting an already vulnerable financial system or by market participants targeting vulnerabilities in certain markets or in certain institutions or governments. History has taught us that if a condition or policy looks unsustainable, it most likely is and market forces will eventually bring it to an end. To paraphrase Herb Stein, if a policy cannot go on forever, it won't! Third, I referred earlier to research on the benefits of disclosure and transparency. Our analysis contributes to the evidence that having an open and transparent financial system and economy, accompanied by reliable and accurate accounting standards, generally benefits a country and its market participants. A core principle of economics is that markets are more competitive, and therefore more efficient, when accurate information is available to both consumers and suppliers. Information is thus critical to the effective functioning of financial markets: timely and accurate financial information about markets, market participants, and governments is important for all actors to be able to make informed decisions. This is of course true during normal times, but perhaps more so during a crisis when market participants and governments are sometimes trying to determine where problems lie and how severe they might be. Lack of information can present additional problems during a crisis, and incorrect or incomplete information provided by firms, governments, and other institutions can severely undermine their credibility, worsening the problem. ConclusionThese conferences on the Asian crisis serve as excellent forums to analyze the events of ten years ago and share views on ways to prevent and mitigate future crises. They also allow market participants to offer feedback on past policy steps, including which past policies helped and which ones hindered. Policymakers and market participants must remember that preventing and mitigating financial crises requires a blend of sharp analysis, keen judgment, practical experience, and rigorous understanding of how markets work--in both normal times and times of stress. I have tried to provide a framework for analyzing the impact of banking crises on real economic activity, described some results analyzing crises from around the world during the last quarter century, and offered three policy lessons: the importance of a healthy banking system, of sound macroeconomic policy, and of high levels of transparency and disclosure. This is by no means an exhaustive list but I hope it can provide a useful starting point for the discussions that will take place during the rest of the day. As a final thought, I counsel policymakers and market participants alike to remember that no two crises are the same. Recall that the Asian crisis of 1997-98 actually manifested itself differently across Asian countries, with each country having its own set of problems and needing to find its own solutions. In other words, there is never a single remedy to each crisis and each brings its own surprises and risks. Clearly, we can all learn a lot from past crises--which is the value in holding conferences like this one. But we should not assume that past remedies will fully solve the next set of problems or address all future risks. The key is to take lessons from the past and tailor them appropriately to future situations of potential distress. References Beck, T., Levine, R., Loayza, N. (2000)."Finance and the Sources of Growth,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 58, pp. 261–300. Braun, M., Larrain, B., (2005)."Finance and the Business Cycle: International, Inter-industry Evidence."Journal of Finance,vol. 60 (June), pp. 1097–1128. Caprio, G., Klingbiel, D. (2002)."Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Financial Crises."In: Klingebiel, D., Laeven, L. (Eds.),Managing the Real and Fiscal Effects of Banking Crises. World Bank Discussion Paper No. 428, Washington, DC, pp. 31–49. King, R.G., Levine, R. (1993)."Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right."Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 153, pp. 717–738. Kroszner, R.S., Strahan, P.E. (2005). "Regulation and Deregulation of the U.S. Banking Industry: Causes, Consequences, and Implications for the Future. In: Rose, N. (Ed.),Economics of Regulation. NBER Conference Volume, Forthcoming. Kroszner, Randall and Luc Laeven and Daniela Klingbiel (2007)."Banking Crises, Financial Dependence, and Growth, Journal of Financial Economics,"vol. 87 (April), pp. 187-228. La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W. (1998). "Law and Finance,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 106, pp. 1113–1155. Levine, R. (1997)."Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda (371 KB PDF),"Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 35, pp. 688–726. Levine, R. (2005). "Finance and Growth." In: Aghion, P., Durlauf, S. (Eds.),Handbook of Economic Growth. Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Forthcoming. Milesi-Ferretti, G.M., Razin, A. (1998)."Current account reversals and currency crises: empirical regularities (176 KB PDF)."NBER Working Paper No. 6620, Cambridge, MA. Mitton, T. (2002)."A Cross-Firm Analysis of the Impact of Corporate Governance on the East Asian Financial Crisis,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 64, pp. 215–241. Rajan, R.G., Zingales, L. (1998)."Financial Dependence and Growth,"American Economic Review, vol. 88, pp. 559–596. Footnotes 1.The views I express today are, of course, my own and do not necessarily represent those of the Board of Governors or the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2.Kroszner, Laeven, and Klingbiel (2007).Return to text 3.Our paper provides a literature review.Return to text 4.Caprio and Klingbiel (2002).Return to text 5.See Levine (1997, 2005) and Kroszner and Strahan (2005) for overviews.Return to text 6.One measure of financial or external dependence is the fraction of capital expenditures not financing with cash flows from operations. See Rajan and Zingales (1998).Return to text 7.In our recent research paper, the proxy for depth of the financial system is the ratio of private credit to gross domestic product.Return to text 8.Clearly, determining the precise timing of crises is difficult, both in terms of identifying the beginning and the end of a crisis. In our research we experimented with alternative definitions of crisis windows, expanding and contracting the length of the crisis, pre-crisis, and post-crisis periods as well as the gap between the crisis and the pre- and postcrisis periods; our results are not sensitive to the alternative definitions.Return to text 9.La Porta et al (1998).Return to text 10.For our definition of economic contractions, see Braun and Larrain (2005); for our definition of currency crises, see Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (1998).Return to text 11.Mitton (2002).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the annual indexing of the reserve requirement exemption amount and of the low reserve tranche for 2008. These amounts are used in the calculation of reserve requirements of depository institutions. The Board also announced the annual indexing of the nonexempt deposit cutoff level and the reduced reporting limit that will be used to determine deposit reporting panels effective 2008. All depository institutions must hold a percentage of certain types of deposits as reserves in the form of vault cash, as a deposit in a Federal Reserve Bank, or as a deposit in a pass-through account at a correspondent institution. Reserve requirements currently are assessed on the depository institution's net transaction accounts (mostly checking accounts). Depository institutions must also regularly submit deposit reports of their deposits and other reservable liabilities. For net transaction accounts in 2008, the first $9.3 million, up from $8.5 million in 2007, will be exempt from reserve requirements. A 3 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts over $9.3 million up to and including $43.9 million, down from $45.8 million in 2007. A 10 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts in excess of $43.9 million. These annual adjustments, known as the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment, are based on growth in net transaction accounts and total reservable liabilities, respectively, at all depository institutions between June 30, 2006, and June 30, 2007. For depository institutions that report weekly, the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment will apply to the fourteen-day reserve computation period that begins Tuesday, November 20, 2007, and the corresponding fourteen-day reserve maintenance period that begins Thursday, December 20, 2007. For depository institutions that report quarterly, the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment will apply to the seven-day reserve computation period that begins Tuesday, December 18, 2007, and the corresponding seven-day reserve maintenance period that begins Thursday, January 17, 2008. The Board also announced changes in two other amounts, the nonexempt deposit cutoff level and the reduced reporting limit, that are used to determine the frequency with which depository institutions must submit deposit reports. The attachedFederal Registernotice contains a description of the new boundaries for deposit reporting that will be effective in 2008. The Board's notice is attached. Federal Register Notice54 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application of Bank of America Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina, to acquire ABN AMRO North America Holding Company and thereby indirectly acquire LaSalle Bank Corporation, both of Chicago, Illinois, and its subsidiary banks, LaSalle Bank National Association, Chicago, and LaSalle Bank Midwest National Association, Troy, Michigan. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the applications of County Bank, Merced, California, to purchase the assets and assume the liabilities of eleven California branches of National Bank of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, and to establish and operate branches at those branch locations. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Chicago, decreasing the discount rate at the Banks from 5-3/4 percent to 5-1/4 percent, effective immediately.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and Dallas, decreasing the discount rate at the Banks from 5-3/4 percent to 5-1/4 percent, effective immediately.
The Federal Reserve Board’s website has a new look and additional features designed to improve usability. Intuitive navigational tools, new fonts, and updated graphics and layouts will help users access information more quickly and easily. The color scheme for the website (www.federalreserve.gov) has been enhanced and more graphics have been added. A new layout makes the site’s content simpler to find. Visitors to the site will find the list of main categories has moved to the top of the home page, which allowed for the addition of a sub-navigation bar on subsequent pages. The “Breaking News” section has been renamed “Recent Developments,” to more accurately describe the information listed there; and the “Features” section has been expanded. To improve functionality, links to statistical releases, financial education resources, and career opportunities are now displayed more prominently on the page. Secondary pages also have a new look. The banners that appear at the top of these pages feature architectural details from the Board’s buildings, and links to content within each category have been relocated to aid navigation. Feature sections on the secondary pages highlight new and frequently requested content. In coming months, additional enhancements will be introduced to improve and simplify other pages on the site. The Board's website averages more than 12 million page views each month. The redesign is intended to ensure that the site remains effective and user-friendly.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its determination that disease management and mail-order pharmacy activities are complementary to the financial activity of underwriting and selling health insurance and are therefore permissible for a financial holding company under the Bank Holding Company Act. This determination was made in response to a request by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the appointment of D. Nathan Sheets as director of the Division of International Finance, effective September 23, 2007. The division supports the Board and the Federal Open Market Committee by providing information and analysis pertaining to economic and financial developments in foreign countries and the performance of the U.S. external sector. In addition, the division’s director represents the Board at international meetings and in its contacts with foreign central banks. Sheets began his career at the Board in 1993 as an economist. He became a section chief within the Division of International Finance in 1999 and was appointed to the official staff in 2001. In 2006, he was promoted to deputy associate director with responsibility for the International Financial Transactions and the Trade and Quantitative Studies sections. He is currently on detail to the International Monetary Fund where he serves as a senior adviser to the U.S. Executive Director. Sheets succeeds Karen H. Johnson, who has been named senior adviser to the Board. Johnson announced in May that she will retire from the Board in February 2008. Sheets holds a bachelor’s degree from Brigham Young University and a PhD in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the U.S. Chamber Education and Workforce Summit, Washington, D.C. When I travel around the country, meeting with students, business people, and others interested in the economy, I am occasionally asked for investment advice. Usually (though not always) the question is posed in jest. No one really expects me to tell them which three stocks they should buy. However, I know the answer to the question and I will share it with you today: Education is the best investment. Here at the U.S. Chamber Education and Workforce Summit, I don’t really need to convince you that, as an investment, education provides excellent returns, both for individuals and for society. As executives accustomed to making hard cost-benefit decisions, you doubtless assign a high priority to the quality of your business’s workforce because you know that a key--perhapsthekey--to your success is the capabilities of the people you employ. To a significant extent, those capabilities are the product of education. Here I am speaking not just of education acquired formally in classrooms before entering the workforce but also of lifelong learning that, yes, includes the formal classroom training that might first come to mind but that also includes early childhood programs, informal mentoring on the job, and mid-career retraining, to name a few examples. And when I speak of capabilities, I mean not only the knowledge derived from education but also the values, skills, and personal traits acquired through education, which are as important as, and sometimes even more important than, the specific knowledge obtained. These include such qualities as the ability to think critically, to communicate clearly and logically, and to see a project through from start to finish. Today, I would like to offer a broad overview of education and its importance to our economy from my perspective not only as an economist but also as a one-time school board member, the spouse of a teacher, and the parent of two young adults pursuing higher education. Although the United States has long been a world leader in expanding educational opportunities, we have also long grappled with challenges, such as troubling high-school dropout rates, particularly for minority and immigrant youths, and frustratingly slow and uneven progress in raising test scores and other measures of educational achievement. If we are to make progress in meeting these challenges, we must be willing to actively debate their causes and continually experiment and innovate to find solutions. The Benefits of EducationEducation imparts significant benefits both to our society and the individuals who pursue it. Economists have long recognized that the skills of the workforce are an important source of economic growth. Moreover, as the increase over time in the returns to education and skill is likely the single greatest cause of the long-term rise in economic inequality, policies that lead to broad investments in education and training can help reduce inequality while expanding economic opportunity (Bernanke, 2007). But the benefits of education are more than economic. A substantial body of evidence demonstrates that more-highly-educated individuals are happier on average, make better personal financial decisions, suffer fewer spells of unemployment, and enjoy better health. Benefiting society as a whole, educated individuals are more likely to participate in civic affairs, volunteer their time to charities, and subscribe to personal values--such as tolerance and an appreciation of cultural differences--that are increasingly crucial for the healthy functioning of our diverse society (Glaeser, Ponzetto, and Shleifer, 2006; Dee, 2004). From a macroeconomic standpoint, education is important because it is so directly linked to productivity, which, in turn, is the critical determinant of the overall standard of living. The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that, between 1987 and 2006, ongoing improvement in the education and experience of the U.S. workforce contributed 0.4 percentage point per year to the increase in nonfarm business labor productivity (U.S. Department of Labor, 2007), a significant amount. These estimates are however conservative in that they hold fixed other sources of productivity growth, such as the accumulation of various forms of capital and the advance of technology; but workers’ skills certainly contribute indirectly to productivity growth by affecting these other factors as well. For example, the state of technology is affected both by the creativity and knowledge of scientists and engineers engaged in formal research and development as well as by the efforts of skilled workers on the shop floor who find more efficient ways to accomplish a given task. Managers who develop a new business plan or find new ways to use evolving technologies can also be thought of as adding to the “intangible,” or knowledge-based, capital of the firm, which by some estimates is comparable in importance to physical capital such as factories and equipment (Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel, 2006). For individuals, the economic returns to education are substantial as well. In 2006, the median weekly earnings of college graduates were 75 percent higher than the earnings of high-school graduates. In turn, workers with a high-school degree earned 42 percent more than those without any diploma.1These differentials are large and have been growing; indeed, they have roughly doubled in the past twenty-five years or so. The source of the widening wage gap between the more-educated and less-educated is nothing more complicated than supply and demand. The demand for more-educated workers has been increasing rapidly, partly because the much more widespread use of computers and other sophisticated information and communication technologies in the workplace has increased the reward for technical skills. The supply of highly educated workers has also risen. At the start of the 1980s, 22 percent of young adults aged 25 to 29 held a college degree or more; by last year, that fraction had moved up to 28.5 percent.2Nevertheless, the supply of educated workers has not kept pace with demand, thus generating an increased salary premium for education. Because the wages of those at the top of the educational ladder have increased the fastest, increasing our investment in education can benefit not only individuals and society but also might narrow income gaps. Education and the Challenges Facing America TodayThe educational challenges our society faces should be considered in the context of three broad trends: the retirement of the baby-boom generation, the inexorable advance of the technological frontier, and the ongoing globalization of economic activity. As the baby boomers, now ranging in age from their late 40s to early 60s, leave the workforce, their places will be taken by the smaller cohort of workers born in the mid-to-late 1960s and early 1970s. As a result, the U.S. workforce--as a matter of simple arithmetic--will increase more slowly and is likely to become less experienced on average (Jorgenson and others, 2007; Aaronson and Sullivan, 2002). In a broader sense, the ratio of working people to retirees will decline, meaning that those still working will, in effect, be supporting relatively more non-working people. This year, there are about five working-age people (20-64) for every person aged 65 and older; by 2030, the ratio will be about 3-to-1 (Bernanke, 2006). The slower expansion of the labor force, all else equal, implies slower growth of potential output. More schooling for more of the workforce could help cushion the impact of this demographic transition on economic growth by boosting productivity growth. Continuing advances in technology also put a premium on education. Which jobs will be most affected by technology is difficult to predict, although some research suggests that sectors that now use information technology (IT) relatively less intensively, such as health-care and other service sectors, are likely to step up their use of software and IT services (Mann, 2003). Regardless, better-educated workers are likely better prepared to adapt to new technologies as they develop (Doms, Dunne, and Troske, 1997). Ongoing globalization of economic activity will also lead to continuing changes in the structure of the U.S. economy--including the composition of our output of both goods and services, and thus the structure of our labor force. The world economy is benefiting from the expansion of trade and the rising productivity of countries abroad that are making great strides expanding both their infrastructure and the educational attainment of their workforces. That can be good for them, and for us. Importantly, our ability to reap the benefits of globalization will depend on the flexibility of our labor force to adapt to changes in job opportunities, in part by investing in the education and training necessary to meet the new demands (Bernanke, 2004). Educational Attainment and Achievement: Where Do We Stand?The United States has a long tradition of recognizing the significant social and economic benefits of providing high-quality education for as many of its citizens as possible. The United States led the world, first, in expanding access to high-school education and, then, in the post-World War II era, access to college (Goldin, 2001; Goldin and Katz, 1999). By 1966, about half of the workforce aged 25 and older had completed high school and about 10 percent had completed college. By 2006, more than 90 percent of adults in the labor force had a high-school education and more than 20 percent held at least a bachelor’s degree. However, most of the progress over the past forty years occurred in the 1970s and early 1980s. Since then, for example, the high-school graduation rate for 25-to-29-year-olds has not increased, and the college completion rate has risen only modestly (U.S. Department of Education, 2007b). One trend is particularly disappointing: Both high-school and college completion rates for minorities continue to lag.3Over the past ten years, the high-school completion rate for whites aged 25 to 29 hovered above 93 percent, while the rate for blacks of the same age stayed near 87 percent; the rate for Hispanics, though trending up over the period, was only 63 percent last year. The gaps in college completion are wider. In recent years, more than one-third of whites aged 25 to 29 had at least a bachelor’s degree, compared with less than one-fifth of same-aged blacks and around 10 percent of Hispanics. Assessing where we stand in terms of educational achievement (how much students learn) is fraught with considerably greater difficulties than assessing attainment (how far students progress in their schooling). And, the results of various metrics highlight both discouraging and encouraging elements. The Department of Education’s National Assessment of Educational Progress shows the average reading levels of our high-school seniors have stagnated in recent years; however, our fourth graders continue to improve in reading, and both fourth and eighth graders have improved in math (U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 2007b). At the same time, some initial results from the adoption of state accountability standards suggest that they have had a positive effect on students’ test-score gains (Jacob, 2005; Hanushek and Raymond, 2004). International comparisons of student achievement are even more difficult and present a mixed picture.4Compared with students around the world, U.S. students still perform relatively well in reading and, in the lower grades, at math and science. Older U.S. students, however, show less ability to apply math and science skills than their peers in other industrialized countries. Lifelong Learning Can Help Us Meet Economic ChallengesIn the past, the U.S. education system has responded to the needs of a changing economy, and I believe that as we address such challenges as the retirement of the baby-boom generation, advancing technology, and globalization, our education system will again make an important contribution to the adjustment process. That means, of course, that we will have to grapple with difficult issues--how to boost educational attainment, particularly for minorities and immigrant youths; how to make more consistent and noticeable progress in raising academic achievement; and how to ensure that older workers have meaningful opportunities to refresh their skills. What can be done so that our educational system will continue to play a significant role in supporting economic change? In broad terms, we must begin by recognizing that learning is a lifelong process and that we have opportunities to improve education at every point along the way. Many of these opportunities lie outside the traditional route of a kindergarten-through-twelfth-grade education followed by four years of college. I’d like to comment briefly on what economists have found about the benefits of educational investments at different points in the life cycle. Early Childhood EducationBuilding the foundation for lifelong learning from the earliest ages is crucial (Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006). Research suggests that the home environment is especially important and that children who start behind find catching up increasingly difficult (Heckman and Masterov, 2007). Thus, the payoff from high-quality pre-school and home visitation programs is likely very high, especially for children born into poor or otherwise disadvantaged families. Recent research--some sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis in collaboration with the University of Minnesota--has documented high returns from early childhood programs in terms of subsequent educational attainment and in lower rates of social problems, such as crime, teenage pregnancy, and welfare dependency (Burr and Grunewald, 2006).5But early childhood education is only the beginning. Positive results from programs such as Head Start dissipate without further high-quality schooling at the elementary and secondary levels (Garces, Thomas, and Currie, 2002). Elementary and Secondary SchoolingDeciding what and how to teach students from kindergarten through high school and then evaluating our schools’ effectiveness in preparing students for the workforce and a lifetime of learning is a daunting task. I will make only a few observations on the goals we should keep in mind as we explore ways to improve learning at the elementary and secondary levels. First, we should encourage experimentation and innovation. By my reading, the research on K-12 education has, to date, yielded no easy answers to the questions of how to raise academic achievement and how to ensure that students finish high school well prepared to move on to more advanced study. A wide range of approaches has been and is being explored: smaller class size, school choice, charter school programs, accountability standards, flexibility in teacher certification rules, better teacher pay, merit-based pay, year-round schooling--the list is long and probably will get longer. The size and diversity of our country, together with the fact that state and local policymakers retain significant discretion over how to structure their educational systems, provides us a natural laboratory for assessing the effectiveness of alternative educational strategies. I view the debate about what works and what doesn’t to be a crucial part of discovering cost-effective ways to improve our educational system. The business community has an obvious interest in how well our schools prepare students for a future in the workforce and should actively participate in the debate. But we all have a stake. Students at the elementary and secondary levels are being prepared not just for work but for life. Such skills and acquired traits as critical and creative thinking, social ability, persistence, and satisfaction in accomplishment make not only good employees but good citizens as well. Exposure to the arts and culture and experience in serving the community can help support the development of these broader, harder-to-measure skills, alongside more readily measurable cognitive accomplishments in reading, math, and science. Second, teacher quality is critical. Studies show that student performance depends on putting high-quality teachers in the classroom and retaining them as long as possible (Aaronson, Barrow, and Sander, 2007; Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain, 2005; Rockoff, 2004). Indeed, many initiatives focus on linking students, especially disadvantaged students, with high-quality schools staffed by high-quality teachers. High-quality teachers instill in their young students a desire to stay in school and seek more education later in life, and the evidence suggests that the quality of teaching might have the biggest impact on lower-ability students (Murnane and Steele, 2007; Clotfelter and others, 2006; Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin, 2004). Unfortunately, our most disadvantaged communities, the ones most troubled by high dropout rates, have difficulty attracting and keeping qualified teachers. We must instill a desire among students to stay in school and to seek more education and training over their working lives. Our elementary and secondary schools must provide students a strong foundation for a life of learning. Although a wide range of remedial education programs exist, research suggests that they are more costly and less effective than a solid, sustained course of study through high school. In particular, government training programs for disadvantaged youth have a rather disappointing reputation, particularly those that are less intensive and not well tied to labor market needs (Martin and Grubb, 2001; Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith, 1999). A number of possibilities for improving the education of disadvantaged students seem worth exploring. For example, several experiments suggest that smaller schools and smaller classes may help disadvantaged students (although the benefits of such programs for the general student population remain controversial). Supplemental education, including after-school and mentoring programs such as Big Brothers Big Sisters, have been shown to boost school attendance (Grossman and Tierney, 1998). Increasing school time--either through longer school hours or summer school--also has found some support (Jacob and Lefgren, 2004). Higher EducationIn many ways, higher education represents the strongest part of the U.S. educational system, as demonstrated by the fact that students from all parts of the world come here to study. Our institutions of higher learning are extraordinarily varied, ranging from large public research universities to small liberal arts colleges to community colleges and vocational schools. The main business of our institutions of higher education is, of course, undergraduate teaching. But unlike some countries, we do not separate research and undergraduate education; our advanced, graduate-level research programs are housed in universities with strong undergraduate programs. Thus, our colleges and universities are important sources of research and development (National Science Foundation, 2007; Litan, Mitchell, and Reedy, forthcoming). More than half our basic research--the foundation for breakthroughs that create new industries--is conducted at universities. Additionally, higher education has embraced the broader mission of translating research into new products and enterprises; our colleges and universities account for 15 percent of applied research and development (National Science Foundation, 2007). The innovations that begin on campuses are diffused to businesses through patents, start-up companies, and consulting arrangements between faculty and industry. One great challenge in higher education lies in making sure our high-school graduates are prepared for it and have access to it. With college enrollment rates having leveled off in recent years, much debate surrounds how we can move more students into higher education and keep them in school until they graduate. Researchers have demonstrated a strong relationship between family income and college attendance. Since 1990, nearly 80 percent of high-school completers from high-income families (the top 20 percent of income) have enrolled in college the next fall. The proportion of those from low-income families who enroll in college the following fall has been moving up gradually, but it remains much lower--just over 50 percent.6This discrepancy holds even for students classified as high achievers: A longitudinal study of eighth graders in 1988 found that only 29 percent of those scoring in the top fourth of the group in math--but who were from families with low social and economic status--had completed a bachelor’s degree or more by 2000, while three-fourths of those from families with high social and economic status finished their undergraduate degrees (Fox, Connelly, and Snyder, 2005).7Surely, high tuition must be one barrier to attending and completing college (Card, 2001; Kane, 1994), but it is not the only barrier (Dynarski, 2005). Low-income students, in particular, are more likely to come from school and family environments that do a poor job of preparing them for a successful transition to college (Carneiro and Heckman, 2003). This suggests that supplemental programs to help under-prepared college students could improve eventual college completion rates; unfortunately, the research on the benefits of such programs is mixed, which reinforces the need to improve educational achievement in regular high school classes (Bettinger and Long, 2005; Angrist, Lang, and Oreopoulos, 2006). Community colleges have made a significant contribution to expanding educational opportunities. Offering lower costs and more-flexible schedules, they now enroll almost one-half of U.S. undergraduates. Attendance at one of these institutions is associated with higher wages, even if a degree is not completed. Evidence suggests that each year of credit at a community college is worth almost as much, in terms of increased earnings potential, as a year at a four-year college. The average student who entered, but did not complete, community college earns 9 percent to 13 percent more than the average for students who ended their education with high school. Those who completed a two-year associate degree earn an even larger premium, 15 percent to 27 percent (Kane and Rouse, 1999). And the earnings of graduates who started at two-year schools and transferred to four-year programs ultimately match those who begin their post-high-school education at four-year institutions (Gill and Leigh, 2003). Community colleges play a constructive role not only for 18-to-22-year-olds but also for older adults, providing flexible programs for obtaining new skills, specialized training contracted for by individual businesses, remedial education, and adult enrichment. Adult EducationToday we are increasingly recognizing that education need not, indeed should not, stop at the age of 22. Economists have long argued that on-the-job training and learning-by-doing are significant components of the acquisition of human capital. Research shows that the knowledge and experience gained over time through informal and formal learning on the job appear to pay off for workers and accrues particularly rapidly early in their careers (Altonji and Williams, 2005; Topel, 1991). An extensive survey of firm-sponsored training a number of years ago found that 84 percent of employees received some kind of formal training while working for their current employer, and 96 percent received some type of informal training (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1996). With the advance of technology and the need to attract and retain skilled workers, I am certain that business-sponsored training will remain an important component of the management toolkit. Upgrading skills through continuing education and training outside the job is also important, particularly in an environment in which workers can face displacement from international competition or technological advance. Recognizing this possibility, many workers continue to acquire formal education later in life than was once traditional. For example, almost one-fifth of students at post-secondary institutions of all types are at least 35 years old (National Center for Education Statistics, 2007a). And, for older workers looking to retool their skills, classroom instruction has been shown to be effective. For example, classroom training for displaced workers is estimated to boost future wages as much as for students of the usual school age, although the overall return on investment for displaced workers is lower because they have fewer remaining working years than do new entrants to the labor force (Jacobsen, LaLonde, Sullivan, 2005). Similarly, studies of a number of welfare-to-work programs have reported long-term gains for those who participated in intensive basic education and vocational training (Dyke and others, 2006; Hotz, Imbens, Klerman, 2006). Such results suggest that well-designed programs to assist workers who lose their jobs can contribute to cushioning the effects of globalization and technological change. ConclusionLet me close by reiterating that education--lifelong education for everyone, from toddlers to workers well advanced in their careers--is indeed an excellent investment for individuals and society as a whole. Education fundamentally supports advances in productivity, upon which our ability to generate continuing improvement in our standard of living depends. If we are to successfully navigate such challenges as the retirement of the baby-boom generation, advancing technology, and increasing globalization, we must work diligently to maintain the quality of our educational system where it is strong and strive to improve it where it is not. In particular, we must find ways to move more of our students, especially minorities and students from disadvantaged backgrounds, into educational opportunities after high school. To do that, we must continually experiment, innovate, and evaluate so that we can make rational decisions about what works and what doesn’t in education. Because the quality of your workforces is so vital to the success of your businesses, you as business executives must participate fully in this process, along with other stakeholders--students, parents, teachers, and policymakers. I’m encouraged that you are devoting so much energy and thought to this topic at this three-day conference. References Aaronson, Daniel, Lisa Barrow, and William Sander (2007).“Teachers and Student Achievement in the Chicago Public High Schools,”Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 25 (no. 1), pp. 95-135. Aaronson, Daniel, and Daniel G. Sullivan (2002). “Growth in Worker Quality,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,Chicago Fed Letter, vol. 2002 (February), pp. 1-4, http://www.chicagofed.org/webpages/research/index.cfm. Altonji, Joseph G., and Nicolas Williams (2005). “Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority? A Reassessment (177 KB PDF),”Industrial and Labor Relations Review, vol. 58 (April), pp. 370-97. Angrist, Joshua D., Daniel Lang, and Philip Oreopoulos (2006). “Lead Them to Water and Pay Them to Drink: An Experiment with Services and Incentives for College Achievement,” NBER Working Paper Series 12790. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, December, www.nber.org/new_archive. Bernanke, Ben S. (2004). “Trade and Jobs,” Distinguished Speaker Series, speech delivered at the Fuqua School of Business, Duke University, Durham, N.C., March 30, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents. Bernanke, Ben S. (2006). “The Coming Demographic Transition: Will We Treat Future Generations Fairly?” speech delivered at the Washington Economic Club, Washington, October 4, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents. Bernanke, Ben S. (2007). “The Level and Distribution of Economic Well-Being,” speech delivered at the Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce, Omaha, Neb., February 6, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents. Bettinger, Eric P. and Bridget Terry Long (2005). “Addressing the Needs of Under-Prepared Students in Higher Education: Does College Remediation Work?” NBER Working Paper Series 11325, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May, www.nber.org/new_archive. Burr, Jean, and Rob Grunewald (2006). “Lessons Learned: A Review of Early Childhood Development Studies (135 KB PDF),”Early Childhood Development,Staff Study, Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, April, http://minneapolisfed.org/research/studies/earlychild/lessonslearned.pdf/earlychild. Card, David (2001). “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent Econometric Problems,”Econometrica, vol. 69 (September), pp. 1127-60. Carneiro, Pedro, and James J. Heckman (2003). “Human Capital Policy,” in James J. Heckman and Alan B. Krueger, eds.,Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies?Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 77-239. Clotfelter, Charles, Elizabeth Glennie, Helen Ladd, and Jacob Vigdor (2006). “Would Higher Salaries Keep Teachers in High-Poverty Schools? Evidence from a Policy Intervention in North Carolina,” NBER Working Paper Series 12285. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June, www.nber.org/new_archive. Corrado, Carol A., Charles R. Hulten, and Daniel E. Sichel (2006). “Intangible Capital and Economic Growth,” NBER Working Paper Series 11948. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January, www.nber.org/new_archive. Dee, Thomas S. (2004). “Are There Civic Returns to Education?”Journal of Public Economics, vol. 88 (August), pp. 1697-720. Doms, Mark, Timothy Dunne, and Kenneth R. Troske (1997). “Workers, Wages, and Technology,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 112 (February), pp. 253-90. Dyke, Andrew, Carolyn J. Heinrich, Peter R. Mueser, Kenneth R. Troske, and Kyung-Seong Jeon (2006). “The Effects of Welfare-to-Work Program Activities on Labor Market Outcomes,”Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 24 (July), pp. 567-607. Dynarski, Susan (2005). "Building the Stock of College-Educated Labor,” NBER Working Paper Series 11604. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September, www.nber.org/new_archive. Fox, Mary Anne, Brooke A. Connolly, and Thomas D. Snyder (2005).Youth Indicators 2005: Trends in the Well-Being of American Youth(592 KB PDF), NCES 2005-050. Washington: Department of Education, Institute for Education Science, National Center for Education Statistics, July, http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2005/2005050.pdf. Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie (2002). “Longer-Term Effects of Head Start,”The American Economic Review, vol. 92 (September), pp. 999-1012. Gill, Andrew M., and Duane E. Leigh (2003). “Do the Returns to Community Colleges Differ Between Academic and Vocational Programs?”Journal of Human Resources, vol. 38 (Winter), pp. 134-55. Glaeser, Edward L., Giacomo Ponzetto, and Andrei Shleifer (2006). “Why Does Democracy Need Education?” NBER Working Paper Series 12128. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March, www.nber.org/new_archive. Grossman, Jean Baldwin, and Joseph P. Tierney (1998). “Does Mentoring Work? An Impact Study of the Big Brothers Big Sisters Program,”Evaluation Review, vol. 22 (June), pp. 403-26. Goldin, Claudia (2001). “The Human-Capital Century and American Leadership: Virtues of the Past (220 KB PDF),”Journal of Economic History, vol. 61 (June), pp. 263-92. Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz (1999). “The Shaping of Higher Education: The Formative Years in the United States, 1890-1940,”Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 13 (Winter), pp. 37-62. Hanushek Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steven G. Rivkin (2004). “Why Public Schools Lose Teachers,”Journal of Human Resources, vol. 39 (Spring), pp. 326-54. Hanushek, Eric A., and Margaret E. Raymond (2004). “Does School Accountability Lead to Improved Student Performance?” NBER Working Paper Series 10591; Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June, www.nber.org/new_archive. Heckman, James J., and Alan B. Krueger (2003).Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies?Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Heckman, James, J., Robert J. LaLonde, and Jeffrey A. Smith (1999). “The Economics and Econometrics of Active Labor Market Programs (677 KB PDF),” in Orley C. Ashenfelter and David A. Card, eds.,Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3A. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science and North-Holland, pp. 1865-2097. Heckman, James J., and Dimitriy V. Masterov (2007). “The Productivity Argument for Investing in Young Children,” NBER Working Paper Series 13016. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April, www.nber.org/new_archive. Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua (2006). “The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior,”Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 24 (July), pp. 411-82. Hotz, V. Joseph, Guido W. Imbens, and Jacob Alex Klerman (2006). “Evaluating the Differential Effects of Alternative Welfare-to-Work Training Components: A Re-Analysis of the California GAIN Program,” NBER Working Paper Series 11939. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January, www.nber.org/new_archive. Jacob, Brian A. (2005). “Accountability, Incentives, and Behavior: The Impact of High-Stakes Testing in the Chicago Public Schools,”Journal of Public Economics, vol. 89 (June), pp. 761-96. Jacob, Brian A., and Lars Lefgren (2004). “Remedial Education and Student Achievement,”Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 86 (February), pp. 226-44. Jacobson, Louis, Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel Sullivan (2005). “The Impact of Community College Retraining on Older Displaced Workers: Should We Teach Old Dogs New Tricks?”Industrial and Labor Relations Review, vol. 58 (April), pp. 398-415. Jorgenson, Dale W., Richard J. Goettle, Mun S. Ho, Daniel T. Slesnick, and Peter J. Wilcoxen (2007). “U.S. Labor Supply and Demand in the Long Run,” prepared for “Labor Supply in the New Century (895 KB PDF),” the 52nd Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Mass., June 18-20, www.bos.frb.org/economic/conf/conf52. Kane, Thomas J. (1994). ”College Entry by Blacks Since 1970: The Role of College Costs, Family Background, and the Returns to Education,”Journal of Political Economy, vol. 102 (October), pp. 878-911. Kane, Thomas J., and Cecilia Elena Rouse (1999). “The Community College: Educating Students at the Margin Between College and Work,”Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 13 (Winter), pp. 63-84. Litan, Robert E., Lesa Mitchell, and E.J. Reedy (forthcoming). “Commercializing University Innovations: A Better Way,” inInnovation Policy and the Economy, vol. 8. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Martin, John P., and David Grubb (2001). “What Works and For Whom? A Review of OECD Countries’ Experiences with Active Labour Market Policies,”Swedish Economic Policy Review, vol. 8 (Fall), pp. 9-56. Mann, Catherine L. (2003). “Globalization of IT Services and White Collar Jobs: The Next Wave of Productivity Growth,” International Economics Policy BriefsPB03-11. Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, December, www.iie.com/publications/pubs.cfm. Murnane, Richard J., and Jennifer L. Steele (2007). “What Is The Problem? The Challenge of Providing Effective Teachers for All Children,”Future of Children, vol. 17 (Spring), pp. 15-43, www.futureofchildren.org. National Science Foundation (2007). “U.S. R&D Increased 6.0% in 2006 According to the NSF Projections (55 KB PDF),” NSF Report 07-317. Arlington, Va.: Division of Science Resource Statistics, National Science Foundation, April, www.nsf.gov/statistics/infbrief/nsf07317. Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain (2005). “Teachers, Schools, and Academic Achievement,”Econometrica, vol. 73 (March), pp. 417-58. Rockoff, Jonah E. (2004). “The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence from Panel Data,”American Economic Review, vol. 94 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 247-52. Rolnick, Art, and Rob Grunewald (2003). “Early Childhood Development: Economic Development with a High Public Return,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,Fedgazette, vol. 2003 (March), http://minneapolisfed.org/pubs/fedgaz/03-03/earlychild.cfm. Topel, Robert (1991). “Specific Capital, Mobility, and Wages: Wages Rise with Job Seniority,”Journal of Political Economy, vol. 99 (February), pp. 145-76. U.S. Census Bureau and U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (2007).Current Population Survey. Washington: Census Bureau, www.census.gov/cps. U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Statistics (2007a).Digest of Education Statistics: 2006. Washington: Department of Education, http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d06. U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Statistics (2007b).The Condition of Education 2000-2007. Washington: Department of Education, http://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe. U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (1996). “BLS Reports on the Amount of Formal and Informal Training Received by Employees,” press release, December 19, www.bls.gov/news.release/sept.nws.htm. U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (2007). “Preliminary Multifactor Productivity Trends,” press release, May 24, www.bls.gov/news.release/prod3.nr0.htm. Footnotes 1.The data are weekly earnings of full-time wage and salary workers aged twenty-five and older and are derived from the Current Population Survey, published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.Return to text 2.The data are derived from the Current Population Survey, published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.Return to text 3.The data are derived from the Current Population Survey, March and Annual Social and Economic Supplement, 1971-2006, published by the U.S. Department of Commerce.Return to text 4.The results of two prominent international assessments--The Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study, conducted under the aegis of the International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement, and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development’s Program for International Student Assessment--are summarized in the 2006 Digest of Education Statistics published by the U.S. Department of Education (2007a). http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d06/ch_6.aspReturn to text 5.More information on the Early Childhood Research Collaborative and copies of its research papers can be obtained from the website of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, www.earlychildhoodrc.org.Return to text 6.These data are derived from the annual October Supplement to the Current Population Survey. They are summarized in the U.S. Department of Education’sCondition of Education 2007available at http://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/2007/section3/indicator 25.asp#info.Return to text 7.Socioeconomic status was measured by a composite score on parental education and occupations and family income. The study also found that the proportion of low-scoring math students from high socioeconomic families who completed at least a bachelor’s degree was 30 percent versus only 3 percent for those from lower socioeconomic families. For those in the middle quintiles of both scores and family characteristics, the proportion was 21 percent.Return to text
The federal financial regulatory agencies and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) on Tuesday issued a statement encouraging federally regulated financial institutions and state-supervised entities that service securitized residential mortgages to review to determine the full extent of their authority under pooling and servicing agreements to identify borrowers at risk of default and pursue appropriate loss mitigation strategies designed to preserve homeownership. Significant numbers of hybrid adjustable-rate mortgages will reset throughout the remainder of this year and next. Many subprime and other mortgage loans have been transferred into securitization trusts that are governed by pooling and servicing agreements. These agreements may allow servicers to contact borrowers at risk of default, assess whether default is reasonably foreseeable, and, if so, apply loss mitigation strategies designed to achieve sustainable mortgage obligations. Servicers may have the flexibility to contact borrowers in advance of loan resets. Appropriate loss mitigation strategies may include, for example, loan modifications, deferral of payments, or a reduction of principal. In addition, institutions should consider referring appropriate borrowers to qualified homeownership counseling services that may be able to work with all parties to avoid unnecessary foreclosures. The statement, which was issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision, the National Credit Union Administration, and CSBS, is attached.
Washington--The federal financial regulatory agencies today requested public comment on a proposed statement encouraging federally regulated financial institutions to follow best practices to protect federal benefit payments from garnishment orders. Federal law protects federal benefit payments--such as Social Security benefits, Supplemental Security Income benefits, Veterans’ benefits, Federal Civil Service retirement benefits, and Federal Railroad benefits--from garnishment orders and the claims of judgment creditors subject to certain exceptions, such as garnishment orders relating to alimony or child support payments. The proposed statement lists best practices followed by financial institutions in this area, invites suggestions on other practices the agencies should consider, and encourages financial institutions to stay apprised of any future guidance issued by the Social SecurityAdministration or Department of Veterans Affairsregarding garnishment practices and of developments in the courts in their jurisdiction regarding garnishment practices. The proposed statement, which was issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision, and the National Credit Union Administration, is attached. Comment is requested by 60 days after publication in the Federal Register. Federal Register Notice62 KB PDF|TEXT View comments
Governor Kevin Warsh To the State University of New York at Albany’s School of Business, Albany, New York It is good to be back in upstate New York. Thank you to the School of Business of the University of Albany for inviting me. I am particularly heartened to see old friends, new students, and prominent business leaders in attendance. I played in the New York State Public High School Tennis Championships on the other side of this campus, so this is certainly familiar terrain. However, I hope to perform better in my remarks today than I did with my racquet twenty years ago. I have been honored to serve in Washington, D.C. for the past 5-1/2 years. My knowledge of the economy has deepened by working with my colleagues to put fiscal and monetary policy into practice. Nonetheless, with each passing day, it is more obvious that I learned much of what I need to know about the real economy in my first eighteen years here in upstate New York. The current period of heightened financial market volatility has drawn more attention than usual to the policy actions of the Federal Reserve. Returning home at this time serves as a useful reminder that the decisions we make in Washington matter on the front lines of the real economy. Our monetary tools, for example, affect the ability of aspiring homeowners to take out a first mortgage. They also matter to retirees on fixed budgets, who are vulnerable to escalating prices, and to graduates of this and other universities looking for jobs. Our supervision and regulatory policies, to cite another example, matter to businesses, large and small, looking to borrow from banks to expand their operations. On the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), my colleagues and I seek to deploy our monetary policy tools to help keep the U.S. economy on an even keel.1We try to provide the right mix of policy prescriptions, patience, and perspective to counter possible adverse developments. In evaluating the state of the U.S. economy, its prospects, and the current stance of policy, we typically turn to such arcana from the economics textbooks as the term structure of interest rates, the shape of the Phillips curve, trends on the natural rate of unemployment, changing risk premiums, the exchange value of the dollar, and marginal propensities to consume as asset values change, to name just a few. While these indicators and relationships are important, many of the enduring teachings needed to evaluate the financial markets and U.S. economy (particularly in times of financial tumult) are well known without the technical jargon all across the country: Trees don't grow to the sky. There is no free lunch. You shouldn't put all your eggs in one basket. There is no substitute for doing your own homework. And my favorite, that which can't go on forever usually doesn't.2 My intent today is not to suggest that the Federal Reserve is somehow omniscient regarding the path of the U.S. economy. Nor is it my intent to suggest that the Federal Reserve's knowledge and tools are sufficiently surgical to steer the U.S. economy completely unscathed through the choppy waters of financial market turbulence. And of course, I do not literally mean to suggest that common aphorisms provide an infallible compass to guide the economy past shocks of one sort or another. Instead, my goal is to describe the Federal Reserve's monetary responsibilities, highlight the critical role of liquidity in financial markets, and discuss the recent financial market turmoil. While the subprime-mortgage markets showed some of the earliest and most pronounced indications of weakness, I believe that problems afflicting the subprime-mortgage markets served more as the trigger than the fundamental cause of recent market turmoil and economic uncertainty. Monetary Responsibilities and Financial MarketsBy way of background, allow me to highlight the Federal Reserve's dual mandate for monetary policy, as embodied in the Federal Reserve Act. The Federal Reserve's statutory objectives are to institute policies that foster maximum employment and price stability. To ensure that these objectives are consistent with each other and with strong, enduring economic performance over time, my colleagues, past and present, interpret "maximum employment" to mean maximum sustainable employment. In pursuing this objective, the Federal Reserve is trying to foster an environment in which those who are looking for work can reasonably find it. Similarly, we generally interpret our congressional mandate to ensure "price stability" to mean that inflation (the rate of price change for a broad range of products and services) is at sufficiently low and predictable levels so that it is not a factor in the economic planning of households and businesses. The principal instruments of monetary policy conducted by the Federal Reserve--open market operations, the discount rate, and reserve requirements--do not operate in a vacuum.3Rather, they operate dynamically in association with ever-changing financial market conditions to produce effects on the real economy. Indeed, well-functioning financial markets are a precondition for a sustainable, prosperous economy. Financial markets facilitate the flow of capital from individuals and institutions that have savings to individuals and institutions with investment opportunities that are deemed worthwhile. When functioning properly, financial markets may also lower financing costs by allocating risks to suppliers of capital most willing and able to bear them. Investments that build human and physical capital, in turn, generate economic growth and ultimately raise living standards. In addition, financial markets should serve as a shock absorber of sorts for both individuals and businesses. The capital cushions of financial intermediaries, for example, should help mitigate the impact of financial shocks on the overall economy. Conversely, when financial markets function poorly, the capital allocation process I just described is impaired, and worthwhile investment projects may go unfunded. In the extreme, savers refuse to part with their funds for capital investments at virtually any price. Instead, they retreat to the shore for safety, waiting for calmer seas and cooler heads to prevail. As I have noted previously, "While policymakers and market participants know with certainty that these episodes will occur, [we] must be humble in [our] ability to predict the timing, scope, and duration of these periods of financial distress."4 To avoid these outcomes altogether, some believe that the Federal Reserve should treat financial stability itself as a goal. Often that is seen to imply a preference by policymakers for the perpetuation of existing financial institutions and products. That is not a view I share. The level of economic activity would invariably be lower if financial stability alone were our guiding light; protecting incumbents at the expense of innovators would prove detrimental to the long-term vibrancy of the economy. We should be extremely wary of protecting financial institutions and their various stakeholders from incurring losses. Such actions distort asset prices and critically impair the efficiency of capital allocation. The desire for well-functioning markets does not require us to insulate asset prices or individual financial institutions from the buffeting of the marketplace. Liquidity and Well-Functioning Financial MarketsNow, let me briefly highlight a key attribute of well-functioning financial markets: they function best when they attract sufficient liquidity. In previous remarks, I advanced the notion that liquidity can be thought of as roughly comparable to investor confidence.5Liquidity exists when investors are confident and willing to assume risks. And liquidity persists when risks are quantifiable and investors are creditworthy. To trace the origins of recent financial markets turmoil, let's recall a time when the environment was more benign and financial markets were flush with liquidity. This does not require a long memory, as it aptly characterized our capital markets just four months ago. In early June, I remarked that: These financial market conditions were, in part, I argued, the consequence of a long period of remarkably supportive macroeconomic conditions, the acceleration in financial innovation, particularly the growth of structured finance products, and the continued export of the culture of capitalism to emerging-market countries. Taken together, confidence fostered the continued propagation of new securities, new products, and new markets. Not surprisingly, liquidity was ample. Did Success Sow the Seeds of Distress?So, what could go wrong? In times of abundant liquidity, investors that were no longer comfortable with their financial positions could readily sell their holdings. Similarly, financial institutions could distribute the securities they originated with few constraints. Like others who had grown increasingly watchful about the ebullience in the financial markets, I wondered whether the risks were being given their due: Confidence can be fleeting. Confidence can beget complacency. If, in liquid times, investors in structured products become complacent, they may not understand fully the value of the underlying assets. High levels of confidence, perhaps even complacency, were also observable in the behavior of many financial intermediaries. Many hedge funds, growing in size and scope, invested in less-liquid assets in search of higher expected returns. Many commercial banks increased sponsorship of structured investment vehicles to invest in long-term securities, often financing them off-balance-sheet with short-term commercial paper. Those financial intermediaries that recognized the risks of extrapolating high levels of liquidity indefinitely were threatened with eroding market share and less-impressive profit profiles. They may have hoped that robust trading markets would allow them to exit positions ahead of a crowded trade. But, to paraphrase an old Wall Street saw, they don't ring a bell when the markets are at the top or at the bottom. As you know, liquidity conditions started to deteriorate by mid-July. Subprime-mortgage markets suffered significantly from a rapid withdrawal of liquidity. They were a particularly tempting target: Many subprime mortgage products were newer, performance histories were shorter, prices were rising faster, securitization structures were more complex, disclosure was more opaque, and credit standards were weaker than most other asset classes. But, were subprime credit problems the source of contagion causing broader reductions in liquidity and market functioning, as has become a common refrain? Or did reductions in liquidity--and concomitant changes in investor sentiment--simply manifest themselves first in the subprime-mortgage markets? If the latter is the case, then the true causes of recent financial tumult may well have preceded the turmoil in the subprime-mortgage markets altogether. And policy prescriptions should be judged accordingly. Subprime Lending: The Spark, Not the CauseThroughout the summer, delinquency rates for subprime adjustable-rate mortgages jumped as house prices decelerated and effective interest rates rose. The rate of serious delinquencies for subprime mortgages with adjustable interest rates reached close to 15 percent in July. Investors incurred large losses from forced sales of securities backed by subprime mortgages. Credit-rating agencies downgraded numerous securities backed by subprime and alt-A mortgages. The resulting investor skepticism about the accuracy of ratings, combined with mounting losses at mortgage lenders, caused investors to pull back from a broad range of structured products, even though unrelated to mortgages. Financing for leveraged buyouts halted; demand for securities backed by syndicated loans evaporated. Investors began to shun non-mortgage related asset-backed commercial paper. These subsequent financial problems may not be a reflection of subprime contagion after all. Instead, it may be that investors fundamentally lost confidence in their ability to value a broad range of assets, particularly those that rely on robust securitization and secondary markets. Moreover, uncertainty about the ability of large financial institutions to fund their commitments eroded confidence in counterparties more generally. Risk premiums and term premiums rose rapidly, and investors sought refuge. The principles, products, and practices that served so many so well for so long seemed somehow ill-suited to the evolving financial architecture. Markets that rely less on securitizations, and are more transparent, have fared better in recent days and weeks. The stock market, while quite volatile, is about unchanged from mid-June levels. In the corporate bond market, spreads have widened somewhat, but current levels are close to historic averages, and issuance of investment-grade bonds has been quite sizable. Issuance of speculative-grade bonds has been sharply reduced, but aside from difficulties of LBO-related deals, this may reflect issuers' willingness to await improved conditions. Not unlike prior episodes, it seems increasingly apparent that many investors and financial intermediaries became so content with the benign economic conditions and robust financial markets that they tended to act with confidence greater than warranted by the fundamentals. Indeed, some may have overly relied on credit ratings as sole gatekeepers for evaluating risks. So perhaps, in some sense, markets can become too liquid. In this case, markets may appear to function smoothly, but the risk-based pricing that lies at the heart of how financial markets efficiently allocate capital is impaired. The gloss of confidence may cause a misallocation of resources, and investors and financial intermediaries can be sidelined for a time, undermining the normal functioning of market operations. ConclusionSome months ago, I asked, "What happens when liquidity falters?"8Highlighting the risks of a liquidity shock at some indeterminate point in the future is easier than ascertaining the consequences with precision. Reduced liquidity conditions in markets today stem from a pullback in investors' willingness to take risks, which may have been triggered, but I argue not caused, by losses in subprime-mortgage markets. Thus, a broader reassessment of risk positions appears at work, especially for products that are opaque or complex. Investors who had relied on credit ratings alone are now confronted with having to perform their own credit and market valuations. Some may now find they are not well-equipped to make these evaluations. How quickly markets normalize may depend on the speed with which investors and counterparties gain comfort in their abilities to value assets. The adjustment process by private investors has increased the risk that banks may increasingly be called upon as backup providers of funding. The Federal Reserve responded to these developments by providing reserves to the banking system; it announced a cut in the discount rate of 50 basis points and adjustments to the Reserve Banks' usual discount window practices to facilitate the provision of term financing. In addition, earlier this week, the FOMC lowered its target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points. The action was intended to help forestall some of the adverse effects on the broader economy that might arise from the disruptions in financial markets and to promote moderate growth over time. Recent developments in financial markets, including impaired price discovery, have increased the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook. What originated as a liquidity shock could potentially give rise to increases in credit risk. The Committee will continue to assess the effects of these and other developments on economic prospects and will act as needed to meet our dual mandate, fostering price stability and economic growth.Footnotes1.The views expressed herein are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of other members of the Board of Governors or of the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful for the assistance ofNellie LiangandDaniel Covitzof Board staff, who contributed to these remarks.Return to text2.That is a slight paraphrasing of Herbert Stein's self-styled "Stein's Law" (Herbert Stein, 1998,What I Think: Essays on Economics, Politics, and Life,Washington: AEI Press, p. 32).Return to text3.A fuller description of the tools available to Federal Reserve policymakers is in Laurence H. Meyer (1998), "Come with Me to the FOMC," Gillis Lecture, speech delivered at Williamette University, Salem, Ore., April 2, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents.Return to text4.Kevin Warsh (2007), "Market Liquidity: Definitions and Implications," speech delivered at the Institute of International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington, March 5, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents.Return to text5.Kevin Warsh (2007), "Financial Intermediation and Complete Markets," speech delivered at the European Economics and Financial Centre, London, June 5, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents.Return to text6.Warsh, "Financial Intermediation and Complete Markets."Return to text7.Warsh, "Financial Intermediation and Complete Markets."Return to text8.Warsh, "Financial Intermediation and Complete Markets."Return to text Footnotes 1.The views expressed herein are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of other members of the Board of Governors or of the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful for the assistance ofNellie LiangandDaniel Covitzof Board staff, who contributed to these remarks.Return to text 2.That is a slight paraphrasing of Herbert Stein's self-styled "Stein's Law" (Herbert Stein, 1998,What I Think: Essays on Economics, Politics, and Life,Washington: AEI Press, p. 32).Return to text 3.A fuller description of the tools available to Federal Reserve policymakers is in Laurence H. Meyer (1998), "Come with Me to the FOMC," Gillis Lecture, speech delivered at Williamette University, Salem, Ore., April 2, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents.Return to text 4.Kevin Warsh (2007), "Market Liquidity: Definitions and Implications," speech delivered at the Institute of International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington, March 5, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents.Return to text 5.Kevin Warsh (2007), "Financial Intermediation and Complete Markets," speech delivered at the European Economics and Financial Centre, London, June 5, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents.Return to text 6.Warsh, "Financial Intermediation and Complete Markets."Return to text 7.Warsh, "Financial Intermediation and Complete Markets."Return to text 8.Warsh, "Financial Intermediation and Complete Markets."Return to text
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate 50 basis points to 4-3/4 percent. Economic growth was moderate during the first half of the year, but the tightening of credit conditions has the potential to intensify the housing correction and to restrain economic growth more generally. Today’s action is intended to help forestall some of the adverse effects on the broader economy that might otherwise arise from the disruptions in financial markets and to promote moderate growth over time. Readings on core inflation have improved modestly this year. However, the Committee judges that some inflation risks remain, and it will continue to monitor inflation developments carefully. Developments in financial markets since the Committee’s last regular meeting have increased the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook. The Committee will continue to assess the effects of these and other developments on economic prospects and will act as needed to foster price stability and sustainable economic growth. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Charles L. Evans; Thomas M. Hoenig; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Frederic S. Mishkin; William Poole; Eric Rosengren; and Kevin M. Warsh. In a related action, the Board of Governors unanimously approved a 50-basis-point decrease in the discount rate to 5-1/4 percent. In taking this action, the Board approved the requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Cleveland, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, and San Francisco.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Bundesbank Lecture, Berlin, Germany In a speech given in March 2005 (Bernanke, 2005), I discussed a number of important and interrelated developments in the global economy, including the substantial expansion of the current account deficit in the United States, the equally impressive rise in the current account surpluses of many emerging-market economies, and a worldwide decline in long-term real interest rates. I argued that these developments could be explained, in part, by the emergence of aglobal saving glut, driven by the transformation of many emerging-market economies--notably, rapidly growing East Asian economies and oil-producing countries--from net borrowers to large net lenders on international capital markets. Today I will review those developments and provide an update. I will also consider policy implications and prospects for the future. A principal theme of my earlier remarks was that a satisfying explanation of the developments in the U.S. current account cannot focus on developments within the United States alone. Rather, understanding these developments and evaluating potential policy responses require a global perspective. I will continue to take that perspective in my remarks today and will emphasize in particular how changes in desired saving and investment in any given region, through their effects on global capital flows, may affect saving, investment, and the external balances of other countries around the world. The Origins of the Global Saving Glut, 1996-2004I will begin by reviewing the origins and development of the global saving glut over the period 1996-2004, as discussed in my earlier speech, and will then turn to more-recent developments. As is well known, the U.S. current account deficit expanded sharply in the latter part of the 1990s and the first half of the present decade. In 1996, the U.S. deficit was $125 billion, or 1.6 percent of U.S. gross domestic product (GDP); by 2004, it had grown to $640 billion, or 5.5 percent of GDP.1National income accounting identities imply that the current account deficit equals the excess of domestic investment in capital goods, including housing, over domestic saving, including the saving of households, firms, and governments. The proximate cause of the increase in the U.S. external deficit was a decline in U.S. saving; between 1996 and 2004, the investment rate in the United States remained almost unchanged at about 19 percent of GDP, whereas the saving rate declined from 16-1/2 percent to slightly less than 14 percent of GDP.2Domestic investment not funded by domestic saving must be financed by capital flows from abroad, and, indeed, the large increase in the U.S. current account deficit was matched by a similar expansion of net capital inflows. Globally, national current account deficits and surpluses must balance out, as deficit countries can raise funds in international capital markets only to the extent that other (surplus) countries provide those funds. Accordingly, it is not surprising that the widening of the U.S. current account deficit has been associated with increased current account surpluses in the rest of the world. What is surprising, however, in light of historical patterns, is that much of the increase in current account surpluses during this period took place in developing countries rather than in the industrial countries.3The table shows current account balances for various countries and regions in selected years. The aggregate current account balance of industrial countries other than the United States did increase between 1996 and 2004, by a bit less than $200 billion, much of that rise being accounted for by an increase in Japan's current account balance; the aggregate balance of the euro area rose only slightly.4In comparison, the aggregate current account position of developing countries swung from a deficit of about $80 billion in 1996 to a surplus of roughly $300 billion in 2004, a net move toward surplus of $380 billion. In the aggregate, the shift from deficit to surplus in the current account of the emerging-market world over this period largely reflected increased saving as a share of output rather than a decline in the rate of capital investment. However, changes in saving and investment patterns varied by countries and regions. For example, in the countries of developing Asia excluding China, most of the $150 billion swing toward external surplus between 1996 and 2004 was attributable to declines in domestic investment. In China, rates of both saving and investment rose, but saving rates rose more, leading to an increase in that country's current account surplus of about $60 billion. Outside of developing Asia, oil exporters in the Middle East and the former Soviet Union were also important contributors to the large increase in emerging-market current account balances. The combined current accounts of the two regions increased from a surplus of $20 billion in 1996 to a surplus of $162 billion in 2004, an increase of about $140 billion. This rise largely reflected higher saving rates, as domestic consumption fell behind the surge in oil revenues.Among other emerging-market economies, higher saving also accounted for an increase in the aggregate current account balance of Latin America. Of course, as emerging-market countries switched from being net borrowers to being net lenders, they began to pay down their international debts and to acquire assets of industrial countries. I have noted the expansion of the U.S. current account deficit and the associated increases in current account surpluses abroad over the 1996-2004 period. A third key development in that period was a sustained decline in long-term real interest rates in many parts of the world. For example, the real yield on ten-year inflation-indexed U.S. Treasury securities averaged about 4 percent in 1999 but less than 2 percent in 2004. The difference between the nominal long-term Treasury yield and the trailing twelve-month rate of consumer price inflation, another measure of the U.S. real interest rate, showed a similar pattern, falling from about 3.5 percent in 1996 to about 1.5 percent in 2004. Similar movements were observed in other industrial countries: In the United Kingdom, the real yields on inflation-indexed government bonds fell from an average of 3.6 percent in 1996 to just below 2 percent in 2004; in Canada, the analogous figures were 4.6 percent in 1996 and 2.3 percent in 2004. Real interest rates measured as the difference between government bond yields and consumer inflation also fell in Germany, Sweden, and Switzerland. However, in Japan, real interest rates remained low throughout the period. In sum, considering the 1996-2004 period, we have three facts to explain: (1) the substantial increase in the U.S. current account deficit, (2) the swing from moderate deficits to large surpluses in emerging-market countries, and (3) the significant decline in long-term real interest rates. Many observers have focused on the expansion of the U.S. current account deficit in isolation and have argued that it is due largely to domestic factors, particularly declines in both public and private saving rates. But accounting identities assure us that any movement in the current account must involve changes in realized saving rates relative to investment rates. The question at issue, therefore, is whether the decline in the realized saving rate in the United States reflected a decline indesiredsaving or was instead a response to other, possibly external, economic developments. Or, in textbook terms, did the fall in the realized saving rate in the United States reflect a shift in the demand for savings at any given interest rate (a shift in the saving schedule) or a decline in savings induced by a change in the interest rate (a movement along the saving schedule)? In fact, there is no obvious reason why the desired saving rate in the United States should have fallen precipitously over the 1996-2004 period.5Indeed, the federal budget deficit, an oft-cited source of the decline in U.S. saving, was actually in surplus during the 1998-2001 period even as the current account deficit was widening. Moreover, a downward shift in the U.S. desired saving rate, all else being equal, should have led to greater pressure on economic resources and thus to increases, not decreases, in real interest rates. As I will discuss later, from a normative viewpoint, we have good reasons to believe that the U.S. saving rate should be higher than it is. Nonetheless, domestic factors alone do not seem to account for the large deterioration in the U.S. external balance. In my earlier speech, I put forth an alternative explanation that is consistent with each of the three basic facts I listed earlier. That explanation takes as a key driving force a large increase in net desired saving (that is, desired saving less desired domestic investment) in emerging-market and oil-producing economies, a change that transformed these countries from modest net demanders to substantial net suppliers of funds to international capital markets. This large increase in the net supply of financial capital from sources outside the industrial countries is what, in my earlier remarks, I called the global saving glut. To interpret the rise in net saving in emerging-market countries as causal, we need to identify factors in those countries that may have caused their desired saving to rise, or their desired investment to fall, or both. In fact, several factors appear to have contributed to the increase in the supply of net saving from emerging-market countries. First, the financial crises that hit many Asian economies in the 1990s led to significant declines in investment in those countries (in part because of reduced confidence in domestic financial institutions) and to changes in policies--including a resistance to currency appreciation, the determined accumulation of foreign exchange reserves, and fiscal consolidation--that had the effect of promoting current account surpluses. Second, sharp increases in crude oil prices boosted oil exporters' incomes by more than those countries were able or willing to increase spending, thereby leading to higher saving and current account surpluses. Finally, Chinese saving rates rose rapidly (by more even than investment rates); that rise in saving was, perhaps, a result of the strong growth in incomes in the midst of an underdeveloped financial sector and a weak social safety net that increases the motivation for precautionary saving. The combined effect of these developments, I argued, raised desired saving relative to desired investment in the emerging markets, which in turn led to current account surpluses in those countries. But for the world as a whole, total saving must equal investment, and the sum of national current account balances must be zero. Accordingly, in the industrial economies, realized saving rates had to fall relative to investment, and current account deficits had to emerge as counterparts to the developing countries' surpluses. This adjustment could be achieved only by declines in real interest rates (as well as increases in asset prices), as we observed. The effects were particularly large in the United States, perhaps because high productivity growth and deep capital markets in that country were particularly attractive to foreign capital. The global saving glut hypothesis is thus consistent with the three key facts I noted earlier. To be sure, the global saving glut was not the only factor behind the decline in long-term real interest rates since the 1990s. As I described in subsequent remarks (Bernanke, 2006), term premiums also declined during this period for reasons that are debated but may have included a perceived reduction in uncertainty regarding inflation and the real economy as well as increased demand for longer-term securities by various institutional investors, including pension funds and foreign central banks. Changes in the global pattern of saving and investment surely played an important role in the decline in long-term rates, however. Recent DevelopmentsI turn now to a review of developments since I last spoke on these issues two and a half years ago. In brief, external imbalances have become wider since 2004. Both the geographical pattern of these imbalances and their sources in terms of saving and investment rates have changed a bit. Nevertheless, the broad configuration that developed after 1996 still seems to be in place today. As the table shows, the U.S. current account deficit has widened further in the past two years, from $640 billion in 2004 (5.5 percent of GDP) to $812 billion in 2006 (6.2 percent of GDP), although it fell a bit in the first quarter of this year, to $770 billion at an annual rate. In an accounting sense, the increase in the U.S. deficit over this period reflects primarily an increase in the investment rate from about 19 percent of GDP in 2004 to 20 percent of GDP in 2006. The U.S. national saving rate did not change significantly over that period. Meanwhile, the aggregate current account surplus of emerging-market economies expanded about $350 billion,from $297 billion in 2004 to $643 billion in 2006; almost all the increase was attributable to a higher aggregate rate of saving. A significant portion of this further growth is due to China, whose current account surplus swelled an additional $180 billion, rising from 3.6 percent of national output in 2004 to 9.4 percent in 2006. The increase in the Chinese surplus can be attributed primarily to an increase in the saving rate between 2004 and 2006. The increase in China's saving rate could, in part, be a consequence of the rapid pace of growth in the country. That is, with income growing very rapidly, but with consumer credit not readily available and precautionary motives for saving remaining strong, consumption is failing to catch up.6Also contributing to high saving rates was the authorities' decision to limit currency appreciation, thereby restraining import demand and boosting exports. Oil exporters have also contributed significantly to the recent increase in the aggregate current account balance of developing countries. The combined current account balance of the countries of the Middle East and the former Soviet Union (which include a number of large oil exporters) rose about $150 billion between 2004 and 2006. Again, the increase is almost entirely reflected in higher saving rates, as the oil exporters continue to save a large portion of the increased revenue resulting from higher oil prices. In contrast to the situation in emerging markets, the aggregate current account surplus for industrial countries other than the United States declined recently, from almost $350 billion in 2004 to about $200 billion in 2006; most of the decline reflected a sharp drop in the euro-area balance. Thus, unlike in the 1996-2004 period, industrial countries other than the United States have absorbed part of the increase in the net supply of capital coming from the emerging-market economies. In aggregate, the recent decline in the current account balances of non-U.S. industrial economies reflects an increase in investment rates; saving rates have generally remained little changed.7In short, in the emerging markets, realized saving and current account surpluses have increased since 2004. In the industrial countries, over the same period, current accounts have moved further into deficit, primarily because of higher realized rates of investment. What about real interest rates? Since I discussed these issues in March 2005, real interest rates have reversed some of their previous declines. For example, in the United States, real yields on inflation-indexed government debt averaged 2.3 percent in 2006 as compared with 1.85 percent in 2004. In the past few weeks, that yield has averaged about 2.4 percent. Inflation-adjusted yields in other industrial countries have also started to move back up after falling in 2005.8 How does this all fit together? My reading of recent developments is that although some of the details have changed, the fundamental elements of the global saving glut remain in place. Most important, the emerging-market countries and oil producers remain large net suppliers of financial capital to global markets. The mix of suppliers of funds and the factors motivating that supply have changed a bit: China and the oil exporters account for a larger share of the developing countries' aggregate surplus, and developing Asia excluding China accounts for somewhat less. Also, the further expansion of the region's net supply of saving in the past two years appears to reflect primarily an increase in desired saving by the emerging-market countries, whereas the previous increase in net saving also involved some decline in desired investment in East Asia after the financial crises of the 1990s. Exchange rate policies in Asia have also influenced desired saving in that region. Further increases in net capital flows from the developing economies, all else being equal, should have further depressed real interest rates around the world. But as I have noted, in the past few years, real interest rates have moved up a bit. This increase does not imply that the global saving glut has dissipated. However, it does suggest that, at the margin, desired investment net of desired saving must have risen in the industrial countries enough to offset any increase in desired saving by emerging-market countries. This characterization is certainly consistent with the pickup in investment rates in the industrial countries, which I noted earlier, and it is also consistent, more generally, with the recovery of domestic demand growth in Europe, Japan, and other parts of the industrial world. In summary, economic growth over the past few years, especially in industrial countries, has apparently been sufficient to increase the net demand for saving and thus to raise global real interest rates somewhat. Once again, however, I do not want to rely exclusively on this line of explanation for the behavior of long-term real interest rates, as other factors have no doubt been relevant. In particular, term premiums appear recently to have risen from what may have been unsustainably low levels, in part because of the greater recent volatility in financial markets and investors' demands for increased compensation for risk-taking. Are Current Account Imbalances a Problem?This analysis of the sources of global imbalances does not address the critical normative question: Are the current account imbalances that we see today a problem? Not everyone would agree that they are, for several reasons. First, these external imbalances are to a significant extent a market phenomenon and, in the case of the U.S. deficit, reflect the attractiveness of both the U.S. economy overall and the depth, liquidity, and legal safeguards associated with its capital markets.9Of course, some foreign governments have intervened in foreign exchange markets and invested the proceeds in U.S. and other capital markets, which most likely has led to greater imbalances than would otherwise exist. But the supply of capital from foreign governments is not as large as that from foreign private investors. From 1998 through 2001, even as the U.S. current account deficit widened substantially, official capital flows into the United States were quite small. During the years 2002 through 2006, net official capital inflows picked up substantially but still corresponded to less than half (47 percent) of the U.S. current account deficit over the period. On a gross basis, during the same period, private foreign inflows were three times official capital flows.10Moreover, even public investors are motivated to some extent by the attractions of the U.S. economy and U.S. capital markets. Second, current account imbalances can help reduce tendencies toward recession, on the one hand, or overheating and inflation, on the other.11During the late 1990s, for example, the developing Asian economies that had experienced financial crises and consequent collapses in domestic investment benefited from being able to run trade surpluses, which helped strengthen aggregate demand and employment. During that same period, the trade deficits run by the United States allowed domestic demand to grow strongly without creating significant inflationary pressures. Until a few years ago, the euro area was growing slowly and thus also benefited from running trade surpluses; more recently, as domestic demand in Europe has recovered, the trade surplus has declined. Third, although the U.S. current account deficit is certainly not sustainable at its current level, U.S. liabilities to foreigners are not, at this point, putting an exceptionally large burden on the American economy. The net international investment position (NIIP) of the United States, although at a substantial negative 19 percent of GDP, is still smaller than the negative NIIP of several other industrial economies. As a fraction of net household wealth, which totaled almost $56 trillion in 2006, the negative NIIP is even smaller--less than 5 percent. Moreover, the U.S. investment income balance, which essentially represents the debt service on the NIIP, remains positive, at least for now. Thus, even after years of current account deficits and corresponding increases in net liabilities, the United States continues to earn more on its foreign investments than it pays on its foreign liabilities. And, as best we can tell, the share of U.S. assets in foreign portfolios does not seem excessive relative to the importance of the United States in the global economy. All that said, the current pattern of external imbalances--the export of capital from the developing countries to the industrial economies, particularly the United States--may prove counterproductive over the longer term. I noted some reasons for concern in my earlier speech, and they remain relevant today. First, the United States and other industrial economies face the prospect of aging populations and of workforces that are growing more slowly. These trends enhance the need to save (to support future retirees) and may reduce incentives to invest (because workforces eventually will shrink). If the United States saved more, one likely outcome would be a reduction in the U.S. current account deficit and in the rate at which the country is adding to its liabilities to the rest of the world. Second, the large U.S. current account deficit cannot persist indefinitely because the ability of the United States to make debt service payments and the willingness of foreigners to hold U.S. assets in their portfolios are both limited. Adjustment must eventually take place, and the process of adjustment will have both real and financial consequences. For example, in the United States, the growth of export-oriented sectors such as manufacturing has been restrained by the shifts in relative prices and foreign demand associated with the U.S. trade deficit. Ultimately, the necessary reduction in the trade and current account deficits will entail shifting resources out of sectors producing nontraded goods and services to those producing tradables. The greater the needed adjustment, the more potentially disruptive and costly these shifts may be. Similarly, external adjustment for China and other surplus countries will involve shifting resources out of the export sector and into industries geared toward meeting domestic consumption needs; that necessary shift, too, will likely be less disruptive if it occurs earlier and thus less rapidly and on a smaller scale. On the financial side, if U.S. current account deficits were to persist at near their current levels, foreign investors would ultimately become satiated with dollar assets, and financing the deficit at a reasonable cost would become difficult. Earlier reduction of global imbalances would reduce the potential strains associated with financing a large quantity of international liabilities and likely allow a smoother adjustment in financial markets. Finally, in the longer term, the developing world should be the recipient, not the provider, of financial capital. Because developing countries tend to have high ratios of labor to capital and to be away from the technological frontier, the potential returns to investment in those countries are high. Thus, capital flows toward those countries should benefit both them and the countries providing the capital. Prospects for Reducing External ImbalancesWhat are the prospects for a gradual and orderly rebalancing of spending and external accounts around the world? The brief answer is that signs of progress have appeared but that most countries have only just begun to undertake the policy changes that will ultimately be needed. Recently, the pickup in economic growth outside the United States, together with changes in the real exchange rate and other relative prices, has assisted the process of current account adjustment. Notably, during 2006, foreign growth helped U.S. real exports of goods and services grow 9.3 percent, and exports of capital goods rose 10.8 percent. Some of the gain in foreign growth is cyclical, but some is due to economic reforms (in both industrial and non-industrial countries) and thus may be more persistent. Overall, we have seen some modest indications of improvement in the U.S. external balance recently. For example, the non-oil trade deficit has declined modestly, from 3.7 percent of U.S. GDP in 2004 to 3.5 percent of GDP in 2006. In addition, in 2006, net exports made a positive contribution to U.S. real GDP growth, the first year that had happened since 1995. Net exports also contributed to U.S. growth in the first half of 2007. As is well known, however, further progress on the U.S. current account seems unlikely without significant increases in public and private saving in the United States. The U.S. federal budget deficit has declined recently and is officially projected to improve further over the next few years. Unfortunately, as I have noted, the United States has already reached the leading edge of major demographic changes that will result in an older population and a more slowly growing workforce. A major effort to increase public and private saving is needed to prepare for the economic consequences of this demographic transition and to address external imbalances. As the global perspective makes clear, the reduction of the U.S. current account deficit also requires efforts on the part of the surplus countries to reduce the excess of their desired saving over desired investment. Over the longer term, the current account surpluses of the emerging-market countries seem likely to narrow as domestic spending catches up with income. Economic policies in these countries can assist this process. For example, the oil exporters have collectively saved much of the windfall arising from higher crude prices in recent years; they should spend more in the future to develop and diversify their domestic economies. China has officially recognized the need to increase its domestic spending and scale back its reliance on exports. Measures that could help achieve these goals include further reforms of the financial sector; increased government spending on infrastructure, environmental improvement, and the social safety net; and currency appreciation. In East Asia excluding China, continued efforts to strengthen and deepen the banking sector and financial markets would help domestic investment recover from the lingering effects of the financial crises of the 1990s. In each of these cases, the indicated policies would reduce global imbalances. Moreover, as with U.S. saving efforts, these actions would convey important economic benefits to the countries undertaking them even if current account balances were not an issue. What implications would a gradual rebalancing have for long-term real interest rates? The logic of the global saving glut suggests that, as the glut dissipates over the next few decades and thereby reduces the net supply of financial capital from emerging-market countries, real interest rates should rise--a tendency that seems likely to be only partly offset by increased saving in the industrial countries. However, factors other than the saving-investment balance affect long-term interest rates, including the relative supplies of, and demands for, long-term securities and changes in the required compensation for the risk embedded in term premiums. Moreover, distant one-year forward interest rates remain low, an indication that markets currently do not expect much change in the global balance of desired saving and investment or that they expect the effects of such a change to be offset by other developments. Accordingly, we are again reminded of the need to maintain appropriate humility in forecasting returns and asset prices. Current Account Balances(Billions of U.S. dollars) Country or region 1996 2000 2004 2005 2006 Industrial 31.1 -304.7 -296.5 -502.5 -607.3 United States -124.8 -417.4 -640.2 -754.8 -811.5 Japan 65.7 119.6 172.1 165.7 170.4 Euro area1 77.3 -37.0 115.0 22.2 -11.1 France 23.4 22.3 10.5 -19.5 -28.3 Germany -14.0 -32.6 118.0 128.4 146.4 Italy 36.8 -6.2 -15.5 -28.4 -41.6 Spain -1.4 -23.1 -54.9 -83.0 -108.0 Other 12.9 30.0 56.6 64.4 45.0 Australia -15.4 -14.9 -38.5 -41.2 -40.9 Canada 3.4 19.7 21.3 26.3 21.5 Switzerland 22.0 30.7 50.4 61.4 69.8 United Kingdom -10.5 -37.6 -35.4 -53.7 -88.3 Memo:Industrial excl.United States 155.9 112.7 343.7 252.3 204.2 Developing -82.8 124.7 296.5 507.9 643.2 Asia -40.2 77.0 172.4 245.1 352.1 China 7.2 20.5 68.7 160.8 249.9 Hong Kong -4.0 7.0 15.7 20.3 20.6 Korea -23.1 12.3 28.2 15.0 6.1 Taiwan 10.9 8.9 18.5 16.0 24.7 Thailand -14.4 9.3 2.8 -7.9 3.2 Latin America -39.1 -48.1 20.4 34.6 48.7 Argentina -6.8 -9.0 3.2 3.5 5.2 Brazil -23.5 -24.2 11.7 14.2 13.6 Mexico -2.5 -18.7 -6.7 -4.9 -1.5 Middle East 15.1 72.1 99.2 189.0 212.4 Africa -5.2 7.2 0.6 14.6 19.9 Eastern Europe -18.5 -31.8 -58.6 -63.2 -88.9 Former Soviet Union 5.2 48.3 62.6 87.7 99.0 Memo:Developing Asiaexcl. China -47.4 56.5 103.7 84.3 102.2 Statistical discrepancy -51.6 -180.0 0.0 5.4 35.9 1.Calculated as the sum of the balances of the thirteen euro-area countries.Return to table Source: For the United States, Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. For some countries other than the United States, national sources; for most countries, however, International Monetary Fund (IMF),World Economic Outlook Database, April 2007 (www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2007/01/data/index.aspx); some values for 2006 are IMF estimates. References Bernanke, Ben S. (2005). "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit," speech delivered for the Sandridge Lecture at the Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, March 10, www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2005/200503102/default.htm. Similar remarks with updated data were presented for theHomer Jones Lecture, St. Louis, April 14, 2005, www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2005/20050414/default.htm. ------------ (2006). "Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, March 20, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20060320a.htm. Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2006). "An Equilibrium Model of 'Global Imbalances' and Low Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 11996. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January, www.nber.org/papers/w11996.pdf. Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull (2007). "Financial Integration, Financial Deepness, and Global Imbalances," NBER Working Paper Series 12909. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February, www.nber.org/papers/w12909.pdf. Footnotes 1.The shift was almost wholly attributable to a similar expansion of the trade deficit. The balance on investment income actually improved over the period.Return to text 2.More precisely, investment grew from 19.0 percent to 19.3 percent of GDP, and saving declined from 16.5 percent to 13.8 percent of GDP, for a net change in investment less saving of 3.0 percent of GDP. As implied by data noted earlier in this paragraph, the net change in the U.S. current account deficit over the same period was 3.9 percent of GDP. In principle, the change in the excess of investment over saving and the change in the current account deficit should be the same. The difference between the two figures is accounted for by statistical discrepancies, both within the national income and product accounts (NIPA) and between the balance of payments definitions and NIPA definitions of certain international transactions.Return to text 3.I am using the terms "emerging-market" and "developing" interchangeably.Return to text 4.As shown in the table, the surplus of industrial countries other than the United States increased from about $150 billion to nearly $350 billion over the period, and the Japanese external balance rose from $66 billion to $172 billion. The increase in the Japanese current account balance as a share of GDP, from 1.4 percent to 3.7 percent, occurred despite a substantial fall in the GDP share of the saving rate, from 30.4 percent to 26.8 percent, as the GDP share of the investment rate fell even more dramatically, from 28.9 percent to 23.0 percent. For the euro area as a whole, the current account balance remained at about 1 percent of GDP between 1996 and 2004, as aggregate investment and saving ratios remained largely unchanged. Within the euro area, Germany's current account balance increased almost 5 percentage points of GDP--from -0.6 percent in 1996 to 4.3 percent in 2004--as saving moved up and investment decreased. However, this development was offset by declines in the balances of some other euro-area countries, including France, Italy, and Spain; the decreases were mostly associated with higher investment rates. Data on saving, investment, and current account balances for countries other than the United States are drawn primarily from the International Monetary Fund,World Economic Outlook Database, April 2007 (www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2007/01/data/index.aspx); in some cases, data are drawn from national sources.Return to text 5.During the first part of the period, the rise in U.S. productivity and higher stock prices likely contributed to the U.S. current account deficit by increasing desired investment and reducing desired saving. However, some of the increase in stock prices may have been the endogenous result of factors discussed later, and in any case the effects of the stock market on investment dissipated by 2004. Finally, as noted in the text, if the driving force behind the changes in external balances was a decline in desired saving in the United States, world real interest rates would have risen rather than fallen.Return to text 6.The combined current account balance of developing Asia excluding China narrowed a bit as a share of GDP between 2004 and 2006, as the investment rate edged up while the saving rate was little changed. Nevertheless, investment rates in this region still remain substantially below their 1996 levels.Return to text 7.The combined current account balance for the euro area moved from a surplus of $115 billion in 2004 to a deficit of about $10 billion in 2006, largely because of an increase in the aggregate investment rate. Large declines in the balances of France, Italy, and Spain more than offset a higher surplus in the balance of Germany. For the euro area as a whole, the movement into deficit has largely reflected an increase in the euro-area investment rate from about 20 percent of GDP in 2004 to about 21 percent of GDP in 2006. Japan's current account surplus was almost unchanged at around $170 billion in both 2004 and 2006, as an increase in the rate of investment was matched by a higher saving rate.Return to text 8.Inflation-adjusted bonds in the United Kingdom had a yield of 2.19 percent, on average, in July 2007 as compared with a yield of 1.65 percent, on average, in July 2005. In Canada, yields on inflation-adjusted bonds moved from 1.76 percent in July 2005 to 2.18 percent in July 2007. Real interest rates, calculated as government bond yields minus twelve-month inflation rates, have also moved up since 2005 in Germany, Sweden, and Switzerland.Return to text 9.An interesting vein of recent research suggests that one of the reasons that developing countries seek to run current account surpluses is to finance the acquisition of high-quality assets they cannot produce in their own economies. Refer to Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2006) and Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull (2007).Return to text 10.During 2002-06, gross foreign official inflows totaled $1,491 billion; net official inflows were only slightly less, as U.S. official outflows were negligible. Private foreign inflows net of private U.S. outflows totaled $1,659 billion during the same period; gross foreign private inflows were $4,697 billion.Return to text 11.Another way to make this point is that current account balances and surpluses give countries the flexibility to spend more or less than their current output, as dictated by economic conditions and needs.Return to text
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the Domestic Prices in an Integrated World Economy Conference, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. In recent years, globalization has become one of the hottest topics, not only for the general public but also for central bankers.1Some commentators have gone so far as to claim that greater openness of economies to flows of goods, services, capital, and businesses from other nations invalidate traditional economic models of inflation, which take little account of globalization. In the long run, monetary policy strives to achieve price stability, which contributes to maximum sustainable employment and economic growth. In the shorter run, we at the Federal Reserve aim to achieve our dual mandate of not only stabilizing prices but also reducing the volatility of output and employment around their maximum sustainable levels. Globalization affects the ability of monetary policy makers to stabilize prices and output in two ways: (1) through its effects on the behavior of inflation and output and (2) through its effects on the ways in which monetary policy influences inflation and output--that is, on the monetary transmission mechanism. I will look at each in turn and will then use the analysis to address another important issue for monetary policy makers: Has globalization been a key driver of improvements in inflation performance and the decline in inflation that we have been seeing throughout the world? (Please note that my comments here reflect my own views and not necessarily those of others on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.) Globalization and InflationWe should never forget Milton Friedman's adage that "inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon." In the long run, as long as a central bank has an independent monetary policy‑‑that is, it is not locked into a fixed-exchange-rate regime in which its hands are tied‑‑the rate of inflation is determined by monetary policy. Globalization, however, can have an effect on the incentives for central banks to control inflation and, more directly, on inflation developments in the short and medium runs. Kenneth Rogoff (2003) argues that globalization has led to greater price flexibility, which has reduced the ability of central banks to use inflation surprises to boost output. In other words, the Phillips curve will steepen, making more stark the short-run tradeoff between unemployment and inflation. As a result, central banks will be less tempted to try to exploit the short-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment, as in the Barro-Gordon (1983) model, and so will be less likely to pursue overly expansionary monetary policy that leads to higher inflation. A major problem with Rogoff's argument is that instead of steepening with the growth of globalization in recent years, the Phillips curve has become flatter, not only in the United States but also in many other countries throughout the world (Borio and Filardo, 2007; International Monetary Fund, 2006; Ihrig and others, 2007; Pain, Koske, and Sollie, 2006). Therefore, even though Rogoff's argument is reasonable from a theoretical viewpoint, it is hard to make the case that it is important in the current economic environment. Globalization, because it makes markets more competitive, also has the potential to spur productivity growth. Higher productivity growth can lead to a reduction in inflation because it directly lowers prices if monetary policy does not become more expansionary. In addition, such growth makes it easier for the monetary authorities to allow inflation to fall because output growth will continue to be rapid when inflation is declining. This may have been the situation in the United States in the late 1990s, when productivity growth surged and inflation declined. The rise in productivity growth during this period in the United States, however, did not seem to spill over to other industrial countries, a result that cast doubt on whether globalization has indeed accelerated the transmission of productivity growth across national borders. Because globalization increases competition, it can also reduce markups (price over costs), and this reduction may lead to lower relative prices, as is argued by Chen, Imbs, and Scott (2007). However, lower markups andprice levelsshould have only transitory effects on inflation. Furthermore, the prediction of lower markups from globalization seems to conflict with the high corporate profit rates that we are currently observing around the world. These effects from the greater price flexibility and increased competition in domestic markets that have arisen from globalization, while theoretically plausible, are often at variance with salient features of the world economy, and so they do not explain why inflation has declined in recent years. However, another very dramatic feature of globalization is that it has brought more than a billion new workers into the global economic system from China and India. Some observers claim that through its sales of low-cost goods, developing Asia‑‑and especially China‑‑has been "exporting deflation" and will continue to do so until wages in these countries rise. Although this effect, too, is plausible, research suggests that its importance should not be exaggerated. If China were truly exporting deflation, the effect should be evident primarily in the behavior of import prices. Research at the Federal Reserve Board by Kamin, Marazzi, and Schindler (2006) estimates that purchases of manufactures from China have lowered U.S. import price inflation roughly 1 percentage point annually over the past decade, a decline that has led to a short-run lowering of consumer price inflation of about one-tenth of 1 percentage point and a somewhat larger effect over the longer term. Research at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) by Pain, Koske, and Sollie (2006) arrives at a similar estimate of the effect of trade in manufactures with developing countries on U.S. inflation: negative 0.2 to negative 0.3 percentage point. At the same time, the additional demand for primary commodities by developing Asia, especially China and India, is putting upward pressure on global prices of these goods. During 2004-06, the region accounted for about 40 percent of the global growth in demand for oil and more than 70 percent of the growth in demand for copper and zinc. The global commodities boom, which has been stimulated by the emergence of the Chinese and Indian economies on the international scene, has been an important offset to the deflationary effects from their low-priced goods and services. Analysis by the Board's staff, which weights the negative effect on U.S. inflation from cheaper manufactures against the positive effect from higher commodity prices, finds that the net effect in recent years could go either way but in any case is probably quite small. Looking back before the recent boom in commodities prices, the staff's best estimate is that China's and India's entrance on the global trading scene has had a small negative effect on inflation. Research at the OECD (Pain, Koske, and Sollie, 2006) reaches similar conclusions, finding a net effect of 0 to negative 1/4 percentage point for the United States, the euro area, and the OECD economies in aggregate. Laurence Ball (2006) makes an important point that cheaper imports from places like China lower relative prices for imported goods but ultimately do not affect inflation, which is the change in overall prices. Following the argument made by Milton Friedman (Friedman, 1974), Ball points out that for every decline in the relative price of one good or service in a price index like the consumer price index (CPI), there is by definition a rise in the relative price of some other good or service. Any pattern of relative-price changes is compatible with a particular level of the inflation rate. What determines the overall inflation rate is not relative prices for one category of goods and services but rather the balance between overall demand and supply in the economy, which ultimately is influenced by monetary policy. Ball therefore takes the view that cheap imports from China and other low-wage economies should not affect inflation. I would not go as far as Ball does for the reason that changes in relative prices in an important category of goods and services could affect inflation for a considerable period of time. Nevertheless, his argument, as well as the research cited earlier, indicates that many of the exaggerated claims that globalization has been an important factor in lowering inflation in recent years just do not hold up. Globalization and OutputThe increasing integration of the global economy can have several effects on output. It is thus of concern to monetary policy makers because it can affect both output volatility and our forecasts of the economy. Globalization may stabilize output by enabling producers to service a diversified global market rather than just the domestic market. Research at the Federal Reserve Board (Ihrig and others, 2007) documents that net exports tend to be negatively correlated with domestic demand and thus stabilize output; other research (Guerrieri, Gust, and López-Salido, 2007) finds that shocks to domestic demand move output less in more open economies. In the opposite direction, greater trade integration‑‑including greater trade in services (Markusen, 2007)‑‑could raise output volatility as countries become more vulnerable to foreign shocks. There is indeed some evidence that this situation has occurred in Mexico (Bergin, Feenstra, and Hanson, 2007). As with the effects of greater trade integration on the volatility of output, the effects of financial globalization can go both ways. Increasing global diversification lowers the likelihood that financial shocks will be concentrated in individual economies and thus lead to economic downturns. Furthermore, as I have emphasized in my writings (Mishkin, 2006a), financial globalization can help promote institutional reforms that can make the financial system more stable, thereby contributing to more output stability. However, as I have also emphasized in my work (Mishkin, 2006a, chap. 4), financial globalization makes it easier for capital inflows to fuel excessive risk-taking on the part of financial institutions and allows financial shocks to be transmitted more readily across borders. On balance, my sense is that economic globalization has the potential to be stabilizing for individual economies as both real and financial shocks are spread more evenly across larger numbers of economic agents. One might even speculate that globalization has contributed to the so-called Great Moderation, the decline in output variability in countries like the United States over the past twenty years, and this hypothesis should be a topic for future research. The bottom line, however, is that it is not at all clear whether globalization increases or reduces output volatility. That said, as I have emphasized in my speeches and writings (Mishkin, 2006a, b; Mishkin, 2007b), I strongly believe that globalization is and has been a key factor in promoting economic growth. Globalization not only promotes a more competitive economic environment--which forces business to innovate--but it also creates strong incentives for institutional reform to make markets work better. Globalization in recent years has not only enabled hundreds of millions of people in countries like China and India to escape abject poverty (income of less than $1 per day) but has also helped economies like ours in the United States to be highly dynamic, which is essential to our future economic well-being. Globalization and the Monetary Transmission MechanismFour questions naturally arise when we consider whether globalization has changed the monetary transmission mechanism, that is, how monetary policy influences inflation and output: (1) Has globalization led to a decline in the sensitivity of inflation to domestic output gaps (the difference between actual and potential output) and thus to domestic monetary policy? In other words, has globalization made the Phillips curve flatter? (2) Are foreign output gaps playing a more prominent role in the domestic inflation process, so that domestic monetary policy has more difficulty stabilizing inflation? (3) Can domestic monetary policy still control domestic interest rates and so stabilize both inflation and output? (4) Are there other ways, besides possible influences on inflation and interest rates, in which globalization may have affected the transmission mechanism of monetary policy? Has globalization led to a decline in the sensitivity of inflation to domestic output gaps (the difference between actual and potential output) and thus to domestic monetary policy? In recent years, we have clearly witnessed a decline in the sensitivity of inflation to the domestic output gap (a flattening of the Phillips curve) in the United States and other advanced countries (Borio and Filardo, 2007; International Monetary Fund, 2006; Ihrig and others, 2007; Pain, Koske, and Sollie, 2006). Globalization might make inflation less responsive to rising domestic resource utilization because households and businesses can go outside the country to buy goods and services, so there will be less pressure for domestic prices to rise. Another way of thinking about this point is to recognize that globalization might reduce the likelihood of having supply bottlenecks as domestic resource utilization rises. Although this story is a plausible one, research at the Federal Reserve Board and elsewhere finds no evidence that the flattening of the Phillips curve reflects the process of increasing trade integration (Ihrig and others, 2007; Ball, 2006; Wynne and Kersting, 2007).2 Rather than globalization being an important factor leading to flatter Phillips curves, I would argue (as in Mishkin, 2007a) that flatter Phillips curves are the direct result of better monetary policy that has anchored inflation expectations. Because monetary authorities are focusing more on establishing a stronger nominal anchor, a rise in resource utilization will not lead to a rise in expected inflation. Instead, households and businesses will expect monetary authorities to take the necessary steps to ensure that the economy will not overheat, and, as a result, they will not push for higher prices and wages. Not only is this explanation for decreased sensitivity of inflation to output gaps more consistent with empirical evidence (see Mishkin, 2007a; Roberts, 2006), but it is more consistent with the timing of when Phillips curves became flatter. In the United States, Phillips curves started to flatten in the 1980s, well before the recent surge of globalization but just after inflation expectations started to become anchored. Are foreign output gaps playing a more prominent role in the domestic inflation process, so that domestic monetary policy has more difficulty stabilizing inflation? As economies have become more open, foreign factors may have become more important in the determination of domestic inflation. Research at the Bank for International Settlements (Borio and Filardo, 2007) seems to provide evidence that foreign resource slack has superseded domestic slack as a key determinant of domestic inflation. However, research at the Federal Reserve Board (Ihrig and others, 2007) and at the OECD (Pain, Koske, and Sollie, 2006) point out that the specification of the Phillips curve in Borio and Filardo (2007) is problematic. Their key findings are not robust to alternative specifications. Moreover, their specification leads to econometric difficulties because it causes serial correlation of the residuals that is not corrected for. Using more-conventional specifications of Phillips curves, the research at the Federal Reserve Board (Ihrig and others, 2007) and the OECD (Pain, Koske, and Sollie, 2006), as well as Ball (2006), finds that foreign output gaps are not important determinants of domestic inflation. However, foreign factors could more plausibly play a role in the inflation process through import prices. As economies become more open and imports play a bigger role in the economy, consumer prices may become more sensitive to import prices. Indeed, CPI inflation does appear to have become more sensitive to import prices over time, both in the United States and in other OECD countries (Pain, Koske, and Sollie, 2006).3 Can domestic monetary policy still control domestic interest rates and so stabilize both inflation and output? In principle, the increasing global integration of financial markets, by reducing the scope for individual central banks to control domestic interest rates, could hamper the ability of monetary policy to stabilize prices and economic activity. Indeed, some evidence appears to suggest that foreign factors influence interest rates; for example, the global saving glut does seem to have led to somewhat lower long-term interest rates by reducing term premiums (Warnock and Warnock, 2006). More generally, research points to important linkages between U.S. and foreign interest rates and other asset prices (Ehrmann, Fratzscher and Rigobon, 2005; Faust and others, 2007). However, central banks still retain the ability to control short-term interest rates, which affect the domestic cost of credit and long-term interest rates, and so can continue to do their job of stabilizing inflation and output. Are there other ways, besides possible influences on inflation and interest rates, in which globalization may have affected the transmission mechanism of monetary policy? The preceding discussion might lead to the conclusion that globalization has not had important effects, either on the behavior of inflation or the ability of monetary policy to affect the economy. However, globalization might have an effect on the process of monetary transmission that does not operate through Phillips-curve-type mechanisms. One of the key transmission channels of monetary policy is the exchange rate. A tightening of monetary policy, for example, raises U.S. interest rates relative to those abroad, thereby inducing upward pressure on the foreign exchange value of the dollar. An appreciation of the dollar, in turn, restrains exports (because the price of U.S. goods rises when measured in foreign currencies) and stimulates imports (because imports become cheaper in dollar terms). The resulting decrease in net exports implies a reduction in aggregate demand. In addition, an appreciation of the dollar that leads to a decline in import prices also helps restrain overall U.S. inflation. By expanding the share of tradable goods and services in the economy, globalization might increase the role of the exchange rate as a transmission channel of monetary policy and could reduce the role of the interest rate channel. The larger the share of imports and exports in the economy, the greater the change in net exports‑‑and, hence, in the contribution of net exports to gross domestic product (GDP) growth‑‑for a given change in the exchange rate. In addition, the larger the share of imports in the economy, the larger should be the effect on overall CPI inflation of a given change in import prices when the exchange rate changes.4(This effect is explicitly incorporated in Federal Reserve staff models of U.S. inflation, which weight import prices by the share of imports in the consumption basket.) By the same token, the effect of the interest rate channel on overall economic activity may be diminished by greater trade integration as changes in domestic demand are offset by induced changes in imports. Guerrieri, Gust, and López-Salido (2007), for example, find that shocks to domestic demand move output less in more-open economies because they lead to larger offsetting movements in the trade balance. Supporting this result, Ihrig and others (2007) conclude that correlations between real GDP growth and real domestic demand growth have declined in recent decades in the United States and several other industrial economies. In addition to increasing the sensitivity of the economy to changes in exchange rates, globalization may have increased the sensitivity of exchange rates to monetary policy. Over the past few decades, as capital controls have been eliminated in most major economies and the levels of home bias in portfolio investment have declined, financial markets around the world have become more tightly integrated. An implication of this financial globalization is that demand for domestic and foreign assets is likely to have become more sensitive to international differences in perceived rates of return. Accordingly, monetary policy actions may now exert more influence on exchange rates than was the case when markets were less tightly integrated and assets of different countries were perceived to be less substitutable for each other. This linkage between globalization and the effect of monetary policy on exchange rates is somewhat speculative but represents a worthwhile avenue for further research. Why Has Inflation Declined in Recent Years?What does all the preceding analysis tell us about why we have had better inflation performance in recent years? I don't know of anyone who would have predicted twenty years ago that inflation would be so low and stable in so many countries. Has globalization been an important part of the story of inflation's remarkable decline in recent years? In terms of direct effects, the discussion here provides a clear-cut answer: No. Inflation has come down in the old-fashioned way. Tighter monetary policy and a commitment to price stability by central banks throughout the world have led to lower inflation and an anchoring of inflation expectations. These policies have had huge benefits‑‑not only the achievement of low and stable inflation but also an improvement in the overall performance of the economy. Globalization, however, may have helped reduce inflation in more-subtle ways. By fostering increased interactions among central banks, academics, and the public in many different countries, globalization has helped spread a common culture that stresses the benefits of achieving price stability. The resulting increased focus on price stability has been a key reason for the reduction of inflation worldwide. ConclusionThe increasing integration of global product, labor, and financial markets has the potential to significantly alter the behavior of the economy, a development that could complicate the task of monetary policy. In practice, however, the behavior of the U.S. and global economies does not appear to have radically changed in recent years. The Federal Reserve and other central banks retain the ability to stabilize prices and output. Nonetheless, central bankers must continue to monitor the evolution of the economy and the changes that may result from the ongoing globalization process. References Ball, Laurence M. (2006)."Has Globalization Changed Inflation?"NBER Working Paper Series 12687. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November, www.nber.org/papers. Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon (1983)."Rules, Discretion, and Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 12 (no. 1), pp. 101-22. Bergin, Paul R., Robert C. Feenstra, and Gordon Hanson (2007)."Outsourcing and Volatility (184 KB PDF),"paper presented at the Conference on Globalization and the Macroeconomy, European Central Bank, July 23-24, www.ecb.int/events/conferences/html/global_macro.en.html. Borio, Claudio E.V., and Andrew Filardo (2007)."Globalisation and Inflation: New Cross-Country Evidence on the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation,"BIS Working Paper 227. Basel: Bank for International Settlements, May, www.bis.org/forum/research.htm. Chen, Natalie, Jean Imbs, and Andrew Scott (2007)."The Dynamics of Trade and Competition (556 KB PDF),"paper presented at the Conference on Globalization and the Macroeconomy, European Central Bank, July 23-24, www.ecb.int/events/conferences/html/global_macro.en.html. Ehrmann, Michael, Marcel Fratzscher, and Roberto Rigobon (2005)."Stocks, Bonds, Money Markets, and Exchange Rates: Measuring International Financial Transmission (953 KB PDF),"ECB Working Paper No. 452. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, March, www.ecb.int/pub/scientific/wps/date/html/wps2005.en.html. Erceg, Christopher, Christopher Gust, and David López-Salido (2007)."The Transmission of Domestic Shocks in Open Economies (406 KB PDF),"paper presented at "International Dimensions of Monetary Policy," a conference sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Research Conference on Policy, held in Barcelona, June 11-13, www.nber.org/booksnew/gert07-1. Faust, Jon, John H. Rogers, Shing-Yi B. Wang, and Jonathan H. Wright (2007)."The High-Frequency Response of Exchange Rates and Interest Rates to Macroeconomic Announcements,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 54 (May), pp. 1051-68. Friedman, Milton (1974). "Perspectives on Inflation,"Newsweek, June 24. Guerrieri, Luca, Christopher Gust, and David López-Salido (2007). "International Competition and Inflation: A New Keynesian Perspective," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Ihrig, Jane, Steven B. Kamin, Deborah Lindner, and Jaime Marquez (2007)."Some Simple Tests of the Globalization and Inflation Hypothesis,"International Finance Discussion Papers 891. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April, www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ifdp. International Monetary Fund (2006)."How Has Globalization Affected Inflation? (762 KB PDF)"inGlobalization and Inflation, IMF World Economic Outlook. Washington: International Monetary Fund, pp. 97-134, www.imf.org/pubs/ft/weo/2006/01. Kamin, Steven B., Mario Marazzi, and John W. Schindler (2006)."The Impact of Chinese Exports on Global Import Prices,"Review of International Economics, vol. 14 (May), pp. 179-201. Markusen, James R. (2007)."Trade and Foreign Direct Investment in Business Services: A Modelling Approach (671 KB PDF),"paper presented at the Conference on Globalization and the Macroeconomy, European Central Bank, July 23-24, www.ecb.int/events/conferences/html/global_macro.en.html. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2006a).The Next Great Globalization: How Disadvantaged Nations Can Harness Their Financial Systems to Get Rich,Princeton: Princeton University Press. ------------ (2006b). "Globalization: A Force for Good?" speech delivered at Baruch College, New York, N.Y., October 12, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents. ------------ (2007a). "Inflation Dynamics," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, Calif., March 23, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents. ------------ (2007b). "Globalization and Financial Development," speech delivered to the New Perspectives on Financial Development Conference, Washington, D.C., April 26, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents. Pain, Nigel, Isabell Koske, and Marte Sollie (2006)."Globalisation and Inflation in the OECD Economies,"OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 524. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, November, www.oecd.org/findDocument. Roberts, John M. (2006)."Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 2 (September), pp. 193-230. Rogoff, Kenneth S. (2003)."Globalization and Global Disinflation (237 KB PDF),"paper presented at "Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 28-30, www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2003/pdf/Rogoff2003.pdf. Warnock, Francis E., and Veronica Cacdac Warnock (2006)."International Capital Flows and U.S. Interest Rates,"NBER Working Paper Series 12560. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October, www.nber.org/papers. Wynne, Mark A., and Erasmus K. Kersting (2007)."Openness and Inflation,"Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas,Staff Papers, vol. 2007 (April), pp. 1-28, http://dallasfed.org/research/staff. Footnotes 1.I want to thankSteven KaminandJaime Marquezfor their helpful comments and assistance on this speech.Return to text 2.International Monetary Fund (2006) does find some evidence supporting the hypothesis that globalization flattens the Phillips curve: In a cross-country regression of inflation on, among other factors, the trade share multiplied by the output gap, the interaction term is found to have a significant negative coefficient. In the simpler specification of Ihrig and others (2007), however, the effect of this interaction term is not significant.Return to text 3.International Monetary Fund (2006) finds indirect evidence supporting this channel‑‑namely, that inflation is affected by relative import prices multiplied by import shares in GDP and that import shares have been rising over time. Ihrig and others (2007) document a rise in the sensitivity of U.S. inflation to import prices over time, although they do not identify such a trend in other countries.Return to text 4.A qualification of this point is that even as the share of imports in U.S. spending has risen, the pass-through of exchange rates into import prices has declined. However, we do not know whether the decline in pass-through is merely transitory or will be sustained.Return to text
No content found
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount ratemeetings from July 9 through August 6, 2007.The minutes are attached.
First-Ever “Digital Unveiling” of a Redesigned BillIntroduction Scheduled for Early 2008 The U.S. government today digitally unveiled a new, more secure design for the $5 bill that will be issued and enter circulation in early 2008. A new $100 bill will follow. This is the first time in history that U.S. paper money has ever been unveiled entirely online. Similar to recently redesigned $10, $20, and $50 bills, the new $5 bill incorporates improved, easy-to-use security features, making it easier for businesses and consumers to check the new $5 bills they receive and more difficult for counterfeiters to fake. Officials from the U.S. Treasury, Federal Reserve Board, Bureau of Engraving and Printing, and U.S. Secret Service were part of today’s “Wi-5” preview, an entirely digital event which emphasized the government’s commitment to staying ahead of counterfeiters. The live “unveiling” of the $5 bill design, which featured government officials discussing currency security efforts, took place onwww.moneyfactory.gov/newmoneyand also included an online Q&A for news reporters. Podcasts featuring important information about the new $5 bill are also posted on the site. “The government uses the best tools available so that it will be unlikely that you will receive a counterfeit bill,” said Treasurer of the United States Anna Escobedo Cabral. “Improved security features are at the heart of this currency series--security features that are easy for everyone to use. Learn how to use them, so you don’t lose your hard-earned money in the unlikely event that someone tries to pass a counterfeit bill to you.” The new $5 bill incorporates state-of-the-art security features that are easy to use by cash handlers and consumers alike. Hold the bills up to the light to check for these features: "Our goal is to seamlessly introduce the redesigned bills to the public by working primarily with financial institutions in the United States and around the world, as well as with foreign central banks," said Michael Lambert, Assistant Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Federal Reserve Board. "There is no need to trade in your old $5 bills for new ones. All U.S. currency issued by the U.S. government--old and new--is legal tender and continues to be redeemable at full face value." Because the $5 bill is heavily used in vending and transit farecard machines, the U.S. government began informing the manufacturers and end-users of those machines about the upcoming new $5 bill more than a year ago, to provide ample time to adjust them to accept the new design. “We are working with manufacturers of ATMs and other cash-oriented machines to ensure they have the information they need to adjust their machines to accept the new bills,” said Larry R. Felix, Director of the Treasury’s Bureau of Engraving and Printing. “Just as importantly, we are educating cash handlers on how to use the improved security features. They are the first line of defense against counterfeiting, and their familiarity with the new design and its improved security features is vital to a smooth transition.” With today’s unveiling of the $5 bill’s new look, the U.S. government officially launched the next phase of the public education program that will ensure a smooth transition for the new currency by informing people worldwide about the new design and its security features. Free educational materials are available to businesses, financial institutions, trade and professional associations, citizen groups and individuals to prepare cash handlers and consumers to recognize the new design and protect themselves against counterfeits. Since 2003, the U.S. government has distributed approximately 78 million pieces of public education and training materials about the new $10, $20, and $50 bill redesigns. Materials are available to order or download in multiple languages atwww.moneyfactory.gov/newmoney. The redesign of the $5 bill will also help protect against a method of counterfeiting that bleaches, or removes the ink from, a $5 bill and prints over it to create a fake $100 bill. By eliminating as many similarities as possible between the $5 and $100 denominations, the new design foils counterfeiting and protects U.S. currency users. The embedded security thread on the new $5 bill has been moved so that it is in a distinctively different location than the thread on the $100 bill. Previously located to the left of the portrait on the older-design $5 bill and in a similar position on the $100 bill, the thread has now been moved to the right of the portrait of President Abraham Lincoln on the redesigned $5 bill. In addition, similarities between the watermarks on the new $5 and $100 bills have also been eliminated. While the old $5 and $100 bills both have a portrait watermark, the watermark on the new $5 bill has been changed to a large number “5.” Furthermore, a second watermark, featuring a column of three smaller number “5”s has been added to the left of President Lincoln’s portrait. “The combination of public education, law enforcement and improved security features helps deter potential counterfeiters, but security features only work if people know how to use them,” said Michael Merritt, Deputy Assistant Director, Office of Investigations, U.S. Secret Service. “Be smart; know your money so counterfeiters don’t take advantage of you.” In the U.S. alone last year there were 3,945 arrests related to counterfeit bills passed to individuals and businesses, equaling a total loss of $62 million.1Last year, the U.S. Secret Service and international authorities seized just over $53 million in counterfeit bills before they entered circulation. Nearly $65 million that had been passed into circulation was detected and removed worldwide. In these cases, innocent victims who accepted bogus bills suffered a financial loss.2 As with the redesigned $10, $20, and $50 bills that preceded it, the new $5 bill features an American symbol of freedom printed in the background: The Great Seal of the United States, featuring an eagle and shield, is printed in purple on the front of the bill. Additional design elements include: The new $5 bill’s most noticeable design difference is the addition of light purple in the center of the bill, which blends into gray near the edges. Consumers and cash-handlers should use the key security features--watermarks and security thread--not color, to check the authenticity of paper money because color can be duplicated. 1.U.S. Secret Service, based on FY2006 statistics.Return to text2.U.S. Secret Service, based on FY2006 statistics.Return to text
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin To the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, New York Thank you for the invitation to be here this evening.1It is always a pleasure to be back in my hometown, and it is a particular pleasure to have a chance to talk again with the Money Marketeers. At the outset, I would like to acknowledge that tomorrow marks the sixth anniversary of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center, the Pentagon, and United Flight 93, which crashed in Pennsylvania. The anniversary weighs on the minds of Americans everywhere, and it weighs especially heavily on members of the New York financial community. That terrible day and its aftermath remind us that resilience is a defining characteristic not just of our economy and financial system but also of our country and our city. For as long as anyone who experienced it is alive, the memory of that awful day will not fade. In my remarks this evening, I will review the current economic situation and outlook and make some specific observations about recent developments in financial markets. I should note that the views I will express here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). As everyone in this room knows, financial markets have been front and center in recent discussions about the economy. The FOMC noted on August 17 that financial market conditions deteriorated last month and that the associated tighter credit conditions and increased uncertainty have the potential to restrain economic growth going forward. Indeed, at this point, housing demand seems likely to be crimped further by a marked reduction in the availability of mortgages, and consumer and business spending also could be damped as a consequence of the recent financial turmoil. In light of these events, we will need to make the best possible real-time judgments about the extent to which the recent developments in financial markets are likely to affect economic activity in the period ahead. That said, the economy ended the second quarter on a positive note. The Commerce Department’s Bureau of Economic Analysis recently reported that the economy expanded at an annual rate of 4 percent in the second quarter, about 1/2 percentage point higher than the first estimate. Of course, the jump in growth followed a sluggish first-quarter gain: That choppiness in growth reflected large swings in several factors that are often volatile, including inventory investment, federal defense outlays, and net exports. Smoothing through this volatility, the underlying pattern of activity in the first half of the year essentially represented a continuation of the moderate growth that had prevailed since the spring of last year when growth in real gross domestic product stepped down from an above-trend pace. Many of the spending indicators for the current quarter have remained consistent with that earlier trend. However, for the most part, these data cover a period that predates the recent onset of financial turbulence. The step-down in the growth of real output that began in mid-2006 and proceeded through the middle of this year primarily reflected weakness in the housing market. Declines in real residential investment subtracted nearly 1-1/4 percentage points from the growth of real GDP in the second half of last year and about 3/4 percentage point in the first half of this year. Moreover, the demand for housing appears to be weakening further amid credit conditions for home mortgage lending that are generally tighter, but especially so in the subprime segment. Sales of existing single-family homes in July were more than 20 percent below their peak in mid-2005, while sales of new homes in July were more than 37 percent below their peak. Although housing starts have also moved down over the past year, the decline thus far has lagged the downturn in sales, and the backlog of unsold new homes has climbed to a very high level relative to sales. Given this sizable backlog and the likelihood that sales will remain weak or weaken further in coming months, cutbacks in housing construction are likely to continue to be a drag on economic activity in future quarters. Turning to consumer spending, real outlays decelerated considerably in the second quarter. To some extent, a moderation from the very rapid pace of growth around the turn of the year probably was to be expected. In the second quarter, in particular, a jump in energy prices eroded the purchasing power of gains in household income, placing downward pressure on the growth of real spending at that point. Even so, early indications are that household spending is holding up reasonably well thus far in the current quarter: Real outlays for goods excluding motor vehicles posted a solid increase in July, and sales of light motor vehicles--which had slumped in June and July--rebounded last month. Having said that, several factors suggest that consumer spending will be subdued in the period ahead. This summer’s retrenchment in equity markets and the sharp deceleration in house prices have damped gains in household wealth this year and are likely to restrain consumer outlays. Moreover, at least some households are likely to find it more difficult or expensive to borrow, and consumer sentiment--which turned down in August--could soften further if households become more anxious about recent financial market developments. Business investment in equipment and software weakened toward the end of last year and remained sluggish in the first quarter. In part, the slowing reflected a downturn in outlays for capital goods that are used heavily by the motor vehicle and construction industries, two sectors in which activity had softened considerably. But spending on other types of equipment also was soft in the first quarter. In the second quarter, however, demand for these other types of equipment bounced back strongly, and the gains were extended in July--as reported in the most recent data on orders and shipments of capital goods. We have no direct readings on capital spending in August, but the limited indicators currently in hand--such as the Institute for Supply Management’s survey of purchasing managers--have held up reasonably well and remain at levels consistent with modest growth in manufacturing production and business investment. Of course, all this could change noticeably if many firms were to face significantly tighter credit conditions or if business sentiment were to soften appreciably. Regarding international developments, the recent deterioration in financial market conditions has had effects around the world, but the economies of our major trading partners appear set to continue their expansion. That growth should continue to stimulate demand for U.S. exports of goods and services. Turning to the labor market, payroll employment has weakened. As reported on Friday, nonfarm payrolls fell 4,000 last month, and private payrolls rose only 24,000. Smoothing through the recent monthly numbers, private payrolls increased an average of about 70,000 per month over the past three months; this is down from gains near 120,000 per month in the first five months of the year and about 165,000 per month in the second half of 2006. As for the economy’s longer-run growth rate, a key determinant is the trend in labor productivity. As you know, from 1995 to 2000, productivity in the nonfarm business sector increased at an average annual rate of 2-1/2 percent, well above the lackluster pace of the preceding twenty-five years. Then, remarkably, productivity accelerated further, rising at an average of about 3-1/2 percent per year for the first three years of this decade, despite the challenges of a recession, the fall of the dot-com market, a broad stock market correction, and the terrorist attacks. Since the middle of 2004, however, the growth of labor productivity has slowed, registering an average annual rate of about 1-1/4 percent. Previously, that figure had looked higher, but this summer’s annual revision of the national income and product accounts marked down productivity growth over the 2004 to 2006 period by an average of 0.3 percentage point per year. Part of the recent deceleration in productivity almost surely reflects a typical cyclical response to a slowing economy. The difficult questions, of course, are whether some of the recent slowing also reflects a downshift in the underlying trend, and, if so, to what extent? The latest evidence suggests that structural productivity might be increasing somewhat more slowly than it did during the second half of the 1990s, but the confidence band around any such estimate of trend productivity growth surely is very wide.2These issues remain an area of active debate, the outcome of which will be essential for gauging the economy’s potential rate of growth going forward. Let me turn now to inflation and inflation dynamics. Over the past year, the price index for total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose 2.1 percent, down from nearly 3-1/2 percent during the comparable period twelve months earlier. Recently, topline inflation has been boosted by sizable increases in food prices; energy-price increases slowed considerably over the past twelve months after sizable advances in earlier years. Excluding food and energy, core PCE prices decelerated over the past year; the July reading on the twelve-month change stood at 1.9 percent, almost 1/2 percentage point less than it was a year earlier. In my view, inflation expectations have been a key element in the recent performance of core inflation. By a range of measures, inflation expectations appear to have remained contained even as headline inflation moved temporarily higher. According to the Reuters/University of Michigan Survey of Consumers, the median expectation of inflation five to ten years ahead has been essentially flat since the beginning of last year. In addition, measures of long-run inflation compensation derived from spreads between yields on nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury securities have not pushed above the range that has prevailed in the past couple of years. As I discussed in a speech earlier this year, I read the evidence as suggesting that households’ long-run inflation expectations are consistent with PCE price inflation in the neighborhood of 2 percent.3To be sure, this figure is sensitive to the assumptions used to tease such estimates from the available data, so I do not want to overstate its precision. Still, the professional forecasters surveyed by the Philadelphia Fed also project PCE inflation to be close to 2 percent over the next five to ten years. As I look at the incoming inflation data, I would judge them to be consistent with expectations in this range; moreover, I believe that having expectations reasonably well anchored in this range has been a helpful influence on the path of actual inflation. However, let me be clear: I do not subscribe to adeus ex machinaview of the inflation process, in which inflation is driven solely by inflation expectations and is little influenced by the balance of aggregate demand and aggregate supply. Indeed, I take the view that expectations of future resource utilization are also an important factor affecting inflation outcomes. If households and businesses believe that the Federal Reserve will set monetary policy in a way that keeps aggregate demand in reasonable alignment with aggregate supply over time, then expectations of future resource utilization will be stable, and current resource utilization will provide less information about future inflation movements. In that situation, which I believe describes the current environment, inflation expectations will be a key driver of inflation dynamics. The stable inflation expectations we have seen lately derive from confidence that monetary policy will keep inflation under control. If monetary policy allowed aggregate demand to get out of sync with supply and if the Fed was not expected to bring demand back into balance with supply, then inflation expectations would be much less likely to remain stable. This is why I believe that the Federal Reserve must remain vigilant on inflation but give appropriate attention to keeping demand from falling below supply as well. What does this all mean for the inflation outlook? At present, labor and product markets appear to be in reasonable balance. And I would expect the pressures on inflation that we have experienced from food and energy prices to abate. Accordingly, with inflation expectations remaining stable around their current level, I see inflation as remaining in alignment with long-run expectations at around a 2 percent pace for the PCE deflator. In addition, I believe that the risks to the inflation outlook have become more balanced, given the greater downside risks to real growth. Let me shift gears and discuss developments in financial markets. As you know, the recent turmoil had its beginnings in the subprime mortgage market.4The development of the subprime market in the 1990s was an important financial innovation that enabled borrowers with higher credit risk to obtain mortgages that previously were unavailable to them. This expansion appears likely to have been a significant factor in raising the rate of homeownership from 64 percent, the level in 1994, to about 68 percent currently. In addition, subprime and other nonprime lending played an important role in the high volume of home sales in the mid-2000s. Indeed, data collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act indicate that about 25 percent of the loans used to purchase single-family, owner-occupied homes in 2005 were high-priced loans, including primarily subprime and some near-prime mortgages.5 However, as has been the case in previous instances of rapid financial innovations, adequate mechanisms to control excessive risk-taking may not have been in place during the subprime market’s greatest growth. One innovation, further development of securitized products, gave mortgage lenders greater access to the capital markets and spread risks more broadly. However, securitization also widened the separation of the originators from the ultimate holders of the loans--that is, those who bought securities backed by loans. In this setup, a classic principal-agent problem can arise if originators (the agents) do not have a sufficient incentive to shield the owners of the securities (the principals) from suffering higher-than-expected losses. Against a backdrop of continued strong investor demand for high-yielding securities, some lenders began loosening underwriting standards for subprime mortgages in late 2005. Loans to subprime borrowers were approved with high loan-to-value ratios and incomplete income documentation. Had house prices kept appreciating, loan-to-value ratios would have fallen and some borrowers would have been able to refinance, perhaps into a prime loan with a lower interest rate. But, instead, as the housing market softened and interest rates rose, delinquencies in the adjustable-rate subprime market began to soar and reached nearly 15 percent in July.6Among other types of nonprime mortgages, delinquencies on fixed-rate subprime mortgages have been fairly steady at less than 6 percent; rates on mortgages in alt-A pools have increased to nearly 3 percent, up notably from the 1 percent rate of only a year ago. The rise in delinquencies in the subprime market has led to the collapse of some large subprime lenders and inflicted substantial losses on holders of subprime residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) and of some collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). As a result, underwriting standards have been tightened, and fewer households are qualifying for subprime loans. In addition, some borrowers apart from the subprime segment are reportedly finding it more difficult to qualify for loans or are having to pay more for them. These developments have contributed materially to the drop in demand for housing this year. Without a doubt, they also have caused significant hardship for many individuals and families. Recently, we have watched the deterioration in financial conditions extend beyond the subprime market. Investors appear to have reassessed their outlook and their tolerance for risk, especially for structured financial products and for securities of highly leveraged firms. Bond spreads--especially those for speculative-grade debt--widened substantially in June and July, and the volatility of equity prices increased as well. In mid-August, following several events that led investors to believe that credit risks might be larger and more pervasive than previously thought, the functioning of financial markets, including short-term and interbank funding markets, became increasingly impaired. Notably, many asset-backed commercial paper programs found rolling over their paper increasingly difficult. To help restore orderly conditions, the Federal Reserve in recent weeks has increased the provision of reserves, cut the discount rate, and changed its usual discount-window lending practices in order to facilitate term borrowing, together with other measures. Stepping back from the rush of unfolding events, we are seeing a pattern that occurs from time to time. Financial markets and institutions perform the essential function of channeling funds to those individuals or firms having the most productive investment opportunities. However, an increase in uncertainty and concerns about the quality of information can lead investors to pull back from financial markets and restrict productive lending--with potentially adverse implications for real activity. That is essentially the story I laid out in a paper delivered at the Kansas City Fed’s Jackson Hole conference about ten years ago.7 In my view, such an increase in uncertainty is an important part of what we have observed recently and stems from heightened concerns about the value of financial securities related to certain types of loans, about who is holding these securities, and about how a revaluation of these securities might affect the balance sheets of various financial intermediaries. Consequently, investors have become less willing to put funds into various financial markets, particularly into the more opaque segments of those markets. As best we can tell thus far, the imprint of these developments on economic activity appears likely to be most pronounced in the housing sector. However, economic activity could be affected more severely in other sectors should heightened uncertainty lead to a broader pullback in household and business spending. That scenario cannot, in my view, be ruled out, and I believe it poses an important downside risk to economic activity. I also believe that the process of adjustment that is under way in financial markets--of investors reassessing the outlook for risk and their tolerance for that risk--will ultimately create a more solid financial footing for the real economy. But in the meantime, the FOMC is monitoring the situation and is prepared to act as needed to mitigate the adverse effects on the economy arising from the disruptions in financial markets. Thank you for your interest and attention. I look forward to your questions and observations on recent developments. Footnotes 1.I would like to thankDaniel SichelandLawrence Slifmanfor the excellent comments and assistance on this speech.Return to text 2.Stephen D. Oliner, Daniel E. Sichel, and Kevin J. Stiroh (2007), “Explaining a Productive Decade,”Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2007 (1), pp. 81-152. The authors highlight the wide confidence band surrounding estimates of the growth rate of structural productivity.Return to text 3.Frederic S. Mishkin (2007), “Inflation Dynamics,” speech delivered at the Annual Macro Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, March 23, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/mishkin20070323a.htm.Return to text 4.A more in-depth discussion of developments in the subprime mortgage sector can be found in Karen E. Dynan and Donald L. Kohn (2007), “The Rise in U.S. Household Indebtedness: Causes and Consequences,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-37 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August), http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2007/200737/200737pap.pdf.Return to text 5.Calculated from table 4, p. A132, in Robert B. Avery, Kenneth P. Brevoort, and Glenn B. Canner (2006), “Higher-Priced Home Lending and the 2005 HMDA Data,”Federal Reserve Bulletin,vol. 92 (September 8), pp. A123-66, www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2006/hmda/bull06hmda.pdf.Return to text 6.Based on data from First American LoanPerformance.Return to text 7.Frederic S. Mishkin (1997), “The Causes and Propagation of Financial Instability: Lessons for Policymakers (145 KB PDF),” paper presented at “Maintaining Financial Stability in a Global Economy,” a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 28-30, http://www.kc.frb.org/publicat/sympos/1997/sym97prg.htm.Return to text
The volume of Shared National Credits (SNC) rose by 21% in 2006, the fastest pace since 1998, reflecting, in part, significant merger and acquisition lending, according to the SNC2review results released today by federal bank and thrift regulators. The 2007 review noted an increase in the volume of criticized credits. However, the volume of criticized credits as a share of total SNC commitments remains low by historical comparison and is indicative of satisfactory credit quality. The review also included an assessment of underwriting standards and practices. Examiners found weakened underwriting standards in the syndicated lending market, particularly in non-investment grade or leveraged credit facilities. The results of the review--reported by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision--are based on analyses prepared in the second quarter of 2007. Criticized credits3as a percent of total commitments fell slightly to 5.0 percent from 5.1 percent a year ago (see Chart 1). Similarly, the ratio of classified commitments to total commitments dropped slightly to 3.1 percent from 3.3 percent last year. Total classified commitments rose by $9.7 billion, or 16 percent since 2006, with classified credits concentrated in the automotive and broadcast media sectors. Commitments rated special mention increased by $9.1 billion, or 27 percent from 2006. Classified commitments held by United States (U.S.) domiciled banking organizations increased to $19.2 billion from $13.1 billion in 2006, while the classified ratio was only 2.0 percent, a slight increase of 40 basis points. This percentage is substantially below the 3.1 classified percentage of the entire SNC portfolio as U.S. banks continue to hold a significantly lower volume of the classified loans. Classified commitments held by nonbank entities increased to $34.8 billion, representing nearly half of all classified credits. The volume of classified commitments held by nonbanks is particularly significant given their relatively small share (15.9 percent) of all SNC commitments. These discussions of criticized credits and their ratios do not include the effects of hedging or other techniques that organizations often employ to mitigate risk. OverviewIn aggregate, the 2007 SNC portfolio included 7,686 credits totaling $2.3 trillion in credit commitments to 5,264 obligors. SNC commitments increased by $401 billion, or 21.4 percent over 2006 results. This is the largest percentage increase since 1998. The portfolio's growth reflects, in part, substantial merger and acquisition financing provided during 2006 and into early 2007. Total outstandings, or drawn amounts, of $835 billion were up 33.4 percent from the prior year, the largest increase in both dollar and percentage terms in the past 18 years. In addition, outstandings as a percent of total commitments increased from 33 percent in 2006 to 37 percent in 2007. Criticized commitments rose to $114 billion, but still remain less than half of their peak dollar level in 2002. Criticized credits represent a modest 5.0 percent of total commitments, about the same rate experienced over the past three SNC reviews. SNCs classified substandard rose $11.5 billion, or 20 percent from the 2006 review. The severity of the classified portfolio lessened this year as doubtful credits decreased $1.3 billion, or 54 percent (see Table 1), and credits classified as loss fell $400 million, a 34 percent reduction from the prior year. Nonaccrual4classified credits fell 78 percent to $3.9 billion, and only represent 0.2 percent of the SNC portfolio. Industry TrendsCredits in the Manufacturing sector continue to comprise the largest industry component of the SNC portfolio at $570 billion, or 25 percent of total SNC commitments, followed by Financial Services and Insurance at 20 percent, and Oil, Gas, Pipelines, and Utilities at 12 percent. While Construction and Real Estate and Lodging and Transportation experienced the highest growth rates at 50 percent and 38 percent, respectively, the Manufacturing sector had the largest volume growth at $126 billion, or 31 percent of total growth in the SNC portfolio. Some of the larger subsector growth rates were in computer equipment, healthcare, and construction. Criticized credits are heavily concentrated in the Manufacturing and Telecommunications and Cable (Telecom) sectors which again have the highest criticized and classified ratios. Together, these portfolios comprise 63 percent of total criticized credits and 72 percent of total classified credits. Manufacturing criticized credits comprise 10.3 percent of the Manufacturing portfolio, an increase from 8.6 percent in 2006. This sector comprises 52 percent of total criticized credits and 59 percent of total classified credits compared to 41% and 43% respectively in 2006. The bulk of the criticized Manufacturing credits are concentrated in the automotive sector. Thirty-seven percent of the automotive sector is classified, representing 46 percent of total classified credits. Telecom criticized credits comprise 8.9 percent of the Telecom portfolio, still high but an improvement from the 13.8 percent criticized rate in 2006. Telecom criticized credits comprise 11.3 percent of total criticized credits compared to 22% in 2006, and 13.5 percent of total classified credits compared to 24% in 2006. Over 85 percent of the Telecom criticized credits are in the broadcast media sector. Trends by Entity TypeThe portion of SNC commitments held by U.S. domiciled banking organizations edged down slightly from 44 percent to 43 percent, while the portion held by foreign banking organizations (FBOs) stayed at 41 percent (see Appendix C). For more than a decade, lenders not regulated by the federal banking agencies or affiliated with banks, such as brokerage firms, mutual funds, insurance companies, and hedge funds, have taken on larger positions in the syndicated market. These nonbank institutions have increased their share to 16 percent of total commitments from 10 percent five years ago and 2 percent in 1996. The quality of holdings also varied among entity types with classified commitments amounting to 2.0 percent of total commitments at U.S. banks compared with 1.9 percent at FBOs and 9.6 percent at nonbanks. Nonbank institutions continue to hold the largest portion of the SNC classified portfolio at 48 percent compared to 27 percent by U.S. banks and 25 percent by FBOs. U.S. bank holdings of classified credits did, however, increase from 21 percent to 27 percent over the past year, and classified credits held by banks insured by the FDIC increased from 17 percent to 22 percent. SNC UnderwritingRapid portfolio growth, weakening of underwriting standards, and the increase in criticized credits over the past year are indicative of increased credit risk. As such, banking organizations should ensure that underwriting standards are not compromised by competitive pressures. Consistent with safe and sound banking practice, agent banks should underwrite funding commitments in a manner reasonably consistent with internal underwriting standards. Examiners noted a significant volume of loans with liberal repayment terms such as little to no amortization prior to maturity, reliance on refinancing as a primary source of repayment, and lack of meaningful financial loan covenants such as leverage and fixed charge coverage ratios. Examiners also noted the backlog of leveraged loan commitments that cannot currently be distributed without incurring potential market losses and may need to be retained in portfolio. In addition, banking organizations should ensure underwriting processes include a comprehensive repayment capacity analysis that demonstrates a borrower's ability to repay debt over a reasonable period of time. Industry Telecommunication & Cable Commitment 197.5 174.1 149.7 120.2 123.7 149.8 144.5 Classified 6.9 38.1 35.7 13.1 17.0 14.6 9.7 Special Mention 10.0 9.0 7.0 10.8 2.5 6.2 3.2 % Classified 3.5% 21.9% 23.8% 10.9% 13.7% 9.7% 6.7% % Special Mention 5.0% 5.1% 4.7% 9.0% 2.0% 4.1% 2.2% Manufacturing Commitment 540.5 494.8 424.4 400.1 409.7 444.3 570.2 Classified 58.1 60.9 42.6 19.6 10.7 26.4 42.2 Special Mention 27.0 26.2 22.8 6.9 16.6 12.2 16.8 % Classified 10.8% 12.3% 10.0% 4.9% 2.6% 5.9% 7.4% % Special Mention 5.0% 5.3% 5.4% 1.7% 4.0% 2.7% 2.9% Professional, Scientific, & Other Services Commitment 157.9 124.9 122.4 107.3 102.2 125.4 164.5 Classified 11.9 8.8 6.8 3.3 1.5 1.0 2.4 Special Mention 4.5 2.3 1.8 1.1 1.3 0.3 2.4 % Classified 7.5% 7.0% 5.5% 3.1% 1.5% 0.8% 1.5% % Special Mention 2.8% 1.9% 1.5% 1.0% 1.3% 0.3% 1.5% Oil, Gas, Pipeline & Utilities Commitment 222.8 229.5 200.5 175.7 186.4 208.9 261.5 Classified 4.3 17.1 38.1 24.2 14.1 9.7 4.5 Special Mention 7.0 15.5 12.3 10.1 1.9 2.0 0.7 % Classified 1.9% 7.4% 19.0% 13.8% 7.5% 4.6% 1.7% % Special Mention 3.1% 6.8% 6.1% 5.8% 1.0% 1.0% 0.3% Construction & Real Estate Commitment 100.1 96.7 87.5 90.2 107.9 124.0 186.2 Classified 4.7 4.1 3.6 2.5 0.7 0.4 2.9 Special Mention 1.9 3.2 2.3 0.9 0.3 0.6 2.3 % Classified 4.7% 4.2% 4.1% 2.8% 0.6% 0.3% 1.5% % Special Mention 1.9% 3.3% 2.6% 1.0% 0.2% 0.5% 1.2% Lodging & Transportation Commitment 99.1 82.9 74.8 74.1 76.5 80.8 111.7 Classified 3.1 6.6 7.7 5.2 3.7 2.5 0.7 Special Mention 6.7 5.3 1.8 0.7 0.8 4.5 1.1 % Classified 3.1% 7.9% 10.3% 7.1% 4.9% 3.1% 0.6% % Special Mention 6.8% 6.4% 2.4% 1.0% 1.1% 5.6% 1.0% Financial Services & Insurance Commitment 420.0 376.5 343.3 337.1 336.0 424.0 460.7 Classified 11.9 8.9 6.7 2.1 0.1 0.8 0.5 Special Mention 4.4 2.9 2.5 0.5 0.2 2.8 3.0 % Classified 2.8% 2.4% 1.9% 0.6% 0.0% 0.2% 0.1% % Special Mention 1.1% 0.8% 0.7% 0.2% 0.1% 0.7% 0.7% All Other Commitment 310.8 291.6 241.0 240.4 284.2 316.7 376.1 Classified 16.5 12.7 11.0 3.8 4.7 6.4 8.7 Special Mention 13.9 14.6 4.7 1.8 2.4 4.8 13.1 % Classified 5.3% 4.4% 4.6% 1.6% 1.6% 2.0% 2.3% % Special Mention 4.5% 5.0% 2.0% 0.7% 0.8% 1.5% 3.5% All Industries (Total) Commitment 2,048.9 1,871.0 1,643.5 1,545.2 1,626.7 1,873.9 2,275.4 Classified 117.5 157.1 152.2 74.0 52.5 61.8 71.6 Special Mention 75.4 79.0 55.2 32.8 25.9 33.4 42.5 % Classified 5.7% 8.4% 9.3% 4.8% 3.2% 3.3% 3.1% % Special Mention 3.7% 4.2% 3.4% 2.1% 1.6% 1.8% 1.9% Total Classifications ($ billion) Classifieds as % of Commitments Total Nonaccrual Commitments ($ billion) (*)Uninsured refers to organizations that do not take consumer deposits such as holding companies, brokerage firms, finance companies, etc.Note: Figures may not add to totals due to rounding Footnotes 1.Credits include syndicated loans and loan commitments, letters of credit, commercial leases, as well as other forms of credit. Credit commitments include both drawn and undrawn portions of credit facilities. This release reports only the par amounts of commitments; these may differ from the amounts at which loans are carried by investors.Return to text 2.The Shared National Credit (SNC) Program was established in 1977 by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. In 2001, the Office of Thrift Supervision became an assisting agency. With a few exceptions, the annual program, which seeks to provide an efficient and consistent review and classification of large syndicated loans, generally covers loans or loan commitments of at least $20 million that are shared by three or more regulated financial institutions.Return to text 3.Criticized credits are the total of credits classified substandard, doubtful, and loss--and credits rated special mention. Classified credits are only those rated substandard, doubtful, and loss. Under the agencies' Uniform Loan Classification Standards, classified credits have well-defined weaknesses, including default in some cases. Special mention credits exhibit potential weaknesses, which may result in further deterioration if left uncorrected. Excerpt from federal banking agencies' examination manuals defining regulatory classifications:A Substandard asset is inadequately protected by the current sound worth and paying capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if any. Assets so classified must have a well-defined weakness or weaknesses that jeopardize the liquidation of the debt. They are characterized by the distinct possibility that the institution will sustain some loss if the deficiencies are not corrected. An asset classified Doubtful has all the weaknesses inherent in one classified Substandard, with the added characteristic that the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of currently existing facts, conditions, and values, highly questionable and improbable. Assets classified Loss are considered uncollectible and of such little value that their continuance as bankable assets is not warranted. This classification does not mean that the asset has absolutely no recovery or salvage value but rather that it is not practical or desirable to defer writing off this basically worthless asset even though partial recovery may be affected in the future. Amounts classified Loss should be promptly charged off. Excerpt from the June 10, 1993 Interagency Statement on the Supervisory Definition of Special Mention Assets:A Special Mention asset has potential weaknesses that deserve management's close attention. If left uncorrected, these potential weaknesses may result in deterioration of the repayment prospects for the asset or in the institution's credit position at some future date. Special Mention assets are not adversely classified and do not expose an institution to sufficient risk to warrant adverse classification.Return to text 4.Nonaccrual loans are defined for regulatory reporting purposes as "loans and lease financing receivables that are required to be reported on a nonaccrual basis because (a) they are maintained on a cash basis due to a deterioration in the financial position of the borrower, (b) payment in full of interest or principal is not expected, or (c) principal or interest has been in default for 90 days or longer, unless the obligation is both well secured and in the process of collection."Return to text 5.NAICS groupings of industries identified in Appendix B are as follows: Telecommunication & Cable--515 through 519; Manufacturing--31 through 33 and 5121 through 5131; Professional, Scientific, & Other Services--54, 55, 56, 61, and 62; Oil, Gas, Pipelines, & Utilities--21 (oil- & gas-related only), 22, and 486; Construction & Real Estate--23 and 53; Lodging & Transportation--48 (excluding 486), 49, and 72; Financial Services & Insurance--52; and All Other--remaining NAICS codes. Prior year data has been restated to reflect industry categorizations using 2002 NAICS groupings rather than 1997 NAICS groupings used in prior data releases..Return to text
Statement of Chairman Ben S. Bernanke on the death of Edward M. Gramlich, former member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System:
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to appear before you to discuss the origins of the problems in the subprime‑mortgage market and the response of the Federal Reserve to these developments. I will also discuss some possible legislative options for addressing these concerns. Recent Developments in the Subprime-Mortgage SectorLet me begin with some background on the subprime-mortgage sector. Subprime mortgages are loans intended for borrowers who are perceived to have high credit risk. Although these mortgages emerged on the financial landscape more than two decades ago, they did not begin to expand significantly until the mid-1990s. The expansion was fueled by innovations--including the development of credit scoring--that made it easier for lenders to assess and price risks. In addition, regulatory changes and the ongoing growth of the secondary mortgage market increased the ability of lenders, who once typically held mortgages on their books until the loans were repaid, to sell many mortgages to various intermediaries, or "securitizers." The securitizers in turn pooled large numbers of mortgages and sold the rights to the resulting cash flows to investors, often as components of structured securities. This "originate-to-distribute" model gave lenders (and, thus, mortgage borrowers) greater access to capital markets, lowered transaction costs, and allowed risk to be shared more widely. The resulting increase in the supply of mortgage credit likely contributed to the rise in the homeownership rate from 64 percent in 1994 to about 68 percent now--with minority households and households from lower-income census tracts recording some of the largest gains in percentage terms. However, for all its considerable benefits, the broadening of access to mortgage credit that has occurred during the past decade also had important negative aspects. Not surprisingly, given their weaker credit histories and financial conditions, subprime borrowers default on their loans more frequently than prime borrowers. The consequences of default may be severe for homeowners, who face the possibility of foreclosure, the loss of accumulated home equity, and reduced access to credit. In addition, clusters of foreclosures can lead to declines in the values of nearby properties and do great damage to neighborhoods. During the past two years, serious delinquencies among subprime adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) have increased dramatically. (Subprime mortgages with fixed rates, on the other hand, have had a more stable performance.) The fraction of subprime ARMs past due ninety days or more or in foreclosure reached nearly 15 percent in July, roughly triple the low seen in mid-2005.1For so-called near-prime loans in alt-A securitized pools (those made to borrowers who typically have higher credit scores than subprime borrowers but still pose more risk than prime borrowers), the serious delinquency rate has also risen, to 3 percent from 1 percent only a year ago. These patterns contrast sharply with those in the prime-mortgage sector, in which less than 1 percent of loans are seriously delinquent. Higher delinquencies have begun to show through to foreclosures. About 320,000 foreclosures were initiated in each of the first two quarters of this year (just more than half of them on subprime mortgages), up from an average of about 225,000 during the past six years. Foreclosure starts tend to be high in states with stressed economic conditions and to rise where house prices have decelerated or fallen. Adjustable-rate subprime mortgages originated in late 2005 and in 2006 have performed the worst, with some of them defaulting after only one or two payments (or even no payment at all). Relative to earlier vintages, more of these loans carried greater risks beyond weak borrower credit histories--including very high initial cumulative loan-to-value ratios and less documentation of borrower income. In addition, the sharp deceleration in home prices since 2005, including outright declines in some markets, left many of these more-recent borrowers with little or no home equity. In this situation, some borrowers (particularly owner-investors) may have found that simply walking away from their properties was their best option. Moreover, low home equity has made refinancing--the typical way for many subprime borrowers to avoid large scheduled interest rate resets--difficult or impossible for many. Thus, with house prices still soft and many borrowers of recent-vintage subprime ARMs still facing their first interest rate resets, delinquencies and foreclosure initiations in this class of mortgages are likely to rise further. It is difficult to be precise about the number of foreclosure initiations expected in coming quarters, as it will depend on (among other factors) the evolution of house prices, which will vary widely across localities. Historically, about half of homeowners who get a foreclosure notice are ultimately displaced from their homes, but that ratio may turn out to be higher in coming quarters because the proportion of subprime borrowers, who have weaker financial conditions than prime borrowers, is higher. The rise could be tempered somewhat by loan workouts. The originate-to-distribute model seems to have contributed to the loosening of underwriting standards in 2005 and 2006. When an originator sells a mortgage and its servicing rights, depending on the terms of the sale, much or all of the risks are passed on to the loan purchaser. Thus, originators who sell loans may have less incentive to undertake careful underwriting than if they kept the loans. Moreover, for some originators, fees tied to loan volume made loan sales a higher priority than loan quality. This misalignment of incentives, together with strong investor demand for securities with high yields, contributed to the weakening of underwriting standards. The fragmented market structure of mortgage originators in the subprime-lending industry may also have contributed. Data collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act show that independent mortgage companies‑‑those that are not depository institutions or their subsidiaries or holding company affiliates‑‑made nearly half of higher-priced first-lien mortgages in 2006 but only one-fourth of loans that were not higher-priced. In addition, some sources report that the majority of mortgages are obtained through a broker, often an independent entity, who takes loan applications on behalf of a depository institution or other lender. The various lending institutions and brokers operate under different regulatory and supervisory regimes with varying intensities of enforcement effort. That fragmentation makes monitoring brokers and lenders difficult for regulators and investors alike. Markets do tend to self-correct. In response to the serious financial losses incurred by investors, the market for subprime mortgages has adjusted sharply. Investors are demanding that originators employ tighter underwriting standards, and some large lenders are pulling back from the use of brokers. The reassessment and resulting increase in the attention to loan quality should help prevent a recurrence of the recent subprime problems. Nevertheless, many homeowners who took out mortgages in recent years are in financial distress. To help those borrowers, the Federal Reserve, together with the other federal supervisory agencies, has issued two statements‑‑in April, to mortgage lenders; and earlier this month, to mortgage servicers--to encourage the financial industry to work with borrowers to arrange prudent loan modifications to avoid unnecessary foreclosures. The Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) joined the federal agencies in the second statement. Often, loan workouts are in the interest of all parties. We have also encouraged lenders and servicers to identify and contact borrowers who, with counseling and possible loan modifications, may be able to avoid entering delinquency or foreclosure. The simple step of reaching out to borrowers before they get into trouble can be very productive. In addition, a member of the Federal Reserve Board serves as a director of NeighborWorks America, which encourages borrowers facing payment difficulties to seek help by contacting their lenders, services, or trusted counselors. Recently, NeighborWorks America launched a nationwide advertising campaign to increase awareness of available support from their 24-hour hotline, and they are now responding to 2,000 calls a day, almost double the number in June. Additionally, the Federal Reserve is working closely with community and industry groups around the country to reduce homeowners' risks of foreclosure. The community affairs offices in each of the Reserve Banks provide significant leadership and technical assistance. For instance, a public-private collaboration initiated by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago with Neighborhood Housing Services of Chicago and the City of Chicago produced the Home Ownership Preservation Initiative (HOPI), which began in 2003. In the ensuing three years, the HOPI program counseled more than 4,000 people, prevented 1,300 foreclosures, and reclaimed 300 buildings.2HOPI has also been a model for foreclosure prevention programs now operating around the country, including in Baltimore and Atlanta and in Ohio. As another example, the community affairs office of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco recently convened a series of workshops to develop community-based solutions to mortgage delinquencies in six cities. More than 700 lenders, housing counselors, community group representatives, and government officials attended. Regulatory ResponsesThe Federal Reserve takes responsible lending and consumer protection very seriously. Along with other federal and state agencies, we are responding to the subprime problems on a number of fronts. We are committed to preventing problems from recurring, while still preserving responsible subprime lending. Last year, in coordination with other federal supervisory agencies, we issued principles-based guidance describing safety-and-soundness and consumer-protection standards for nontraditional mortgages, such as interest-only and negative-amortization mortgages. We subsequently issued illustrations to help institutions clearly communicate information to consumers. In June of this year the agencies issued supervisory guidance on subprime ARMs. The guidance describes standards that banks should follow to ensure that borrowers obtain loans that they can afford to repay and that give them the opportunity to refinance without prepayment penalty for a reasonable period before the interest rate resets. We have requested public comment on illustrations to help lenders implement this guidance. The Board also is committed to providing more-effective disclosures to help consumers defend against improper lending. As I discussed in my testimony to this Committee in July, we recently issued proposed rules under Regulation Z, which implements the Truth in Lending Act (TILA), to improve disclosures related to credit cards and other revolving credit accounts. We are now engaged in a similarly rigorous review of TILA rules for mortgage loans and will be conducting extensive consumer testing of mortgage disclosures for this purpose. In my view, better disclosure of the schedule of mortgage payments over the life of the loan can help borrowers understand the terms of their mortgages and judge their ability to make future payments. Consumers may also benefit from better information about costs, including brokers' fees, when choosing among competing mortgage products. In addition, we are developing two sets of proposed changes to TILA rules--one to address concerns about incomplete or misleading mortgage loan advertisements and solicitations and a second to require lenders to provide mortgage disclosures more quickly so that consumers can get the information they need when it is most useful to them. Improved and more timely disclosures may not be sufficient in some cases. As I discussed in July, we will use our rulemaking authority under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act to propose additional consumer protections later this year. We are looking closely at some mortgage lending practices, including prepayment penalties, escrow accounts for taxes and insurance, stated-income and low-documentation lending, and the evaluation of a borrower's ability to repay. The information that we gathered at a public hearing in June and from the subsequent comment letters has been extremely helpful. The recent problems in subprime lending have underscored the need not only for better disclosure and new rules but also for more-uniform enforcement in the fragmented market structure of brokers and lenders. In that regard, the CSBS has partnered with the American Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators (AARMR) to develop a nationwide licensing system and database for mortgage professionals, and they have made considerable progress. The system is expected to start up in January 2008 with seven states, and another thirty states have committed and will be added gradually. Such a nationwide system would help limit the ability of originators who run afoul of their state regulators to continue operating simply by moving to another state. Raising the quality of underwriting practices by all lenders to a uniformly high standard is an important objective. To that end, the Board and the other federal agencies worked with the CSBS to apply the two guidance documents I mentioned--on nontraditional mortgages and subprime ARMs‑‑to state-supervised institutions. The CSBS published nearly identical guidance documents and has urged the states to implement them. Many states have done so, or are moving to do so. To achieve strong and uniform enforcement, interagency cooperation among a variety of federal and state agencies is essential. As I noted in my testimony in July, the Board has launched a pilot program with the CSBS, AARMR, the Office of Thrift Supervision, and the Federal Trade Commission. The goal of this program is to expand and improve consumer protection by strengthening compliance reviews at selected nondepository lenders with significant subprime‑mortgage operations. The Board will review nonbank subsidiaries of bank holding companies, and the other agencies will conduct similar reviews of nondepository institutions of thrift holding companies, independent mortgage lending companies, and mortgage brokers doing business with these entities. The reviews will include an evaluation of the companies' underwriting standards and senior-management oversight of the practices used for ensuring compliance with consumer protection regulations and laws. The agencies have been working closely together and are scheduled to begin the on-site reviews in the fourth quarter. The partner agencies will share information about the reviews and make joint assessments of lessons learned. This project should also lay the groundwork for various additional forms of future cooperation to ensure more effective and consistent supervision and consumer protection. Legislative ResponsesBeyond the actions underway at the regulatory agencies, I am aware that the Congress is considering statutory changes to help alleviate the problem of foreclosures. Modernizing the programs administered by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) is one promising direction. The FHA has considerable experience in providing home financing for low- and moderate-income borrowers. It insures mortgages made to borrowers who meet certain underwriting criteria and who pay premiums into a reserve fund that is designated to cover the costs in the event of default. This insurance makes the loans less risky for lenders and investors, and it makes the loans eligible for securitization through the Government National Mortgage Association (Ginnie Mae). Historically, the FHA has played an important role in the mortgage market, particularly for first-time home buyers. However, the FHA's share of first-lien home purchase loans declined substantially, from about 16 percent in 2000 to about 5 percent in 2006, as borrowers who might have sought FHA backing instead were attracted to nontraditional products with more-flexible and quicker underwriting and processing. In addition, maximum loan values that the FHA will insure have failed to keep pace with rising home values in many areas of the country. In modernizing FHA programs, Congress might wish to be guided by design principles that allow flexibility and risk-based pricing. To alleviate foreclosures, the FHA could be encouraged to collaborate with the private sector to expedite the refinancing of creditworthy subprime borrowers facing large resets. Other changes could allow the agency more flexibility to design new products that improve affordability through features such as variable maturities or shared appreciation. In addition, creating risk-based FHA insurance premiums that match insurance premiums with borrowers' credit profiles would give more households access to refinancing options. The risk of moral hazard must be considered in designing government-backed programs; such programs should not bail out failed investors, as doing so would only encourage excessive risk-taking. One must also consider adverse selection; programs that provide credit to only the weakest eligible borrowers are likely to be more costly than those that serve a broader risk spectrum. Risk-based insurance premiums or tighter screening and monitoring by lenders can mitigate adverse selection. But ultimately such mechanisms have their limits, and no government program will be able to provide meaningful help to the highest-risk borrowers without a public subsidy. Whether such subsidies should be employed is a decision for the Congress. The government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are, to a limited extent, assisting in subprime refinancings and should be encouraged to provide products for subprime borrowers to the extent permitted by their charters. However, the GSE charters are likely to limit the ability of the GSEs to serve any but the most creditworthy subprime borrowers. Indeed, if GSE programs remove the strongest borrowers from the pool, the risks faced by other programs--such as a modernized FHA program--could be increased. Some have suggested that the GSEs could help restore functioning in the secondary markets for non-conforming mortgages (specifically jumbo mortgages, those with principal value greater than $417,000) if the conforming-loan limits were raised. However, in my view, the reason that GSE securitizations are well-accepted in the secondary market is because they come with GSE-provided guarantees of financial performance, which market participants appear to treat as backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government, even though this federal guarantee does not exist. Evidently, market participants believe that, in the event of the failure of a GSE, the government would have no alternative but to come to the rescue. The perception, however inaccurate, that the GSEs are fully government-backed implies that investors have few incentives in their role as counterparties or creditors to act to constrain GSE risk-taking. Raising the conforming-loan limit would expand this implied guarantee to another portion of the mortgage market, reducing market discipline further. If, despite these considerations, the Congress were inclined to move in this direction, it should assess whether such action could be taken in a way that is both explicitly temporary and able to be implemented sufficiently promptly to serve its intended purpose. Any benefits that might conceivably accrue to this action would likely be lost if implementation were significantly delayed, as private securitization activity would likely be inhibited in the interim. Implications for Financial Markets and Monetary PolicyMost recently, as I am sure Committee members are well aware, subprime mortgage losses that triggered uncertainty about structured products more generally have reverberated in broader financial markets, raising concern about the consequences for economic activity. As I noted in a speech last month at the economic symposium hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, the turbulence originated in concerns about subprime mortgages, but the resulting global financial losses have far exceeded even the most pessimistic estimates of the credit losses on these loans. These wider losses reflect, in part, a significant increase in investor uncertainty centered on the difficulty of evaluating the risks for a wide range of structured securities products, which can be opaque or have complex payoffs. Investors also may have become less willing to assume risk. Some increase in premiums that investors require to take risk is probably a healthy development on the whole, as these premiums have been exceptionally low for some time. However, in this episode, the shift in risk attitudes combined with greater credit risk and uncertainty about how to value those risks has created significant market stress. On the positive side of the ledger, past efforts to strengthen capital positions and financial market infrastructure places the global financial system in a relatively strong position to work through this process. In response to these developments, the Federal Reserve moved in early August to provide reserves to address unusual strains in money markets. On August 17, the Federal Reserve Board announced a cut in the discount rate of 50 basis points and adjustments to the Reserve Banks' usual discount window practices to facilitate the provision of term financing for as long as thirty days, renewable by the borrower. The purpose of the discount window actions was to assure depositories of the ready availability of a backstop source of liquidity. The Federal Reserve also took a number of supplemental actions, such as cutting the fee charged for lending Treasury securities. Earlier this week, Federal Open Market Committee lowered its target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points. The action was intended to help forestall some of the adverse effects on the broader economy that might arise from the disruptions in financial markets and to promote moderate growth over time. Recent developments in financial markets have increased the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook. The Committee will continue to assess the effects of these and other developments on economic prospects and will act as needed to foster price stability and sustainable economic growth. Footnotes 1.Estimates of delinquencies are based on data from First American LoanPerformance.Return to text 2."The Home Ownership Preservation Initiative in Chicago (HOPI): Reducing Foreclosures Through Strategic Partnerships," presentation by Bruce Gottschall, executive director, Neighborhood Housing Services of Chicago, June 25, 2007,http://nw.org/network/neighborworksprogs/foreclosuresolutions/documents/hopi_000.ppt.Return to text
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At Monetary Policy over Fifty Years, a conference to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt, Germany I appreciate this opportunity to speak on the occasion of the Deutsche Bundesbank's fiftieth anniversary by participating on this panel on "Success and Failure of Monetary Policy since the 1950s." I was reassured in my acceptance of Axel's invitation by David Laidler's survey paper, which found more successes than not over the past two decades.1 A concise summary of this success is evident in the performance of consumer price inflation in the advanced economies. Median inflation in that group (as defined by the International Monetary Fund) has held near 2 percent for this decade. Indeed, in the IMF's latestWorld Economic Outlook, four out of five countries in this group are expected to post inflation rates between 1 percent and 3 percent this year. That good performance has helped to anchor inflation expectations, which, in turn, generates many benefits. Anchored inflation expectations damp the pass-through of supply-related price shocks. They also permit central banks to respond more forcefully to output fluctuations. Most significantly, the improved inflation performance has come with, not at the expense of, output stability. Although a consensus has not formed on how much of the "Great Moderation" in the growth of real output can be attributed to monetary policy, everyone agrees that at least a portion of it can. David views these macroeconomic outcomes as a triumph of monetarism, but not because the formulaic policy prescription associated with that doctrine succeeded (or, for that matter, was even tried on a sustained basis). Rather, the underlying tenets of monetarism ultimately seeped into the collective central banking unconscious and fostered better decisionmaking. The beliefs that David identifies are threefold: That market economies are inherently self-righting, that open economies perform best under flexible exchange rates, and that central bankers should focus on price stability as their long-run objective. David suggests that monetarism failed when its proponents got too prescriptive by advocating rigid rules for money growth. Among the lessons he takes from the failed monetarist experiment are that central banking is an applied science and that our imperfect understanding of how economies and markets function implies that a good dose of humility is required--and I agree. As evidence of that humility on my part, let me also agree with David that two important questions about the conduct of monetary policy have not yet been resolved. This is unfortunate because these two questions are both longstanding sources of debate and central to current policy concerns. First, what is the best way to pursue price stability, and, second, how should asset prices be taken into account in steering policy? In many countries, though not my own, the answer to the first question has been that price stability should be pursued through the formal apparatus of an inflation target, which typically includes establishing an inflation goal by the government, setting metrics to evaluate central bank performance, and periodically communicating progress to the public. Although correlation does not convey causation, the spread of such regimes has coincided with sustained low global inflation. In addition, no adopter of an inflation target has subsequently abandoned it. Before anyone jumps to the conclusion that Frankfurt is a stop on my road to Damascus, let this Saul state that for me the case remains open. Inflation has come down worldwide, in countries without, as well as with, inflation targets. Moreover, I share David's puzzlement about why an explicit inflation goal should make a substantial difference in performance given the paucity of evidence showing that choosing a target directly affects the level of the public's inflation expectations. That said, I am relatively more persuaded that inflation targeting helps reduce the variance of inflation expectations. Evidence has accumulated to suggest that stock prices, interest rates, and measures of inflation expectations seem to vary less in economies in which the central bank has an explicit long-run goal for inflation. I suspect that this better anchoring of expectations and the success of inflation targeting in many countries is attributable in part to aspects of the political economy that David identified. A formal inflation target represents a national embrace of a goal, in which elected authorities recognize the primacy of price stability and publicly support--indeed, even require--the central bank's pursuit of that goal. To the extent that elected authorities channel the desires of the electorate, a central bank directed to adopt an inflation target is being given a strong signal as to the goal's importance to the public at large. This affirmation has often been reinforced by the granting of operational independence to the central bank to achieve that goal most effectively. An important effect of such public acceptance of price stability is that it erodes the standing of those who would direct central bank action toward other ends. In such an environment, workers, businesspeople, and investors can make plans with the expectation that nominal magnitudes will be predictable and so devote their attention to more productive matters. For the European Central Bank, this framework was established by treaty. In most other instances, the adoption of an inflation target involved laws and mutual understandings, not constitutional changes. The early adopters of inflation targets were parliamentary democracies, which is not too surprising given that in such a system a single branch of government can enact laws and put them into effect. With regard to an inflation goal, the parliament can erect the formal apparatus and the finance minister can serve as the government's point of contact with the central bank. The system in the United States is different in that two independent branches of government are responsible for economic policy making, making agreement on a single goal problematic. Moreover, those two branches have already spoken as to the appropriate aim of the nation's central bank: The Congress, in a law the President signed, has given the Federal Reserve a dual mandate that directs us to foster maximum employment and stable prices over time. This instruction is not an accident of history, in that, in the past, the Congress has shown no appetite to amend its legislation. Nor is this instruction unreasonable, in that the dual mandate has come to be interpreted as assigning us the responsibility for attaining price stability in the long run, which will bring with it maximum employment, and of being mindful of resource utilization in the succession of short runs that make up the long run. The dual mandate seems proper and fitting, given that economic costs are incurred both by having inflation stray from its long-run goal and by having output deviate from the economy's potential to produce; and it seems to produce results not too different in practice from those associated with central banks that are flexible inflation targeters. As I said earlier, anchoring expectations has value, in that it makes planning easier, reduces resources spent on predicting and protecting against unexpected variations in nominal magnitudes, and grants a central bank greater scope to lean against fluctuations in output while keeping inflation contained. The latter is particularly attractive given our dual mandate, in that better-anchored inflation expectations could produce the win-win outcome of improving the attainment of both goals. For that reason, in its consideration of its communications strategies, the Federal Open Market Committee has been discussing whether mechanisms could be put in place that could better anchor inflation expectations in a manner consistent with the institutional framework of our dual mandate. The second of David's open issues--whether central banks should lean against possible asset price bubbles--was the key topic in my discussion here eighteen months ago, at Otmar's festschrift. My answer then is my answer now. A central bank should focus on the outlook for the macroeconomy and generally relegate asset prices to the subordinate role of inputs to the forecast process. I view this as the simple application of humility that David and I find so admirable. Although economic theory provides no settled answers to any topic, its predictions are especially imprecise with regard to asset pricing, which has two implications for central bankers. First, little confidence can be attached to the determination that an asset bubble exists except in the most extreme of circumstances. Second, even less confidence can be attached to predictions of the effects of policy on asset prices, and in particular on any speculative element in those prices. Moreover, monetary policy actions addressed at a perceived bubble in one sector may have undesirable effects on other asset prices and the economy more generally. As a result, my preferred policy framework remains three pronged: First, assign the single instrument of monetary policy to its macroeconomic objective; second, rely on regulation to erect a resilient financial structure; and, third, in the event that market judgments prove to be wrong and financial prices adjust sharply, apply the tool of monetary policy to the macroeconomic task at hand. That task is not always easily captured by simple statistical regularities. Relationships between financial markets and economic results are complex and nonlinear, especially when markets are not behaving normally. When investors are ebullient, their expectations of outsized capital gains can feed on themselves and back on the economy. On the way down, investors' loss of confidence, a reduction in credit availability, and a tightening of terms and conditions for credit have the potential to have pronounced effects on activity and inflation. The world is, no doubt, different than when we gathered here eighteen months ago. However, it is far too soon to pass judgment on what went wrong in the U.S. housing market and why. I suspect that, when studies are done with cooler reflection, the causes of the swing in house prices will be seen as less a consequence of monetary policy and more a result of the emotions of excessive optimism followed by fear experienced every so often in the marketplace through the ages. To some extent, too, the amplitude of the housing cycle was heightened by the newness of the subprime market, the fragmentation of regulatory oversight responsibility for that market, and the complexity and opacity of the newer instruments for transforming and distributing risk. Low policy interest rates early in this decade helped feed the initial rise in house prices. However, the worst excesses in the market probably occurred when short-term rates were already well on their way to more normal levels, but longer-term rates were held down by a variety of forces. And similar, sometimes even sharper, trajectories of house prices have been witnessed in some economies in which the central banks said they were paying more attention to asset prices. The action the Federal Open Market Committee took this Tuesday can be interpreted as the application of the third leg of my preferred policy triad, in that it was taken "to forestall some of the adverse effects on the broader economy that might otherwise arise from the disruptions in financial markets and promote moderate growth over time." In the past, such efforts to cushion the restraint induced by declines in asset prices have fueled the assertion that Federal Reserve policy is asymmetrical in its response to booms and busts in asset prices. Such an asymmetry is said to have the potential to feed "moral hazard" in that investors would spend less effort evaluating underlying values as they were lulled by the protection they expected to be provided by monetary policy action. In point of fact, Federal Reserve policy makers have not been asymmetrical in intent or in actions, in that we have always focused sharply on the macroeconomy. Asset prices have mattered in the determination of policy because they have mattered for our outlook. I am confident that the federal funds rate would not have been as high in 2000 if it had not been for the level of equity prices that year, nor would the federal funds rate have been as elevated in 2006 in the absence of the tight credit spreads, low term premiums, and the impetus from housing wealth. And I doubt policy would have been eased this week if housing prices had continued their upward march. In each instance, however, policy was motivated not by the desire to achieve any particular level of asset prices, but rather by the Federal Reserve's assessment of how changes in asset prices were affecting the forecast of growth and inflation. I would also caution that a symmetrical response to the macroeconomic outlook will need to reflect the inherent asymmetries in business cycles. In the typical boom-bust cycle, asset prices tend to rise relatively gradually over a protracted period but fall sharply in a shorter stretch of time, which financial economists refer to as "rising by the escalator and falling by the elevator." Perhaps because those asset prices are important to spending, key macroeconomic indicators, such as the unemployment rate, exhibit a similar pattern. It is not surprising then that a macro-focused monetary policy will leave an asymmetric footprint in the data. In the end, my humble advice is to evaluate policymakers relative to the tasks the law has given them. In my judgment, the record over the past twenty-five years of steady growth with two mild recessions and gradually declining inflation to a reasonably low level does not betray an asymmetry in our policy responses in the metric that counts--macroeconomic performance. Footnotes 1.Vincent Reinhart, of the Board's staff, contributed to the preparation of these remarks. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily shared by my colleagues on the Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the Tenth Annual International Banking Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois After the calm of the past several years, the events of this summer are a strong reminder that our increasingly globalized and sophisticated markets are still vulnerable to systemic risk. When we speak of systemic risk, we mean the risk of a sudden, usually unexpected, disruption of information flows in financial markets that prevents them from channeling funds to those who have the most productive profit opportunities. We have seen how systemic risk, when it becomes especially severe, can result in financial crises--the seizing up of financial markets--which can have potentially important economic consequences. We have also seen how governments, in their role as providers of emergency liquidity, can intervene to help put the financial system back on its feet and prevent a financial crisis from spinning out of control.1 In mature industrial economies, domestic central banks have the credibility and the resources to play this role. Around the world, central banks have injected liquidity and signaled that credit would be available to those institutions and markets that need it. At other times, as well, the Federal Reserve has acted successfully to prevent potentially devastating financial seizures: notably, after the stock market crash of October 19, 1987, and after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. Given the current focus on systemic risk, I would like to talk about an issue that I wrote about extensively before coming to the Board of Governors: financial instability in emerging-market countries. (Please note that my comments here reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors or the Federal Reserve System.) The need for emergency liquidity assistance in times of financial instability is just as strong, and arguably stronger, in emerging-market countries, in part because their less-developed financial markets, weaker institutions, and lack of easily available information often make these countries especially vulnerable to systemic risk. Such risk can be elevated and financial instability triggered by several factors: shocks related to weak domestic institutions and policies, swings in world commodity prices, contagion from other emerging markets, and, turmoil originating in the industrial countries.2 Developing economies have made great strides over the past decade to improve economic fundamentals and policymaking, such as strengthening the independence and credibility of their central banks. Many of these countries have reaped the rewards of their labors during the most recent period of market turmoil, as volatility in their domestic financial markets was reasonably contained. However, room for improvement remains. As market participants have become more discriminating in recent years, emerging-market countries with weaker fundamentals and weaker institutions for the most part have been hit relatively harder. More broadly, these events should serve notice that no country is impervious to crises and that the need for a lender of last resort remains strong. To be clear, by lender of last resort, I mean short-term lending on good collateral to sound institutions, when financial markets temporarily seize up. I do not mean rescuing financial market participants from the consequences of their bad decisions by lending to unsound institutions with little capital, thereby postponing the recognition of insolvency. Despite the need for a lender of last resort, central banks in emerging-market countries, unlike those in advanced countries, often cannot undertake this role. Many emerging-market countries have histories of high inflation and of large fiscal deficits that have generally been accommodated by the monetary authority. This legacy has led to a lack of confidence in the domestic currency, which makes emerging-market economies different from advanced economies in two ways. First, emerging-market economies often have much of their debt denominated in foreign currency. Second, the credibility of central banks in these countries to keep inflation under control is low. Accordingly, an injection of liquidity in the form of domestic currency can actually make the financial crisis worse by raising inflation fears and thus causing the domestic currency to depreciate. Given a debt structure characterized by liabilities denominated in foreign currency, this depreciation causes the domestic-currency value of the liabilities to rise, induces a deterioration of balance sheets, and thus causes a severe economic contraction. Moreover, a run on the domestic currency will likely be associated with a spike in nominal domestic-currency interest rates--just the opposite of what the injection of liquidity was intended to achieve--which will further damage economic prospects. Therefore, if liquidity is to be provided during a financial crisis in an emerging-market economy, it generally should be in the form of foreign, not domestic currency. But, if a domestic central bank lacks the foreign reserves to conduct emergency liquidity assistance in foreign currency to stop a financial crisis or promote a recovery when one occurs, can another institution come to the rescue? The answer is yes, and it is often best if the assistance comes not from within the country, but from without. Liquidity provided by foreign sources can help emerging-market countries cope with financial crises without many of the undesirable consequences that can result from the provision of domestic-currency liquidity by the domestic central bank. roperly managed, and in conjunction with steps to address the sources of the crisis, foreign liquidity assistance does not lead to increased inflation, higher interest rates, and an excessive depreciation of the domestic currency. Instead, it gives the government international reserves which can then be used to stabilize the value of the domestic currency and support domestic financial markets and institutions. Indeed, foreign liquidity assistance should also help lower interest rates (and thus improve firms' and households' cash flow). The resulting strengthening of domestic balance sheets helps undo the asymmetric information problems created by a financial crisis. The need for providing liquidity has once again become the primary focus of governments around the world. Today I would like to review the principles that should govern such lending and then examine some key issues concerning the activities of an international lender of last resort, including which institutions could play this role. How Should a Lender of Last Resort Operate?Our understanding of the sources of systemic risk immediately suggests three general principles for operating as an effective lender of last resort: (1) restore confidence in the financial system by quickly providing liquidity, (2) limit moral hazard by encouraging adequate prudential supervision, and (3) act as a lender of last resort infrequently. Restore Confidence in the Financial System by Quickly Providing LiquidityWhen a systemic financial crisis occurs, the emergency lender's most crucial task is to restore confidence in the financial system. Without confidence, participants will pull out of financial markets, which will then be unable to channel funds to productive investment opportunities. Confidence is essential to an efficiently operating financial system, and it is also necessary for promoting recovery from, or forestalling, a financial crisis. romoting and restoring confidence are easier said than done, however, and require several measures. One such measure is to quickly provide ample liquidity so that markets can operate effectively. Speed is critical. Experience shows that the faster the lending, the lower the amount of lending necessary.3 To illustrate the benefits of acting quickly, I will use a canonical example, the Federal Reserve's operations in the aftermath of the stock market crash in October 1987. What is remarkable about this episode is that the Federal Reserve did not need to lend directly to the banks to encourage them to lend to the securities firms that needed funds to clear their customers' accounts. ecause the Federal Reserve acted promptly (within a day) and reassured banks that the financial system would not seize up, banks knew that lending to securities firms would be profitable. They saw that making these loans immediately was in their interest, even if they did not borrow from the Federal Reserve. anks thus began lending freely to securities firms, and, as a result, confidence was restored and the fear of crisis diminished almost immediately. The Federal Reserve did not have to increase its lending to the banking system at all, and the actual amount of liquidity that it injected into the banking system through open-market operations in the immediate aftermath of the crash was around $12 billion, which at the time was notable but not exceptional. And the Federal Reserve was able to remove this liquidity almost immediately, within weeks of the crash. The resolution of, and recovery from, a financial crisis require a restoration of the balance sheets of financial and nonfinancial firms. This restoration, in turn, requires several steps: the closing down of insolvent financial institutions, the injection of public funds so that healthy financial institutions can buy up the assets of insolvent institutions, and the establishment of a well-functioning bankruptcy law that enables the balance sheets of nonfinancial firms to be cleaned up quickly so that the firms can regain access to the credit markets. Crucial to a country's successful resolution of a financial crisis is a commitment to necessary reforms and a refusal to go halfway. Allowing weak financial institutions or practices to continue may encourage excessive risk-taking because participants have little to lose. ecause the continued presence of excessive risk diminishes confidence in the future health of the financial system, insolvent financial institutions must be shut down. Limit Moral Hazard by Encouraging Adequate Prudential SupervisionThe funds provided by lenders of last resort may be used indirectly to protect depositors and other creditors of banking institutions from losses. This safety net means that depositors and other creditors have little incentive to monitor these banking institutions and withdraw their deposits if the institutions are taking on too much risk. As a result, in the absence of a strong system of bank supervision, banking institutions are encouraged to take on exposures that heighten systemic risk. To limit the moral hazard problem created by their acting as lenders of last resort, governments and institutions must make improved financial-sector supervision and regulation a high priority. The usual elements of a well-functioning prudential regulatory and supervisory system are adequate disclosure and capital requirements, limits on currency mismatch and connected lending, prompt corrective action, careful monitoring of an institution's risk-management procedures, close supervision of financial institutions to enforce compliance with regulations, and sufficient resources and accountability for supervisors. Often, however, strong political forces resist putting these kinds of measures into place. This resistance has been a problem in industrialized countries (it was, for example, an important factor in the U.S. savings and loan debacle of the 1980s),4but the problem is far worse in many emerging-market countries. The political will to adequately regulate and supervise financial institutions can be weak because powerful special interests have prevented such oversight and because the underlying legal and political framework has often been too frail to counteract the special interests. Another important element of financial regulation is that the owners, if not also the managers, of insolvent institutions should suffer significant losses in the event of insolvency. In emerging-market countries (and sometimes in advanced countries, a prominent example of which is Japan during the 1990s), governments have often provided insolvent institutions with funds to keep them from failing and left the existing owners and managers in charge. ailing out the owners and managers in this way worsens the moral hazard problem. Knowing that a bailout will occur, they have incentives to take on huge risks because they have so little to lose. Furthermore, in some cases, the owners and managers of these institutions have been able to take the rescue funds for their own personal gain and send them out of the country before the institutions fail. Act as a Lender of Last Resort InfrequentlyBesides encouraging and promoting the adoption of prudential regulatory and supervisory measures to limit moral hazard, governments and institutions should act as lenders of last resort only when absolutely necessary, as doing so involves a tradeoff between the benefit of preventing a financial crisis and the cost of the moral hazard it creates, which increases systemic risk. Recognizing that the decision to act as a lender of last resort is often very difficult, lenders should refrain from providing funds to markets or institutions not in crisis or to those that are truly insolvent because of an unsustainable amount of debt.5Furthermore, once a crisis is over, the liquidity that has been injected into the financial system must be removed so that asset prices represent the appropriate market-determined value. Current Challenges for an International Lender of Last ResortAs discussed earlier, for certain types of crises in emerging markets an international lender of last resort is necessary. However, the dramatic improvement of the policy and financial environment around the world over the past several years has left many wondering whether such crises are things of the past. For emerging-market economies, the most prominent international institution to act as a lender of last resort has been the International Monetary Fund (IMF). However, demand for IMF lending has dropped more than 80 percent since 2005 as emergency lending has almost ceased and most borrowers have repaid their loans. Such developments have led some to speculate that an international lender of last resort is no longer needed. However, it would be naïve to think that we will never again see situations where an international lender will be indispensable. The past few years have been unusual ones, providing ideal conditions for strong growth in emerging markets. In particular, growth in industrial countries has been solid, borrowing costs have been very low, and commodity prices have been high, not just for fuel but also for many of the primary metals and agricultural products that are produced in developing countries. Many countries have taken advantage of these developments to pay down debt and consolidate fiscal balances. Nevertheless, concerns remain. Numerous economies are vulnerable to changes in commodity prices or slower world demand. This is particularly true for countries that have not improved their financial and regulatory infrastructure and that have adopted policies that stifle investment. In some countries, corporate and household debt levels have increased greatly. For example, one troubling development in the past few years has been the sharp rise of home mortgage lending in foreign currencies, particularly in eastern Europe. This development threatens to unwind the progress made in reducing currency mismatches by shifting the locus of the mismatch from the government or financial sector to the household sector, in which market participants are less well equipped to understand the risks they are taking on. And, more generally, we are increasingly realizing that globalization and the growth of markets have led to complex and occasionally surprising interconnections among markets and economies. Individual countries and regional institutions can track these developments to some extent, but the need to have institutions devoted to international monetary and financial stability on agloballevel has perhaps never been greater. Given a need for lenders of last resort, the question remains, what institutions will best fill that role? The answer is that it is likely to be best filled by a combination of institutions. In some cases, as we have just seen, individual countries, particularly the large industrial countries, will be able to provide liquidity to markets that are domestically based but global in their linkages. To a much larger extent than in the recent past, countries are also working to insure themselves through the accumulation of foreign currency reserves. In the past few weeks, we have seen such reserves being used in the industrial and developing worlds to dampen volatility in exchange rates. Also, talk of regional arrangements such as the Chiang Mai initiative for currency cooperation in Asia, has been increasing. Finally, the IMF remains the premier institution overseeing international monetary and financial stability and crisis lending. None of these options are perfect by themselves. Although central banks of large industrial countries have tremendous resources, their primary focus is domestic monetary policy and they have little mandate for involvement in crises without systemic implications for their countries. It is a positive development that countries with significant exposure to foreign currency risk are more and more able to insure themselves with reserves. However, there are costs associated with such reserve accumulation and there is also a danger that, under the guise of "insurance," countries will engage in activities--including intervention to keep their currencies weak--that are increasingly distorting global capital and trade flows. In terms of regional arrangements, the trend toward rising international cooperation and coordination can have benefits. But regional institutions are typically small and untested, and so their actions may risk undermining more-global efforts. Moreover, their lending may violate the principles I discussed above. In many cases, the IMF is likely the best institution to provide liquidity--it has long experience in this role, significant expertise, and the ability to distribute funds quickly. However, IMF funds may be insufficient when the crisis countries--and associated capital markets--are large. In the mid-1990s and early 2000s, for example, the IMF worked in combination with other lenders in the cases of Korea and Mexico. Regardless of the institution providing emergency liquidity, several challenges must be addressed if that function is to remain effective. One such challenge, which recalls principle number one for operating as a lender of last resort, is the growing need to respond quickly as financial crises evolve. As shown by the events of the past several months, in a world of instantaneous communication and fully integrated financial markets, disruptions in such markets can materialize and spread very rapidly, thereby placing a premium on the ready analysis of developments and quick disbursement of funds. Moreover, an international lender of last resort will be challenged to substantively address liquidity problems in an environment in which gross international flows of capital are increasingly large and threaten to dwarf the resources that can be mustered by the international facility. In many cases, the IMF's funds will be sufficient--as of July, the institution had almost $200 billion in resources available for new financial commitments in the coming year. But in cases involving the largest countries and capital markets, the IMF has played, and must continue to play, the role of coordinator of funds from a variety of sources (a role it adopted most noticeably in the Mexican and Korean crises) or that of a catalyst to restore confidence (as in Brazil in 2002). A second key challenge for an international lender of last resort remains the need to limit moral hazard by encouraging adequate prudential supervision--principle number two discussed earlier. To address this concern, the official international community has promoted such efforts as the establishment of the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), the preparation of Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSCs), and the publication of Financial Soundness Indicators. In particular, the FSAP and ROSC initiatives, which are conducted jointly with the World Bank, consist of detailed public examinations of the financial sectors of member countries and of the countries' adherence to best practices in data dissemination, policy transparency, legal systems, corporate governance, and in combating money laundering and terrorist financing. In combination with the FSAP, the ROSC program has greatly increased the pressure on emerging markets to adopt reforms to improve economic and financial stability and limit moral hazard. This surveillance should enhance the effectiveness of lending regardless of which institution provides the emergency liquidity. A third important challenge, reflecting principle number three for operating as an international lender of last resort, is to bolster the ability to say no to countries and, in cases of insolvency, to facilitate the involvement of governments and the private sector. Several years ago the IMF adopted criteria that countries must meet to receive sizable loans. These criteria included rigorous analysis indicating that a country's financial difficulties reflected a crisis of liquidity rather than of solvency, a high likelihood of a quick return to borrowing from private markets, and a strong probability that the stabilization program would be successful. It is less clear what safeguards regional institutions are adopting to enable them to say no to members when the lending is not justified. Moreover, in countries where reserves are plentiful, it may tempting to lend to insolvent institutions and to avoid the difficult reforms necessary to address the underlying weaknesses. Distinguishing between illiquidity and insolvency, though critical to being an effective lender of last resort, is exceedingly difficult. The difference hinges on many assumptions about future economic conditions, including global and domestic demand, interest rates, commodity prices, exchange rates, and so on, as well as the behavior of market participants, policymakers, and consumers. Moreover the determination is not a static one. Institutions and markets that are initially illiquid can quickly become insolvent without the appropriate funds. The distinction may be even trickier in the case of sovereign insolvency. One could argue that governments have at their disposal an even greater range of possible policy responses to crises than do firms or markets, and so they face a greater range of potential outcomes. Around the world over the past few weeks, central bankers, market participants, academics, and the media have been wrestling with the question of what it means to be an effective lender of last resort. Appropriately providing liquidity while limiting the risk of moral hazard has always been a challenge. Within their own countries, policymakers worldwide must wrestle with the best way to design institutions and, in times of crisis, support the stability of financial systems, in both the short and long runs. This approach must also be taken internationally. We have been fortunate that global economic conditions have been strong. However, it would be a grave mistake to assume that the world no longer needs a lender of last resort. In addition to promoting vigilance and crisis prevention, we should continue to strengthen our international institutions to enable them to provide liquidity quickly, appropriately, and in a way that encourages reform and good policymaking. Footnotes 1.I thankJoseph Gagnon,Steven Kamin, andBeth Anne Wilsonfor their assistance on this speech.Return to text 2.My views on the factors that produce systemic risk and financial instability are in Frederic S. Mishkin,"The Causes and Propagation of Financial Instability: Lessons for Policymakers (145 KB PDF),"Maintaining Financial Stability in a Global Economy(Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, MO., 1997): 55-96 and Frederic S. Mishkin,The Next Great Globalization: How Disadvantaged Nations Can Harness Their Financial Systems to Get Rich, 2006, (Princeton, NJ; Princeton University Press). For a survey on contagion, see Graciela L. Kaminsky et al.,"The Unholy Trinity of Financial Contagion,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2003, Vol 17, No. 4, pp. 51-74.Return to text 3.Frederic S. Mishkin, "Asymmetric Information and Financial Crises: A Historical Perspective," in R. Glenn Hubbard, ed.,Financial Markets and Financial Crises(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991), 69-108.Return to text 4.For example, see Edward J. Kane,The S&L Insurance Mess: How Did It Happen?(Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute Press, 1989).Return to text 5.Morris Goldstein, "The International Financial Architecture," in C. Fred Bergston, ed.,TheUnited Statesand the World Economy: Foreign Economic Policy for the Next Decade(Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics, 2005), 373-407. Goldstein argues that surveillance by the International Monetary Fund needs to focus more on debt sustainability.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve’s public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur.Putnam-Greene Financial Corporation, Eatonton, GAWritten Agreement dated April 16, 2004Terminated August 22, 2007 The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve’s public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur.Putnam-Greene Financial Corporation, Eatonton, GAWritten Agreement dated April 16, 2004Terminated August 22, 2007 The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve’s public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur. Putnam-Greene Financial Corporation, Eatonton, GA Written Agreement dated April 16, 2004 Terminated August 22, 2007
No content found
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Great River Bank & Trust, Davenport, Iowa, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.