The federal bank, credit union, and thrift supervisory agencies, along with the Department of Housing and Urban Development, announced today the availability of the 2006 home loan data disclosed under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). Lenders are required to make these data available to the public, within thirty days after receiving a request, in the form of a Loan Application Register, after removing certain information to protect the privacy of applicants and borrowers. HMDA, which was enacted by Congress in 1975, requires most mortgage lenders located in metropolitan areas to collect data about their housing-related lending activity, report the data annually to the government, and make the data publicly available in a modified Loan Application Register. Initially, HMDA required reporting of the geographic location of originated and purchased loans. In 1989, Congress expanded HMDA data to include information about denied home loan applications and the race, sex and income of applicants and borrowers. In 2002, the Federal Reserve Board amended the HMDA regulation to require lenders to report loan pricing (rate spread) data for certain higher-priced home mortgage loans, in response to concerns about this area of mortgage lending, as well as other new data. The HMDA loan data may be used to facilitate fair lending supervision and enforcement. HMDA data are analyzed in conjunction with other factors to assess an institution’s level of risk for lending discrimination. However, it is not possible to conclude from HMDA data alone whether a lender is complying with fair lending laws. The HMDA data do not include many potential determinants of credit decisions and loan pricing, such as the borrower’s credit history, the debt-to-income ratio, and the loan-to-value ratio. More information about the HMDA data is available in the FAQs on the web site of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC), atwww.ffiec.gov/hmda/faq.htm. Summary statistical reports for each lender and an aggregate report for each Metropolitan Statistical Area will be released in September by the FFIEC.
The federal bank and thrift agencies on Tuesday requested public comment on proposed interim rules expanding the range of small institutions eligible for an extended 18-month on-site examination cycle. The proposed interim rules allow well-capitalized and well-managed banks and savings associations with up to $500 million in total assets and a composite CAMELS rating of 1 or 2 to qualify for an 18-month (rather than a 12-month) on-site examination cycle. Until recently, only institutions with less than $250 million in total assets could qualify for an extended 18-month on-site examination cycle. The proposed interim rules also revise the provisions governing the on-site examination cycle for the U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks. The proposed interim rules, effective upon publication in theFederal Register, implement section 605 of the Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2006 and related provisions from the International Banking Act, both of which are already effective. The proposed interim rules, issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision, are attached and will be published in theFederal Registershortly. The agencies will be seeking comment on the interim rules for a 30-day period.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the approval of an application by The Royal Bank of Scotland plc, Edinburgh, Scotland, to establish a branch in Greenwich, Connecticut. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced final revisions to its 1980 interpretation of Regulation D (Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions), which sets forth criteria for the "bankers' bank" exemption from reserve requirements. The revisions authorize the Board to determine, on a case by case basis, whether certain entities not already expressly authorized in the interpretation may become customers of bankers' banks to a limited extent. A bankers' bank is an institution that is organized solely to do business with other financial institutions, is owned primarily by the financial institutions with which it does business, and does not do business with the general public. The Board will publish the attached notice in theFederal Registershortly, and the final rule will become effective 30 days after publication.
The federal bank, thrift and credit union regulatory agencies are encouraging financial institutions to work with homeowners who are unable to make mortgage payments. Prudent workout arrangements that are consistent with safe and sound lending practices are generally in the long-term best interest of both the financial institution and the borrower. Institutions will not face regulatory penalties if they pursue reasonable workout arrangements with borrowers. Borrowers who are unable to make their mortgage payments should contact their lender or servicer as soon as possible to discuss available options. Examples of constructive workout arrangements include modifying loan terms, and/or moving borrowers from variable-rate loans to fixed-rate loans. Bank and thrift programs that transition low- or moderate-income homeowners from higher-cost loans to lower-cost loans may also receive favorable consideration under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), provided the loans are made in a safe and sound manner. Federal credit unions are exempt from CRA requirements. The agencies want to remind their institutions that existing regulatory guidance and accounting standards do not require immediate foreclosure on homes when borrowers fall behind on payments. In addition, under the Homeownership Counseling Act, institutions are required to inform delinquent borrowers about the availability of homeownership counseling. Institutions should also consider working with reputable consumer-based organizations to help financially stressed borrowers avoid predatory foreclosure rescue scams. The agencies’ statement is attached.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the New York University Law School, New York, New York Market forces determine most outcomes in our economy, a fact that helps to explain much of our nation’s success in creating wealth. Markets aggregate diffuse information more effectively and set prices more efficiently than any central planner possibly could. The result is powerful competitive incentives for businesses to produce, at the least cost, the goods and services that our citizens value most. Writing in the eighteenth century, Adam Smith conceived of the free-market system as an “invisible hand” that harnesses the pursuit of private interest to promote the public good. Smith’s conception remains relevant today, notwithstanding the enormous increase in economic complexity since the Industrial Revolution. Although the market system is the principal source of America’s economic dynamism, economic theory and practice both suggest that targeted government regulation and intervention can sometimes benefit the economy. In the particular case of financial markets, for example, government regulation helps to promote general financial stability and to protect investors and consumers against fraud. Of course, the benefits of regulation come with direct and indirect costs. Direct costs include those arising from compliance with a thicket of complicated rules--costs that can add significantly to a firms’ costs of production, leading to higher prices for consumers. Indirect costs include reductions in innovation or competition that can result from overly restrictive regulations. Therefore, before government decides to regulate in a particular situation, it must weigh the social costs and benefits of the contemplated intervention. In recent decades, public policy has been increasingly influenced by the insight that the market itself can often be used to achieve regulatory objectives. For example, in the area of environmental protection, the trading of emissions permits has been widely embraced as a cost-effective means of controlling pollution. That market-based approach is regulation by the invisible hand, as opposed to the very visible hand of direct government regulation and enforcement. The invisible-hand approach to regulation aims to align the incentives of market participants with the objectives of the regulator, thereby harnessing the same powerful forces that allow markets to work so efficiently. In the financial arena, as I will discuss, this approach often takes the form of creating incentives for market participants to monitor and control the risk-taking behavior of financial firms--that is, to exert market discipline--thereby reducing the need for direct oversight by the government. Today I would like to explore the market-based approach to financial regulation by considering its application to two important--but very different--types of financial institutions: commercial banks and hedge funds. For both types of institutions, market-based regulation has proven an effective supplement to (or substitute for) conventional command-and-control approaches. Commercial BanksFor much of U.S. history, bank shareholders and creditors--not government regulators--were responsible for overseeing banks’ lending and investment decisions. For example, in the years between the demise of the Second Bank of the United States, in 1836, and the National Banking Act of 1863, private commercial banks issued non-interest-bearing notes that served as the principal medium of exchange. Although the notes issued by each bank were supposedly redeemable for gold (or other safe assets, such as government bonds), they did not always trade at face value in every location. Instead, notes issued by different banks traded at variable discounts that depended on (among other things) the perceived financial condition of the issuing bank and the distance a note-holder would have to travel to redeem the notes (Gorton, 1996). Banks did not like to see their notes trade for much less than face value, however, because holders of deeply discounted notes had an incentive to demand the face amount in gold from the issuing bank. If too many note-holders redeemed their notes, the bank might have to pay out all its reserves of gold and close down. Concern about potential note redemptions discouraged banks from taking excessive financial risks that might cause their notes to trade at a deeper discount and, consequently, trigger increased redemptions. Market forces thereby exerted discipline on banks’ activities and the types of assets they held. Similarly, later in the nineteenth century, when demand deposits became the primary form of bank liability, bankers recognized that any loss of confidence by depositors might provoke a run--panicky withdrawals--that could force the bank to close its doors. Presumably the potential for deposit runs led banks to take fewer risks than they might have otherwise--another instance of market discipline (Calomiris and Gorton, 1991). Although the actions of note-holders and depositors constrained banks’ risk-taking, they had some undesirable side effects. Throughout the nineteenth century and in the early decades of the twentieth, bank runs often helped to precipitate general financial panics that shut down large parts of the financial system and constricted economic activity. Bank runs, by extinguishing deposits, also tended to sharply reduce the nation’s money supply. And they sometimes wreaked considerable hardship on the depositors themselves. Certainly, from a modern perspective, putting the burden of monitoring banks on small depositors seems inappropriate. Most retail depositors don’t have the time and resources to gather information on bank assets and investments, and typically they cannot absorb losses when a bank fails. In response to this series of financial panics, the Congress in 1913 founded the Federal Reserve to provide the nation with a safer, more flexible, and more stable monetary and financial system. Specifically, the Fed was established "to furnish an elastic currency, to afford means of rediscounting commercial paper, [and] to establish a more effective supervision of banking in the United States."1Such powers can be used to provide liquidity when an otherwise solvent bank experiences unexpected and widespread withdrawals during a financial panic. Today, the Federal Reserve's discount window and its oversight of the payment system are core components of the so-called federal "safety net" provided to banks. However, the Federal Reserve failed to avert the banking panics of the Great Depression of the 1930s, the longest and most severe series of banking panics in U.S. history. Thousands of banks failed, many after suffering runs on their deposits. As a consequence, the Congress added another element to the safety net when it established government-backed deposit insurance. Deposit insurance both protects depositors (subject to limits on the size and type of account) and reduces the liquidity risks faced by banks. It has achieved its objective in that runs on insured institutions have virtually disappeared. However, despite its evident benefits, deposit insurance created a new type of problem. Unlike the note-holders and depositors of earlier years, insured bank depositors, who know that their funds are protected even if their bank fails, have little or no incentive to evaluate the risk-taking activities of their bank. In the absence of other measures, this safety net reduces the restraint that creditors would otherwise place on unsound lending because the insurance reduces the amount of money they have at stake. The tendency of banks to take on excessive risks when they face little economic penalty for doing so is an example of what economists call a moral hazard problem. To help counter the moral hazard created by deposit insurance, and to try to ensure that banks operate safely and soundly, the United States has developed an extensive system of banking supervision and regulation. In effect, regulators assumed the role of monitor, the role that insured depositors no longer have any incentive to play. Somewhat ironically, however, this system of government supervision may itself exacerbate moral hazard if the banks’ uninsured creditors assume that the government’s oversight obviates any need for them to monitor banks. Market discipline may erode further if market participants believe that, to avoid the risk of a financial crisis, the government will step in to prevent the failure of any very large institution--the “too big to fail” problem. With little or no help from market forces, the burden of ensuring banks’ soundness falls entirely on the supervisory agencies. But as we saw in the savings and loans crisis of the 1980s, regulatory oversight may also fail if the regulators are not sufficiently vigilant or lack the political will or financial resources to promptly close insolvent institutions. The lesson of history appears to be that neither market discipline nor regulatory oversight alone is completely adequate for keeping the banking system safe and sound. However, regulators have increasingly come to appreciate the value of a hybrid system that supplements direct regulation with a substantial amount of market discipline. Fortunately, regulators have a variety of ways to restore and strengthen market discipline for banks, notwithstanding the existence of the federal safety net. Minimum capital requirements are one method. A bank’s capital provides a buffer that can absorb losses before they fall on the deposit insurance fund (and, ultimately, the taxpayers). In addition, however, capital requirements enhance market discipline; they do so by ensuring that the bank will have shareholders (and possibly other types of creditors as well) who have a significant amount of money at risk. These shareholders have a substantial financial incentive to monitor the bank’s activities and to insist on changes if they are dissatisfied. Bank managers are also quite aware that a low share price could invite a hostile takeover, an outcome they usually want to avoid. The incentives for a bank to control risk are even stronger if regulations link the amount of regulatory capital to the risks taken by banks. (Tying capital requirements to risk is a primary objective of the Basel II capital accord, currently in the process of review and implementation.) Risk-based capital regulations, if properly designed, require banks that take more risks to hold more capital. Because equity capital is the most expensive form of funding, this linkage gives banks an incentive to better measure and control risks. Credible receivership provisions for insolvent banks are another method of enhancing market discipline. Effective market discipline requires that uninsured investors believe they could lose some, or all, of their stake. This belief is especially important in the case of very large banks, which investors may otherwise perceive to be too big to fail. Receivership rules that make clear that investors will take losses when a bank becomes insolvent should increase the perceived risk of loss and thus also increase market discipline. In the United States, the banking authorities have ensured that, in virtually all cases, shareholders bear losses when a bank fails. Historically, however, bondholders and uninsured depositors have at times doubted that regulators would impose significant losses on them in the event of a bank’s failure. To address this issue, the Congress has reduced regulators’ discretion when dealing with troubled banks. For example, the requirement for prompt corrective action prohibits regulatory forbearance when a bank’s capital falls to a predetermined level; and the least-cost-resolution requirement compels regulators to resolve a troubled bank at the lowest cost to the deposit insurance fund.2 Improving and broadening the requirements for disclosing information are yet another method of strengthening the invisible hand. For example, the part of the Basel II capital initiative called Pillar 3 requires banks to release additional information to the public about their risk-taking. Pillar 3 should thus help investors, creditors, and other counterparties better assess banks’ risk profiles. Transparency about risk has become all the more important because modern financial assets increasingly entail greatly different degrees of economic leverage per dollar invested. When pursuing regulatory objectives through the application of market discipline, regulators must consider the nature of the incentives faced by different types of stakeholders in varying circumstances as well as the ways each type of stakeholder affects the bank’s risk-taking. For example, as I mentioned, bank capital usually gives equity investors an incentive to monitor and control risk. But when a bank falls into financial distress, its capital may be all but depleted, and its equity investors may thus have little left to lose. Consequently, equity holders may “gamble for resurrection” by encouraging rather than discouraging excessive risk-taking. Thus, as was evident in the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s, market discipline by equity holders may break down when it is most needed. This example suggests that the mix of instruments a bank uses to raise funds can matter. For instance, holders of uninsured debt (such as large certificates of deposits or corporate debt issues) care mostly about the risk of bankruptcy. They don’t benefit if the bank’s stock price rises when undue risk-taking pays off. Consequently, they focus on what bank managers are doing to avoid default. The incentive to monitor risk-taking is particularly keen for holders of subordinated debt, as they are last in line in the event of failure. Because debt holders are sensitive to changes in the probability of financial distress, risk-taking by a bank raises its cost of funding in credit markets, and that connection creates an incentive for banks to control risks. Moreover, the price of a bank’s debt provides useful information about the bank’s riskiness. With that information, the bank’s counterparties and supervisors can take steps of their own to ensure that the bank is operating safely.3 Hedge FundsHedge funds provide a second illustration of how the invisible hand can be used to support regulatory objectives. Their rapid growth is one of the most important developments in U.S. financial markets in the past decade or so. Hedge funds vary widely in their investment strategies and in the types of risks they take. Overall, however, most economists agree that the rise of hedge funds has been a positive development for investors and for financial markets. They have stimulated an extraordinary amount of financial innovation in recent years; and, using many of these new financial tools, they have greatly enhanced the liquidity, efficiency, and risk-sharing capabilities of our financial system. Regulatory oversight of hedge funds is relatively light. Because hedge funds deal with highly sophisticated counterparties and investors, and because they have no claims on the federal safety net, the light regulatory touch seems largely justified. However, the growing market share of hedge funds has raised concerns about possible systemic risk. The complexity and rapid change inherent in the strategies of many funds make them relatively opaque to outsiders, and so the concern arises that the collapse of a hedge fund might come with little warning. In addition, many hedge funds are either highly leveraged or hold positions in derivatives or other assets that make their net asset positions very sensitive to changes in asset prices (the functional equivalent of high leverage). Highly leveraged investors are intrinsically more vulnerable to market shocks, of course, but leverage also increases the risks to the broader financial system. The failure of a highly leveraged fund holding large, concentrated positions could involve the forced liquidation of those positions, possibly at fire-sale prices, thereby imposing heavy losses on counterparties. In the worst scenarios, these counterparty losses could lead to further defaults or threaten systemically important institutions. In addition, market participants that were not creditors or counterparties of the defaulting firm might be harmed indirectly through changes in asset prices, liquidity strains, and increased market uncertainty. As I have noted, the market discipline provided by creditors and investors is potentially a powerful mechanism for controlling leverage and other aspects of risk-taking. But market discipline can fail, as is illustrated by one notable case--the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM), which was at the center of an episode of severe financial stress in 1998. Perhaps because of the stellar reputations of LTCM’s principals, banks and broker-dealers provided credit on generous terms, even though LTCM took exceptional risks. LTCM’s investors and counterparties simply did not ask the tough questions necessary to understand the risks they were taking. Together with the admittedly extraordinary market conditions of August 1998, these risk-management lapses were a major source of the LTCM crisis. In response to the LTCM episode, the Congress might have imposed a much more intrusive regulatory regime on private pools of capital. However, doing so would have been costly and technically difficult, would have increased moral hazard by relieving investors and counterparties of the responsibility for monitoring the funds, and likely would have reduced the social benefits of hedge funds by hampering the ability of their managers to respond quickly and flexibly to changing market conditions. Instead, the regulatory approach taken in the United States has followed recommendations set forth in 1998 by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets and recently reaffirmed in a set of principles by the same group.4 The market-discipline approach to regulating hedge funds imposes responsibilities on four sets of actors: hedge fund investors, creditors and other counterparties, the regulatory agencies, and the hedge funds themselves. In discussing the regulation of commercial banks, I noted that most small retail investors are ill-equipped to provide effective market discipline because monitoring complex financial activities demands considerable time, effort, and sophistication. In the case of hedge funds, securities laws effectively allow only institutions and high-wealth individuals to invest in them. These investors generally have the resources and sophistication, as well as the incentive, to monitor the activities of the hedge funds. Large investors are not only well equipped to assess the management, strategies, performance, risk-management practices, and fee structures of individual hedge funds but they also have the clout to demand the information they need to make their evaluations. Although regulations limit the direct access of retail investors to hedge funds, small investors may obtain indirect exposure, through pension funds for example. However, managers of pension funds and similar institutions generally have a fiduciary duty to their investors to research and understand their investments and to ensure that their overall risk profile is appropriate for their clientele. In practice, most pension funds have only a small exposure to hedge funds. Counterparties are another important source of market discipline. The principal counterparties of most hedge funds are large commercial and investment banks, which provide the funds with credit and a range of other services. As creditors, counterparties have a clear economic incentive to monitor and perhaps impose limits on hedge funds’ risk-taking, as well as an incentive to protect themselves from large losses should one or more of their hedge-fund customers fail. Counterparties seek to protect themselves against large losses through risk management and risk mitigation. Risk management includes the use of stress tests to estimate potential exposure under adverse market conditions; risk-mitigation techniques include collateral agreements under which hedge funds must daily mark to market and fully collateralize their current exposures. The incentives of hedge fund counterparties line up well with regulators’ objectives, which include not only constraining excess risk-taking by hedge funds but also preventing losses that would threaten the stability of other major financial market participants. However, for various reasons, including competitive pressures and the existence of the safety net for some counterparties, private counterparties may not fully account for risks to general financial stability. Thus, supervisors seek to ensure that hedge-fund counterparties--primarily very large commercial and investment banks--protect themselves and, in so doing, protect the broader financial system. Supervisors also monitor markets and key institutions, coordinate with their domestic and foreign counterparts, and work with the private sector to strengthen market infrastructures. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has been leading joint public-private efforts to improve the clearing and settlement of credit derivatives. Coordination of this type can improve market functioning and reduce risks to financial stability without harming market discipline. Finally, in a system of market-based discipline, hedge-fund managers themselves have both the incentive and the responsibility to manage risk effectively, to develop consistent methods for valuing assets and liabilities, and to provide timely and accurate information to their investors, creditors, and counterparties. Thus far, the market-based approach to the regulation of hedge funds seems to have worked well, although many improvements can still be made (Bernanke, 2006). In particular, risk-management techniques have become considerably more sophisticated and comprehensive over the past decade. To be clear, market discipline does not prevent hedge funds from taking risks, suffering losses, or even failing--nor should it. If hedge funds did not take risks, their social benefits--the provision of market liquidity, improved risk-sharing, and support for financial and economic innovation, among others--would largely disappear. ConclusionI have argued today that, in many situations, regulation that relies on the invisible hand of market-based incentives can complement direct government regulation. For market-based regulation to work, the incentives of investors and other private actors must align with the objectives of the government regulator. In particular, private investors must be sophisticated enough to understand and monitor the financial condition of the firm and be persuaded that they will experience significant losses in the event of a failure. When these conditions are met, market discipline is a powerful and proven tool for constraining excessive risk-taking. References Benston, George J., Robert A. Eisenbeis, Paul M. Horvitz, Edward J. Kane, and George C. Kaufman (1986).Perspectives on Safe and Sound Banking: Past, Present, and Future, Regulation of Economic Activity Series. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Bernanke, Ben (2006). “Hedge Funds and Systemic Risk,” speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Financial Markets Conference, May 16. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and U.S. Department of the Treasury (2000).The Feasibility and Desirability of Mandatory Subordinated Debt, report to the Congress, December,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/rptcongress/debt/subord_debt_2000.pdf. Calomiris, Charles, and Gary Gorton (1991). “The Origins of Banking Panics: Models, Facts, and Bank Regulation,” in R. Glenn Hubbard, ed.,Financial Markets and Financial Crises. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 109-73. Evanoff, Douglas D., and Larry Wall (2000). “The Role of Subordinated Debt in Bank Safety and Soundness Regulation,” inThe Changing Financial Industry Structure and Regulation: Bridging States, Countries, and Industries, proceedings of the Thirty-Sixth Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition. Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, pp. 480-93. Gorton, Gary (1996). “Reputation Formation in Early Bank Note Markets,”Journal of Political Economy, vol. 104 (April), pp. 346-97. Lang, William W., and Douglas D. Robertson (2002). “Analysis of Proposal for a Minimum Subordinated Debt Requirement,”Journal of Economics and Business, vol. 54 (January-February), pp. 115-36. Footnotes 1.Federal Reserve Act, December 23, 1913.Return to text 2.The least-cost-resolution requirement can be waived if a determination is made that adherence to it will create a systemic risk; however, this exception was intentionally made quite difficult to invoke.Return to text 3.The potential advantages of creating market discipline through a mix of financial instruments, including subordinated debt, have been discussed for many years by banking economists, and a number of interesting proposals for increasing effective market discipline through restrictions on bank capital structures have been made; refer to Benston and others (1986), Evanoff and Wall (2000), Lang and Robertson (2002), and Board of Governors and U.S. Department of the Treasury (2000). Many of these proposals involve a requirement that banks issue subordinated debt. If markets are working well, the required yield on a bank’s subordinated debt should be a good indicator of the riskiness of the bank.Return to text 4.The recent PWG work is atwww.ustreas.gov/press/releases/hp272.htm.Return to text
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin To the New Perspectives on Financial Globalization ConferenceWashington, D.C. Governor Mishkin presented identical remarks at the Econometric Society at Duke University Lecture, Durham, North Carolina, on June 23, 2007 In the United States and many other countries, students learn that the key to success is hard work. Yet when we look at many developing countries, we see people who work extremely hard for long hours. Their wages are low, and so they remain poor. And as a whole, their countries remain poor. If hard work does not make a country rich, what does? The right institutions are essential. Nobel laureate Douglass North defines institutions as the "rules of the game in a society, or, more formally, humanly devised constraints that shape human intervention." (North, 1990, p. 3). Among the institutions that are most crucial to economic growth are those that enable a country to allocate capital to its most productive uses. Such institutions establish and maintain strong property rights, an effective legal system, and a sound and efficient financial system. In recent years, the field of economic development has come to the conclusion that "institutions rule" and are critical to economic growth.1An extensive literature focuses on financial development as a significant force driving economic development.2 However, developing good institutions that foster financial development is not easy: It takes time for institutions to evolve and adapt to local circumstances. In addition, vested interests in poor countries often oppose the necessary reforms because they believe that such reforms will weaken their power or allow other people to cut into their profits. How can poorer countries overcome these obstacles? How can they change the distribution of power to forge the political will to promote institutional reform? The answer is globalization. I should note that the opinions I will express today are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Elements of Institutional ReformBefore examining the role of globalization in promoting financial development, let’s first look briefly at what steps must be taken to build an institutional infrastructure that will ensure a well-functioning financial system. 1. Develop strong property rights.Strong property rights are needed to encourage productive investment because it will not be undertaken if the returns on investment are likely to be taken away by the government or others. Hernando de Soto, in his important bookThe Mystery of Capital, argues that the inability of the poor in developing countries to acquire property rights is a central reason that they are unable to gain access to capital and so remain mired in poverty. For example, the use of collateral is a crucial tool that helps the financial system make loans because it reduces losses when loans go sour. A person who would pledge land or capital for a loan must, however, legally own the collateral. Unfortunately, as de Soto has documented, legalizing the ownership of capital is extremely expensive and time consuming for the poor in developing countries. In one of his many astonishing examples, obtaining legal title to a dwelling on urban land in the Philippines required taking 168 bureaucratic steps through 53 public and private agencies over a period of 13 to 25 years. 2. Strengthen the legal system.A legal system that enforces contracts quickly and fairly is an essential step in supporting strong property rights and financial development. For example, lenders write restrictive covenants into loan contracts to prevent borrowers from taking on too much risk, but such covenants have value only if they can be legally enforced. An inefficient legal system in which loan contracts cannot be enforced will prevent productive lending from taking place. If setting up legitimate businesses or obtaining legal title to property is too expensive, the poor will never have access to the legal system and will be cut off from lending that could help them start small businesses and escape poverty.3Setting up a simple business in the United States generally requires only filling out a form and paying a nominal licensing fee. In contrast, de Soto's researchers found that legally registering a small garment workshop in Peru required 289 days; at 6 hours per day, the cost was about $1,200, which was approximately thirty times the monthly minimum wage. The lack of property rights for all but the very rich, as documented by de Soto, is a serious impediment to financial development. 3. Reduce corruption. Government is often the primary source of financial repression in developing countries. Rapacious governments whose rulers treat their countries as personal fiefdoms are not uncommon: We have seen these governments in Saddam Hussein's Iraq, Robert Mugabe's Zimbabwe, and Ferdinand Marcos's Philippines. Even officials in less tyrannical governments have been known to use the power of the state to get rich. Not surprisingly, then, many governments pay lip service to property rights but do not encourage a rule of law to protect them. Eliminating corruption is essential to strengthening property rights and the legal system. When corrupt officials demand bribes, they reduce the incentives for entrepreneurs to make investments. The ability to buy off judges weakens the enforcement of legal contracts that enable the economic and financial system to function smoothly.4 4. Improve the quality of financial information.High-quality financial information is essential to well-functioning financial markets. If lenders cannot figure out what is going on in a firm, they will be unable to screen out good from bad credit risks or to monitor the firm to ensure that it does not take on too much risk at the lender’s expense. To make reliable and accurate information more accessible, accounting standards must be high enough so that prospective lenders can make sense of what is in a business’s books. Rules that require businesses to disclose information must be enforced to enable prospective investors to make sensible decisions about whether the business deserves to get their hard-earned money. 5. Improve corporate governance. For people to be willing to buy stocks, another way to channel funds to business, rules must be established to ensure that the managers of corporations act in the stockholders’ interest. If managers find it easy to steal from the corporation, or to use funds for their own personal use rather than for the benefit of the company, no one will want to invest in the company. Finding the right balance of control between management and stockholders is a challenge with which even we in the United States continue to struggle. 6. Develop sound, prudential regulation and supervision of the banking system.Banks are the main institutions that allocate credit in developing countries. The skills necessary for bank officers to assess risks and make good lending decisions are critically important and often scarce. Poor lending policies may cause too much capital to be channeled toward low-return projects and insufficient capital to be directed toward the high-return projects needed to propel income and growth. Moreover, deterioration in banks' balance sheets caused by insider lending or excessive risk-taking that leads to a proliferation of bad loans can cause banks to cut back sharply on lending, with negative effects on the economy. If the deterioration in banks’ balance sheets is severe enough, it can result in banking and currency crises that substantially disrupt the economy, phenomena that unfortunately have been all too common in developing countries over the past several decades.5Preventing banking crises must start with prudentialregulation, in which rules set by the government ensure that banks have sufficient capital and manage risks well. To guarantee that these regulations are enforced, the government must also engage in prudentialsupervision, in which it monitors banks by examining them on a regular basis to ensure that they are complying with government regulations. The role of microfinance in developing countries is receiving much attention these days. Microfinance is a positive development; it has clearly helped substantial numbers of poor people escape poverty, and the Nobel Peace Prize awarded to Muhammad Yunus for his pioneering efforts in this area was certainly well deserved.6However, microfinance is not a substitute for the institution building I am talking about here. Globalizing to Advance Institutional ReformNow that we understand what kinds of institutions are needed to promote financial development and economic growth, let’s turn to the question of how developing countries can improve the likelihood that these institutions are developed. One of the most powerful weapons for stimulating institutional development is globalization. Wealth is not something that can be attained by remaining closed off to the rest of the world. Poorer countries would do better by embracing globalization--that is, opening their financial markets and their markets for goods and services to other nations so that funds, goods, and, often, the ideas that accompany them can flow in. Such inflows can help them achieve reforms that build productivity and wealth that will benefit all their citizens. Of course, countries need to take care that the foundations of the fundamental institutions discussed above are in place, and they must monitor the pace of reform. Opening financial marketsNow let’s look at how opening financial markets to foreigners promotes financial development. Globalizing the domestic financial system by opening financial markets to foreigners encourages financial development and growth in wealth in two ways. First, opening financial markets to foreign capital directly increases access to capital and lowers its cost for those with productive investments to make.7We know that labor is cheap in poor countries, and so we might think that capital would be especially productive there. Just think of how hugely profitable a factory might be in a country where wages are one-tenth of those in the United States. Although some of that differential would likely reflect the higher productivity of American workers, capital should, nevertheless, have extremely high returns in such countries, and, in principle, we should expect substantial flows of capital from rich countries (where the returns on capital should be relatively low) to poor countries (where they should be far higher). Such capital flows could lead to substantial benefits for poor countries in the form of larger capital stocks, higher productivity, and more rapidly growing incomes. In fact, as we well know, at present capital flows are moving, on net, from poor countries to rich ones, that is, in a direction opposite to the one we would expect. Many reasons have been proposed for this apparent paradox, but one of them certainly is the weakness of financial systems in poor countries, as described earlier. This point leads us to a second benefit of financial globalization: Opening markets to foreign financial institutions promotes reforms to the financial system that improve its functioning. Allowing foreign financial institutions to operate in an emerging-market country brings in expertise and best practices, such as those designed to screen good from bad credit risks and to monitor borrower activities to reduce the amount of risk they take.8Because of their familiarity with more-advanced financial systems, foreign financial firms also are likely to increase the pressure on the domestic government to institute reforms that will make the financial system work more effectively. As domestic financial institutions start to lose business to better-run and more trustworthy foreign institutions, they will realize the need for a better legal and accounting infrastructure that will make it easier for them to make loans to new customers. Domestic financial institutions will then be far more likely to advocate for and support the reforms that achieve this result. Of course, this is not to say that in a genuinely corrupt and anticompetitive environment financial globalization, by itself, can still engender an efficient, dynamic, and modern financial system. Recent research has shown that when some countries opened up to international capital markets too soon in the absence of some basic supporting conditions, vulnerabilities to sudden stops of capital flows increased. Thus, some preconditions must exist with respect to a minimum level of institutional quality, financial market development, and macroeconomic stability before financial globalization can further improve financial market and institutional development.9That said, given these preconditions and some constituency for progress and reform, financial globalization can be a powerful force in support of such efforts. Opening trade in goodsNext, let’s consider how opening domestic markets to foreign goods can promote the development of better institutions. Although not immediately obvious, opening domestic markets to foreign goods, known as"trade liberalization," can be a key driver of financial development. It can weaken the political power of entrenched business interests that might otherwise block institutional reforms, a point that is emphatically made by Rajan and Zingales (2004) in their bookSaving Capitalism from the Capitalists. Trade liberalization, which promotes a more competitive environment, will lower the revenue of entrenched firms so that they will need greater access to external sources of capital. Thus, they will be more likely to support reforms that promote a deeper and more efficient financial system. In fact, research indicates that a deeper financial sector is positively associated with greater trade openness (Rajan and Zingales, 2003; Svaleryd and Vlachos, 2002). Free trade also promotes financial deepening by reducing corruption. High tariffs breed corruption because importers have incentives to pay customs officials to look the other way when the importers avoid tariffs by smuggling in goods. Not surprisingly, countries that restrict international trade are found to be more corrupt (Ades and Di Tella, 1994). Even when developing countries are unwilling to tear down all barriers to imports of foreign goods, they can still generate incentives for institutional reform by removing obstacles that prevent domestic producers from engaging in international trade. Facilitating production for overseas markets creates a greater need for a well-functioning financial system because, to compete effectively in the international arena, firms need better access to capital. If they can’t get capital, they won’t be able to make the investments they need to increase productivity and price their goods competitively. Accordingly, international trade creates a demand for reforms that will make the financial system more efficient. The case of China We are seeing how the globalization of trade is driving financial reform in China. As Chinese enterprises increasingly enter international markets, they need a better financial system that can ensure that the allocation of their high domestic savings is done efficiently and is responsive to market developments. Although it has taken time, globalization is helping to generate the demand for an improved financial system, which is driving the reform process. The Communist leadership recognizes that the old development model must change. The government has announced that state-owned banks are being put on the path to be privatized and has allowed foreign investment in China’s banking system ($20 billion in 2005).10The government is also engaged in legal reform to make contracts more enforceable. In August 2006, the National People’s Congress enacted a new bankruptcy law that gives creditors greater protection if a firm goes bankrupt, and last month it approved a law that gives individuals more legal protection for their property.11 China, of course, is an example of a country that has actively encouraged exports as a means of propelling its economic growth and development. To some extent, China may have gone too far in its use of policy to promote export growth. Increased reliance on market-determined prices will help ensure that the allocation of resources into the export sector does not exceed their efficient use. The goal should be to raise productivity toward world-class standards in all sectors of the economy. Recently China’s authorities have agreed that some rebalancing of the sources of growth away from exports and toward domestic demand is in order. Among China’s East Asian neighbors, the importance of developing industries to meet demand for domestic uses also is receiving increasing attention. The problem of export restrictions Nevertheless, developing production for exports may still be useful for those countries at the lowest rungs of the developmental ladder, and it is surprising that many of the world’s poorest developing countries still not only do not encourage an export orientation but in fact maintain a regime of taxes, restrictions, and other policies that effectively discourage it. This problem remains especially serious in some African economies and may help explain why their growth performance has been so disappointing. The primary way that governments discourage exports is by imposing large taxes on them. Because high export taxes are one method of obtaining revenue, governments may be attracted to them to solve their budget problems. They may also use these taxes to punish their political opponents, who are often involved in a particular export industry. The government can then distribute the resulting revenue to their supporters. The most pernicious forms of export taxes are those that are hidden through the government’s setting a fixed official exchange rate that artificially keeps the domestic currency at a value well above what it would be worth in terms of foreign currency (say, U.S. dollars) in a free market. The government then makes it illegal to sell dollars for the larger amount of domestic currency that could be obtained in the black market. The difference between the official exchange rate and the free, black-market rate (often called the "black-market premium") imposes a tax on exporters because they are forced to sell the dollars they earn to the government or to the central bank at the official rate, and thus they receive a much lower price for their goods in terms of the domestic currency. Although in recent decades a great many countries have abandoned currency controls and dismantled their black markets, such controls still exist in some of the poorest economies, especially in Africa. In some countries, the tax from the black-market premium is confiscatory. An example from history illustrates this point. In 1982 Ghana had a black-market premium of more than 1,000 percent, and so exporters of cocoa (primarily from a tribe different from that of the ruling government party) were getting only 6 percent of the world price. Given such a high tax rate, it came as no surprise that cocoa exports, which had accounted for 19 percent of Ghana’s gross domestic product in the 1950s, accounted for only 3 percent by 1982 (Easterly, 2001, p. 222). During the twenty years when the black-market premium was so high, the average income of Ghanaians fell 30 percent. Like many such unwarranted controls on economic life, high black-market premiums also breed corruption, with all its negative effects, because they create strong incentives to bribe officials or to smuggle goods to avoid paying the black-market-premium tax. (Indeed, one of the reasons that governments in poorer countries often use this method of taxation rather than an explicit tax is that it allows government officials to get rich from the bribes they receive.) Other Gains from Trade LiberalizationAlthough we have been focusing on how globalization promotes financial development, we shouldn’t forget that trade globalization, which involves both trade liberalization and an export orientation, is a key driver of economic growth for reasons additional to those already mentioned.12 The first economics course that college students encounter always teaches the concept of comparative advantage: By trading with another country, you can focus your production on what you are really good at so that your productivity will be high. This higher productivity then leads to higher economic welfare. Trade liberalization, more importantly, promotes competition in domestic markets, which in turn forces domestic firms to increase productivity and make better products, both of which drive economic growth. If a foreigner produces a better product that can be imported, domestic firms must make a better product at a lower price to keep selling their product at home. One graphic example of how trade promotes competition occurred in India, which up until 1991 had protected its tool industry with a 100 percent tariff (tax on imports). After the Indian government cut the tariff sharply, Taiwanese firms initially grabbed one-third of the Indian market. Over the next decade, however, Indian firms boosted their productivity almost to the levels of Taiwanese firms, thereby winning back the domestic market. Eventually Indian tool firms became so efficient that they were able to start selling their goods abroad and became substantial exporters.13 Decreasing barriers to imports also helps promote exports. Increased competition from imports lowers the profits firms can earn by focusing solely on the domestic market, and so they naturally concentrate more of their energy on exporting. Moreover, trade liberalization helps developing countries gain access to foreign markets in advanced countries, as illustrated by the fact that the United States, through free-trade agreements, has been more willing to lower tariffs for countries such as Mexico and Chile if they do the same for the United States. Empirical evidence indicates that trade liberalization has positive effects on productivity and economic growth for both importing and exporting countries: It has even been found to be associated with more-rapid increases in life expectancy and a reduction in infant mortality.14Yet, as is often the case in economics, empirical evidence is never completely clear cut: Some economists question whether the evidence strongly supports a positive link between trade liberalization and growth.15Nonetheless, the logic of the benefits of trade liberalization and the preponderance of the evidence supporting its positive effects lead most members of the economics profession, including me, to the following conclusion: Trade liberalization is highly beneficial not only for the overall economy but also for its constituent sectors. The resulting economic growth is a rising tide that raises all boats and is an important tool for poverty alleviation. But even if trade liberalization is not adopted, giving domestic producers the opportunity to sell goods to rich countries’ markets can be an important engine for growth in the world’s poorest countries. One crucial way that governments in developing countries can encourage exports is by providing the transportation infrastructure--ports, roads, and airports--that make it easier for businesses to send their goods abroad. Because foreigners don’t have a natural predilection to buy your goods, you have to be supercompetitive--your goods have to be better and cheaper than the goods made in foreign countries. Domestic firms have to focus even more on being highly productive, and boosting productivity will lead to rapid economic growth. Japan’s experience shows what focusing on exporting can accomplish. In the immediate aftermath of World War II, Japan was a poor country. Its economic infrastructure had been destroyed by the war. To convince Americans and others to buy Japanese products, Japanese firms had to produce goods that were cheaper and better than their American-made counterparts. As a result, the export industries in Japan became enormously productive and supercompetitive. Productivity grew, and three decades after World War II, Japan became one of the richest countries in the world. South Korea, one of the great Asian success stories even with its crisis in the late 1990s, had very high barriers to trade until the 1990s, and its early development strategy did not include opening its domestic market to foreign goods. However, through its export sector, South Korea has participated fully in global markets, and this participation has been a key to its success. South Korea’s development strategy focused on promoting its export sector, and it is the export sector that led to high productivity and economic growth. Indeed, all examples of successful growth stories in developing economies (China, Japan, South Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, Chile) have involved export sectors that met the test of international competition, and some of these economies have also pursued trade liberalization. In almost all the industrializing East Asian economies, future growth will likely have to follow a more balanced path that relies less on exports and more on production for the domestic market. Such adjustments are needed not only to secure such economies’ further development but also to alleviate the pattern of external imbalances around the global economy. It is in the world’s poorest countries--especially in Africa and Latin America--that additional participation in global markets has the highest priority. Only by embracing global markets can developing countries raise living standards.16Trade liberalization has a critical role to play in economic growth by directly stimulating domestic firms to become more productive. And along with financial globalization, it can also encourage emerging-market economies to develop the institutions that foster financial development. Globalization should be one of the highest priorities for developing countries. The Role of Advanced CountriesCan we in the advanced countries help? Yes, we can do so by supporting the opening of our markets to goods and services from emerging-market countries. By encouraging these countries to increase their participation in global markets, we create exactly the right incentives for them to implement the hard measures that will enable them to grow rich. As we have seen, exporters have strong incentives to be productive so that they can take advantage of access to our markets, and thus they will make the investments needed for growth. They also will push for the institutional reforms to make financial markets more efficient and promote financial deepening. By getting financial markets to work well, exporters will have access to the capital they need to increase their business.Opening our markets to emerging-market countries is an important way that those in advanced countries can help emerging-market economies become successful. While providing aid to poor countries can, in the right circumstances, help eradicate poverty, it often will not work because it usually does not create the right incentives to promote economic growth. A handout is almost never as effective as a hand up.Some are concerned about the consequences for us if we in the United States allow free competition in our markets for goods and services from countries where wages are low. Keeping many countries poor and their workers unproductive may seem to be to our benefit. But as shown in the examples of post-World War II recovery in Europe and Japan, and in the rapid growth in the 1970s and 1980s in the newly industrialized economies of Asia, higher standards of living throughout the global economy actually work to our benefit. Prosperity in our trading partners creates growing markets for U.S. exports of high-value goods. And over time, as workers’ productivity abroad rises, so will their wages and incomes. It is true that the changes brought about in our economy by globalization impose significant costs onsomedomestic workers. We need to develop policies to help those workers without undermining the global trading system. The costs to us of damaging that system would far outweigh the benefits that some might gain from protectionist measures. Promoting trade liberalization helps us not only do good but also do well.ReferencesAcemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2001)."The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,"American Economic Review, vol. 91 (December), pp. 1369-1401.Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2005). "Institutions as the Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth," in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds.,Handbook of Economic Growth,vol. 1, part 1. Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 385-472.Ades, Alberto, and Rafael Di Tella (1994). "Competition and Corruption," Institute of Economics and Statistics Discussion Paper Series 169. Oxford: University of Oxford.Alfaro, Laura, and others (2004)."FDI and Economic Growth: The Role of Local Financial Markets,"Journal of International Economics, vol. 64 (October), pp. 89-112.Armendariz de Aghion, Beatriz, and Jonathan Morduch (2005).The Economics of Microfinance.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey and Robin L. Lumsdaine (2002)."Dating the Integration of World Equity Markets,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 65 (August), pp. 203-47.Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (2004).In Defense of Globalization. New York: Oxford University Press.Bourguignon, Francois, Diane Coyle, Raquel Fernandez, Francesco Giavazzi, Dalia Marin, Kevin O’Rourke, Richard Portes, Paul Seabright, Anthony Venables, Thierry Verdier, and L. Alan Winters (2002).Making Sense of Globalization: A Guide to the Economic Issues,CEPR Policy Paper Series 8. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, July.Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, and Robert Marquez (2006)."Lending Booms and Lending Standards,"Journal of Finance, vol. 61 (October), pp. 2511-46.Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache (2005)."Cross-Country Empirical Studies of Systemic Bank Distress: A Survey (422 KB PDF),"IMF Working Paper Series WP 05/96. Washington: International Monetary Fund, May.de Soto, Hernando (2000).The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else.New York: Basic Books.Dollar, David (1992)."Outward-Oriented Developing Economies Really Do Grow More Rapidly: Evidence from 95 LDCs, 1976-1985,"Economic Development and Cultural Change, vol. 40 (April), pp. 523-44.Dollar, David, and Paul Collier (2001).Globalization, Growth, and Poverty: Building an Inclusive World Economy.New York: Oxford University Press.Easterly, William (2001).The Elusive Quest for Growth:Economists’ Adventures and Misadventures in the Tropics.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.Easterly, William, and Ross Levine (2001). "It’s Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized Facts and Growth Models,"World Bank Economic Review, vol. 15 (2), pp. 177-219.Easterly, William, and Ross Levine (2003)."Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments Influence Economic Development,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 50 (January), pp. 3-39.Edwards, Sebastian (1998)."Openness, Productivity, and Growth: What Do We Really Know?"Economic Journal, vol. 108 (March), pp. 383-98.Eichengreen, Barry (2001). "Capital Account Liberalization: What Do Cross-Country Studies Tell Us?"World Bank Economic Review, vol. 15 (3), pp. 341-65.Frankel, Jeffrey A., and David Romer (1999)."Does Trade Cause Growth?"American Economic Review,vol. 89 (June), pp. 379-99.Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2004)."Do Institutions Cause Growth?"NBER Working Paper Series 10568. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June.Goldberg, Linda (2004)."Financial-Sector FDI and Host Countries: New and Old Lessons,"NBER Working Paper Series 10441. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April.Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones (1999)."Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output per Worker Than Others?"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 114 (February), pp. 83-116.Harrison, Ann (1996)."Openness and Growth: A Time-Series, Cross-Country Analysis for Developing Countries,"Journal of Development Economics, vol. 48 (March), pp. 419-47.Henry, Peter Blair (2000a)."Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market Equity Prices,"Journal of Finance,vol. 55 (2), pp. 529-64.Henry, Peter Blair (2000b)."Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms?"Journal of Financial Economics58 (1-2), pp. 301-34.Jones, Benjamin F., and Benjamin A. Olken (2005)."The Anatomy of Start-Stop Growth,"NBER Working Paper Series 11528. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July.Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kray, and Pablo Zoido-Lobaton (1999)."Governance Matters,"Policy Research Working Paper Series 2196. Washington: World Bank, October.Kearl, James R., Clayne L. Pope, Gordon C. Whiting, and Larry T. Wimmer (1979)."A Confusion of Economists?"American Economic Review,vol. 69 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 28-37.Klein, Michael W. (2005)."Capital Account Liberalization: Institutional Quality and Economic Growth: Theory and Evidence,"NBER Working Paper Series 11112. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February.Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei (2006)."Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal (758 KB PDF),"IMF Working Paper Series WP 06/189. Washington: International Monetary Fund, August.Lee, Ha Yan, Luca Antonio Ricci, and Roberto Rigobon (2004)."Once Again, Is Openness Good for Growth?"Journal of Development Economics, vol. 75 (December), pp. 451-72.Levine, Ross (2004)."Finance and Growth,"NBER Working Paper Series 10766. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September; forthcoming in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds.,Handbook of Economic Growth.Amsterdam: North Holland.Levine, Ross and Sara Zervos (1998)."Capital Control Liberalization and Stock Market Development,"World Development26, pp. 1169-84.Mauro, Paolo (1995)."Corruption and Growth,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 110 (August), pp. 681-712.North, Douglass C. (1990).Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.North, Douglass C., and Robert Paul Thomas (1973).The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic History.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales (2003)."The Great Reversals: the Politics of Financial Development in the 20th Century,"Journal of Financial Economics69 (1), pp. 5-50.Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales (2004).Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists: Unleashing the Power of Financial Markets to Create Wealth and Spread Opportunity.Princeton: Princeton University Press.Rodriguez, Francisco, and Dani Rodrik (2001). "Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s Guide to the Evidence," in Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual2000. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi (2002)."Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development,"NBER Working Paper Series 9305. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November.Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Andrew M. Warner (1995). "Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995:1,pp. 1-118.Schmukler, Sergio L. (2004)."Financial Globalization: Gain and Pain for Developing Countries (307 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,Economic Review,vol. 89(Q2), pp. 39-66.Svaleryd, Helena, and Jonas Vlachos (2002)."Markets for Risk and Openness to Trade: How Are They Related?"Journal of International Economics,vol. 57 (August), pp. 369-95.Temple, Jonathan (1999)."The New Growth Evidence,"Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37 (March), pp. 112-56.Wei, Shangjin (1997)."How Taxing Is Corruption on International Investors?"NBER Working Paper Series 6030. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May.Weil, David N. (2005).Economic Growth.Boston: Addison-Wesley.Winters, L. Alan, Neil McCulloch, and Andrew McKay (2004)."Trade Liberalization and Poverty: The Evidence So Far,"Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 42 (March), pp. 72-115.Wolf, Martin (2004).Why Globalization Works.New Haven: Yale University Press.World Bank (2001).Finance for Growth: Policy Choices in a Volatile World.New York: Oxford University Press.World Bank (2005).Doing Business in 2005: Removing Obstacles to Growth.Washington: World Bank.Footnotes1.A large literature shows the importance of good institutions to economic growth. See, for example, North and Thomas (1973); Hall and Jones (1999); Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001); Easterly and Levine (2001); Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi (2002); Easterly and Levine (2003); Glaeser and others (2004); and the recent survey by Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005). Kaufmann and others (1999) also point to the importance of various aspects of good governance.Return to text2.An excellent nontechnical survey of the extensive empirical evidence on the link between financial development and economic growth can be found in World Bank (2001). See also Levine (2004) and Schmukler (2004).Return to text3.A discussion of how the costs of doing business vary across a number of countries is in World Bank (2005).Return to text4.Research finds that increases in corruption are associated with lower growth (for example, Mauro, 1995). Wei (1997) also finds that corruption significantly reduces foreign direct investment, which is generally considered to be beneficial to growth.Return to text5.A survey of the literature that links a lack of sufficient prudential regulation and supporting institutions to excessive risk-taking and the possibility of a subsequent banking crisis is in Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2005). Dell’Ariccia and Marquez (2006) also argue that under certain circumstances lending booms can make the banking system more unstable and can lead to a higher probability of a banking crisis.Return to text6.The literature on microfinance is vast. One thorough discussion is in Armendariz de Aghion and Morduch (2005).Return to text7.When stock markets in emerging-market countries are opened to foreign capital, dividend yields fall, average stock prices increase, and liquidity goes up. See Levine and Zervos (1998); Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002); and Henry (2000a,b).Return to text8.This argument is made in World Bank (2001) and Goldberg (2004).Return to text9.An excellent discussion of the literature on financial globalization using a unified conceptual framework is in Kose and others (2006). Studies focusing more specifically on the necessary preconditions for, and the appropriate sequencing of, financial reforms, macroeconomic policies, and institutional development, on the one hand, and capital account liberalization, on the other, include Eichengreen (2001), Alfaro and others (2004), and Klein (2005).Return to text10.The four largest state-owned banks, with 70 percent of China’s bank deposits, are scheduled to be privatized in the following order: the Construction Bank, the Bank of China, the Industrial and Commercial Bank, and the Agricultural Bank.Return to text11.The new law becomes effective on June 1, 2007, but reportedly will not apply to state-owned enterprises until 2008.Return to text12.Indeed, almost all economists think that trade liberalization, a key element of globalization, is a good thing. For example, in Kearl and others (1979), 97 percent of economists agreed (generally or with some provisions) with the statement that "tariffs and import quotas reduce general economic welfare." A typical view advocating trade liberalization is expressed by Jagdish Bhagwati, one of the most prominent trade theorists in the world, in Bhagwati (2004).Return to text13.This example comes from Weil (2005, p. 322) and is described more extensively in Dollar and Collier (2001).Return to text14.The literature on the effects of trade liberalization on growth and poverty is immense. See the surveys in Temple (1999); Bourguignon and others (2002); Winters, McCulloch, and McKay (2004); and Wolf (2004). Earlier studies found that trade openness was associated with higher growth rates (Dollar, 1992; Sachs and Warner, 1995; and Edwards, 1998). However, because the direction of causation from this evidence is difficult to establish, other researchers have used instrumental variable procedures to establish causality from trade liberalization to growth (for example, Frankel and Romer, 1999). Using a different approach to identify the direction of causation, Lee, Ricci, and Rigobon (2004) also find that trade openness has a positive effect on growth.Return to text15.For example, Harrison (1996) and especially Rodriguez and Rodrik (2000).Return to text16.The finding in Jones and Olken (2005) that growth take-offs are primarily associated with large and steady expansions in international trade provides further support for this view.Return to text Can we in the advanced countries help? Yes, we can do so by supporting the opening of our markets to goods and services from emerging-market countries. By encouraging these countries to increase their participation in global markets, we create exactly the right incentives for them to implement the hard measures that will enable them to grow rich. As we have seen, exporters have strong incentives to be productive so that they can take advantage of access to our markets, and thus they will make the investments needed for growth. They also will push for the institutional reforms to make financial markets more efficient and promote financial deepening. By getting financial markets to work well, exporters will have access to the capital they need to increase their business. Opening our markets to emerging-market countries is an important way that those in advanced countries can help emerging-market economies become successful. While providing aid to poor countries can, in the right circumstances, help eradicate poverty, it often will not work because it usually does not create the right incentives to promote economic growth. A handout is almost never as effective as a hand up. Some are concerned about the consequences for us if we in the United States allow free competition in our markets for goods and services from countries where wages are low. Keeping many countries poor and their workers unproductive may seem to be to our benefit. But as shown in the examples of post-World War II recovery in Europe and Japan, and in the rapid growth in the 1970s and 1980s in the newly industrialized economies of Asia, higher standards of living throughout the global economy actually work to our benefit. Prosperity in our trading partners creates growing markets for U.S. exports of high-value goods. And over time, as workers’ productivity abroad rises, so will their wages and incomes. It is true that the changes brought about in our economy by globalization impose significant costs onsomedomestic workers. We need to develop policies to help those workers without undermining the global trading system. The costs to us of damaging that system would far outweigh the benefits that some might gain from protectionist measures. Promoting trade liberalization helps us not only do good but also do well. References Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2001)."The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,"American Economic Review, vol. 91 (December), pp. 1369-1401. Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2005). "Institutions as the Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth," in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds.,Handbook of Economic Growth,vol. 1, part 1. Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 385-472. Ades, Alberto, and Rafael Di Tella (1994). "Competition and Corruption," Institute of Economics and Statistics Discussion Paper Series 169. Oxford: University of Oxford. Alfaro, Laura, and others (2004)."FDI and Economic Growth: The Role of Local Financial Markets,"Journal of International Economics, vol. 64 (October), pp. 89-112. Armendariz de Aghion, Beatriz, and Jonathan Morduch (2005).The Economics of Microfinance.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey and Robin L. Lumsdaine (2002)."Dating the Integration of World Equity Markets,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 65 (August), pp. 203-47. Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (2004).In Defense of Globalization. New York: Oxford University Press. Bourguignon, Francois, Diane Coyle, Raquel Fernandez, Francesco Giavazzi, Dalia Marin, Kevin O’Rourke, Richard Portes, Paul Seabright, Anthony Venables, Thierry Verdier, and L. Alan Winters (2002).Making Sense of Globalization: A Guide to the Economic Issues,CEPR Policy Paper Series 8. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, July. Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, and Robert Marquez (2006)."Lending Booms and Lending Standards,"Journal of Finance, vol. 61 (October), pp. 2511-46. Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache (2005)."Cross-Country Empirical Studies of Systemic Bank Distress: A Survey (422 KB PDF),"IMF Working Paper Series WP 05/96. Washington: International Monetary Fund, May. de Soto, Hernando (2000).The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else.New York: Basic Books. Dollar, David (1992)."Outward-Oriented Developing Economies Really Do Grow More Rapidly: Evidence from 95 LDCs, 1976-1985,"Economic Development and Cultural Change, vol. 40 (April), pp. 523-44. Dollar, David, and Paul Collier (2001).Globalization, Growth, and Poverty: Building an Inclusive World Economy.New York: Oxford University Press. Easterly, William (2001).The Elusive Quest for Growth:Economists’ Adventures and Misadventures in the Tropics.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Easterly, William, and Ross Levine (2001). "It’s Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized Facts and Growth Models,"World Bank Economic Review, vol. 15 (2), pp. 177-219. Easterly, William, and Ross Levine (2003)."Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments Influence Economic Development,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 50 (January), pp. 3-39. Edwards, Sebastian (1998)."Openness, Productivity, and Growth: What Do We Really Know?"Economic Journal, vol. 108 (March), pp. 383-98. Eichengreen, Barry (2001). "Capital Account Liberalization: What Do Cross-Country Studies Tell Us?"World Bank Economic Review, vol. 15 (3), pp. 341-65. Frankel, Jeffrey A., and David Romer (1999)."Does Trade Cause Growth?"American Economic Review,vol. 89 (June), pp. 379-99. Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2004)."Do Institutions Cause Growth?"NBER Working Paper Series 10568. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. Goldberg, Linda (2004)."Financial-Sector FDI and Host Countries: New and Old Lessons,"NBER Working Paper Series 10441. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April. Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones (1999)."Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output per Worker Than Others?"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 114 (February), pp. 83-116. Harrison, Ann (1996)."Openness and Growth: A Time-Series, Cross-Country Analysis for Developing Countries,"Journal of Development Economics, vol. 48 (March), pp. 419-47. Henry, Peter Blair (2000a)."Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market Equity Prices,"Journal of Finance,vol. 55 (2), pp. 529-64. Henry, Peter Blair (2000b)."Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms?"Journal of Financial Economics58 (1-2), pp. 301-34. Jones, Benjamin F., and Benjamin A. Olken (2005)."The Anatomy of Start-Stop Growth,"NBER Working Paper Series 11528. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July. Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kray, and Pablo Zoido-Lobaton (1999)."Governance Matters,"Policy Research Working Paper Series 2196. Washington: World Bank, October. Kearl, James R., Clayne L. Pope, Gordon C. Whiting, and Larry T. Wimmer (1979)."A Confusion of Economists?"American Economic Review,vol. 69 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 28-37. Klein, Michael W. (2005)."Capital Account Liberalization: Institutional Quality and Economic Growth: Theory and Evidence,"NBER Working Paper Series 11112. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei (2006)."Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal (758 KB PDF),"IMF Working Paper Series WP 06/189. Washington: International Monetary Fund, August. Lee, Ha Yan, Luca Antonio Ricci, and Roberto Rigobon (2004)."Once Again, Is Openness Good for Growth?"Journal of Development Economics, vol. 75 (December), pp. 451-72. Levine, Ross (2004)."Finance and Growth,"NBER Working Paper Series 10766. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September; forthcoming in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds.,Handbook of Economic Growth.Amsterdam: North Holland. Levine, Ross and Sara Zervos (1998)."Capital Control Liberalization and Stock Market Development,"World Development26, pp. 1169-84. Mauro, Paolo (1995)."Corruption and Growth,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 110 (August), pp. 681-712. North, Douglass C. (1990).Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. North, Douglass C., and Robert Paul Thomas (1973).The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic History.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales (2003)."The Great Reversals: the Politics of Financial Development in the 20th Century,"Journal of Financial Economics69 (1), pp. 5-50. Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales (2004).Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists: Unleashing the Power of Financial Markets to Create Wealth and Spread Opportunity.Princeton: Princeton University Press. Rodriguez, Francisco, and Dani Rodrik (2001). "Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s Guide to the Evidence," in Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual2000. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi (2002)."Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development,"NBER Working Paper Series 9305. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November. Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Andrew M. Warner (1995). "Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995:1,pp. 1-118. Schmukler, Sergio L. (2004)."Financial Globalization: Gain and Pain for Developing Countries (307 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,Economic Review,vol. 89(Q2), pp. 39-66. Svaleryd, Helena, and Jonas Vlachos (2002)."Markets for Risk and Openness to Trade: How Are They Related?"Journal of International Economics,vol. 57 (August), pp. 369-95. Temple, Jonathan (1999)."The New Growth Evidence,"Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37 (March), pp. 112-56. Wei, Shangjin (1997)."How Taxing Is Corruption on International Investors?"NBER Working Paper Series 6030. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May. Weil, David N. (2005).Economic Growth.Boston: Addison-Wesley. Winters, L. Alan, Neil McCulloch, and Andrew McKay (2004)."Trade Liberalization and Poverty: The Evidence So Far,"Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 42 (March), pp. 72-115. Wolf, Martin (2004).Why Globalization Works.New Haven: Yale University Press. World Bank (2001).Finance for Growth: Policy Choices in a Volatile World.New York: Oxford University Press. World Bank (2005).Doing Business in 2005: Removing Obstacles to Growth.Washington: World Bank. Footnotes 1.A large literature shows the importance of good institutions to economic growth. See, for example, North and Thomas (1973); Hall and Jones (1999); Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001); Easterly and Levine (2001); Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi (2002); Easterly and Levine (2003); Glaeser and others (2004); and the recent survey by Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005). Kaufmann and others (1999) also point to the importance of various aspects of good governance.Return to text 2.An excellent nontechnical survey of the extensive empirical evidence on the link between financial development and economic growth can be found in World Bank (2001). See also Levine (2004) and Schmukler (2004).Return to text 3.A discussion of how the costs of doing business vary across a number of countries is in World Bank (2005).Return to text 4.Research finds that increases in corruption are associated with lower growth (for example, Mauro, 1995). Wei (1997) also finds that corruption significantly reduces foreign direct investment, which is generally considered to be beneficial to growth.Return to text 5.A survey of the literature that links a lack of sufficient prudential regulation and supporting institutions to excessive risk-taking and the possibility of a subsequent banking crisis is in Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2005). Dell’Ariccia and Marquez (2006) also argue that under certain circumstances lending booms can make the banking system more unstable and can lead to a higher probability of a banking crisis.Return to text 6.The literature on microfinance is vast. One thorough discussion is in Armendariz de Aghion and Morduch (2005).Return to text 7.When stock markets in emerging-market countries are opened to foreign capital, dividend yields fall, average stock prices increase, and liquidity goes up. See Levine and Zervos (1998); Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002); and Henry (2000a,b).Return to text 8.This argument is made in World Bank (2001) and Goldberg (2004).Return to text 9.An excellent discussion of the literature on financial globalization using a unified conceptual framework is in Kose and others (2006). Studies focusing more specifically on the necessary preconditions for, and the appropriate sequencing of, financial reforms, macroeconomic policies, and institutional development, on the one hand, and capital account liberalization, on the other, include Eichengreen (2001), Alfaro and others (2004), and Klein (2005).Return to text 10.The four largest state-owned banks, with 70 percent of China’s bank deposits, are scheduled to be privatized in the following order: the Construction Bank, the Bank of China, the Industrial and Commercial Bank, and the Agricultural Bank.Return to text 11.The new law becomes effective on June 1, 2007, but reportedly will not apply to state-owned enterprises until 2008.Return to text 12.Indeed, almost all economists think that trade liberalization, a key element of globalization, is a good thing. For example, in Kearl and others (1979), 97 percent of economists agreed (generally or with some provisions) with the statement that "tariffs and import quotas reduce general economic welfare." A typical view advocating trade liberalization is expressed by Jagdish Bhagwati, one of the most prominent trade theorists in the world, in Bhagwati (2004).Return to text 13.This example comes from Weil (2005, p. 322) and is described more extensively in Dollar and Collier (2001).Return to text 14.The literature on the effects of trade liberalization on growth and poverty is immense. See the surveys in Temple (1999); Bourguignon and others (2002); Winters, McCulloch, and McKay (2004); and Wolf (2004). Earlier studies found that trade openness was associated with higher growth rates (Dollar, 1992; Sachs and Warner, 1995; and Edwards, 1998). However, because the direction of causation from this evidence is difficult to establish, other researchers have used instrumental variable procedures to establish causality from trade liberalization to growth (for example, Frankel and Romer, 1999). Using a different approach to identify the direction of causation, Lee, Ricci, and Rigobon (2004) also find that trade openness has a positive effect on growth.Return to text 15.For example, Harrison (1996) and especially Rodriguez and Rodrik (2000).Return to text 16.The finding in Jones and Olken (2005) that growth take-offs are primarily associated with large and steady expansions in international trade provides further support for this view.Return to text
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to appear today to provide the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on industrial loan companies (ILCs) and H.R. 698, the Industrial Bank Holding Company Act of 2007. The Board commends the Committee for holding this hearing and for considering ways of addressing the important public policy implications raised by the special exception for ILCs in federal law. ILCs are state-chartered banks that have virtually all of the powers and privileges of other insured commercial banks, including the protections of the federal safety net--deposit insurance and access to the Federal Reserve's discount window and payments system. Nonetheless, ILCs operate under a special exception to the federal Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act). This special exception allows any type of firm, including a commercial firm or foreign bank, to acquire and operate an ILC chartered in one of a handful of states without complying with the standards that Congress has established for bank holding companies to maintain the separation of banking and commerce and to protect insured banks, the federal safety net and, ultimately, the taxpayer. We believe it is critical for Congress to consider and address the important public policy implications raised by the ILC exception, particularly in light of the dramatic recent growth and potential future expansion of banks operating under this special exception. If left unchecked, this recent and potential future growth of firms operating under the exception threatens to undermine the decisions that Congress has made concerning the separation of banking and commerce in the American economy and the proper supervisory framework for companies that own a federally insured bank. The ILC exception also creates an unlevel competitive playing field by allowing both financial and commercial firms to own an insured bank but avoid the prudential limitations, supervisory framework and restrictions on affiliations that apply to corporate owners of other insured banks. The Board appreciates the steps that the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) recently has taken regarding ILCs. These include extending the temporary moratorium on the acquisition of ILCs by commercial firms and seeking ways to help address the supervisory gaps caused by the ILC exception. However, only Congress can craft a solution that addresses the full range of issues created by the ILC exception in current law in a permanent, comprehensive and equitable manner. Your decisions on these matters, whether by action or inaction, also will influence the structure, soundness and resiliency of our financial system and economy. As I will discuss, the Board believes the best way to prevent this exception from further undermining the general policies that Congress has established and further promoting competitive and regulatory imbalances within the banking system is toclosethe loophole in current law going forward. This is precisely the approach that Congress has taken on previous occasions when earlier loopholes began to be used in unintended and potentially damaging ways. H.R. 698 would narrow, but not close, this loophole. The BHC Act, originally enacted in 1956, provides a federal framework for the supervision and regulation of companies that own or control a bank and their affiliates. This comprehensive framework is intended to help protect the safety and soundness of corporately controlled banks that have access to the federal safety net and to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce in the United States. It does so principally in two ways. First, the act provides for all bank holding companies, including financial holding companies formed under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act), to be supervised on a consolidated or group-wide basis by the Federal Reserve. And second, the act prevents bank holding companies from engaging in general commercial activities and allows bank holding companies that qualify as financial holding companies to engage only in those activities that Congress or the Board (in consultation with the Treasury Department, in certain cases) has determined to be financial in nature or incidental or complementary to a financial activity.1 The ILC exception allows a company to acquire an insured bank chartered in one of a handful of states--principally Utah and California--without becoming a bank holding company under the BHC Act and without abiding by the supervisory and regulatory framework established under that act. Ironically, the special exception for ILCs was enacted in 1987 as part of a broader legislative package designed toclosean earlier loophole--the so-called nonbank bank loophole--that increasingly was being exploited by large commercial and financial firms to evade the nonbanking restrictions and consolidated supervisory requirements of the BHC Act. In 1987, Congress acted affirmatively to close this loophole by passing the Competitive Equality Banking Act (CEBA). That act expanded the definition of "bank" in the BHC Act to include any FDIC-insured bank (regardless of the activities it conducts)andany banking institution that both offers transaction accounts and makes commercial loans (regardless of whether it is FDIC-insured). Importantly, the act also provided that, subject to certain limited exceptions, any company that acquired an institution meeting this expanded definition of "bank" would be subject to the same activity restrictions and supervisory and regulatory framework as other bank holding companies, including the prohibition on engaging in commercial activities. One of the exceptions adopted in CEBA was for ILCs chartered in those few states that, as of March 5, 1987, had in effect or under legislative consideration a law requiring ILCs to have FDIC insurance. At the time, the size, nature and powers of ILCs were quite restricted. ILCs were first established in the early 1900s to make small loans to industrial workers. For many years, they were not generally permitted to accept deposits or obtain FDIC insurance. In fact, at the time CEBA was enacted, most ILCs were small, locally owned institutions that had only limited deposit-taking and lending powers under state law. As of year-end 1987, the largest ILC had assets of approximately $410 million and the average asset size of all ILCs was less than $45 million. The relevant states also were not actively chartering new ILCs. At the time CEBA was enacted, for example, Utah had only eleven state-chartered ILCs and had a moratorium on the chartering of new ILCs. Moreover, interstate banking restrictions and technological limitations made it difficult for institutions chartered in a grandfathered state to operate a retail banking business regionally or nationally. What was once an exception with limited and local reach has now become the avenue through which large national and international financial and commercial firms have acquired a federally insured bank and gained access to the federal safety net. Indeed, dramatic changes have occurred with ILCs in recent years that have made ILCs virtually indistinguishable from other commercial banks. For example, in 1997, Utah lifted its moratorium on the chartering of new ILCs, allowed ILCs to call themselves banks, and authorized ILCs to exercise virtually all of the powers of state-chartered commercial banks. Since that time, Utah also has begun to charter new ILCs and to promote them as a method for companies to acquire a federally insured bank while avoiding the requirements of federal supervision and regulation under the BHC Act. As a result of these and other changes, the aggregate amount of assets and deposits held by all ILCs operating under this exception increased substantially just in the nine years between 1997 and 2006, with assets increasing by more than 750 percent (from $25.1 billion to $212.8 billion) and deposits increasing by more than 1000 percent (from $11.7 billion to $146.7 billion). In fact, in 2006 alone, the assets and deposits of ILCs increased by $62.7 billion and $38.8 billion, respectively. The number of Utah-chartered ILCs also has doubled since 1997, while declining in the few other states permitted to charter exempt ILCs. The nature and size of individual ILCs and their parent companies also has changed dramatically in recent years. While the largest ILC in 1987 had assets of approximately $410 million, the largest ILC today has more than $67billionin assets and more than $54billionin deposits, making it among the twenty largest insured banks in the United States in terms of deposits. An additional twelve ILCs each have more than $1 billion in deposits. And, far from being locally owned and focused on small-dollar consumer loans, many today are controlled by large, internationally active companies and are used to support various aspects of these organizations' complex business plans and operations. While the growth of ILCs and diversity of ownership in recent years are impressive, it also is important to keep in mind that the exception currently is open-ended and subject to very few statutory restrictions. Although only a handful of states have the ability to charter exempt ILCs, there isnolimit on the number of exempt ILCs that these states may charter, and the FDIC currently has several applications pending to establish new ILCs or to acquire existing ones. Moreover, federal law places no limit on how large an ILC may become and only limited restrictions on the types of activities that an ILC may conduct. For example, ILCs may operate under the exception so long as they do not accept demand deposits that the depositor may withdraw by check or similar means for payment to third parties. Nevertheless, some ILCs engage in retail banking activities by offering retail customers negotiable order of withdrawal (NOW) accounts--transaction accounts that are functionally indistinguishable from demand deposit accounts. In addition, federal law allows new or existing ILCs of any size to collect FDIC-insured savings or time deposits from institutional or retail customers and offer the full range of other banking services, including commercial, mortgage, credit card, and consumer loans; cash management services; trust services; and payment-related services, such as Fedwire, automated clearinghouse (ACH) and check-clearing services. Moreover, federal law permits ILCs to branch across state lines to the same extent as other types of insured banks. And, due to advances in telecommunications and information technology, some ILCs now conduct their activities throughout the United States--without physical branches--through the Internet or through arrangements with affiliated or unaffiliated entities. Without action, further expansion of banks operating under this exception threatens to undermine several fundamental policies that Congress has established and reaffirmed governing the structure, supervision and regulation of the financial system. The ILC exception also fosters an unfair and unlevel competitive and regulatory playing field by allowing firms that acquire an insured ILC in a handful of states to operate outside the activity restrictions, consolidated supervision and regulatory framework that apply to other community-based, regional and diversified organizations that own a bank. Addressing these matters will only become more difficult if additional companies are permitted to acquire ILCs and operate under a different supervisory and regulatory regime than the owners of other insured banks. Let me discuss these points in more detail and comment on how these matters would be addressed under H.R. 698, the Industrial Bank Holding Company Act of 2007, as introduced. Bank Affiliations with Commercial Entities.For many years, Congress has sought to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce in the United States and has acted affirmatively to close loopholes that create significant breaches in the wall between banking and commerce. For example, one of the primary reasons for enactment of the BHC Act in 1956, and its expansion in 1970 to cover companies that control only a single bank, was to help prevent and restrain combinations of banking and commercial firms under the auspices of a single holding company. And, as noted earlier, when the nonbank bank loophole threatened to undermine the separation of banking and commerce, Congress acted in 1987 to close that loophole. In doing so, Congress was motivated by several concerns. One concern was that allowing the mixing of banking and commerce might, in effect, lead to an extension of the federal safety net to commercial affiliates and make insured banks susceptible to the reputational, operational and financial risks of their commercial affiliates. Congress also expressed concern that banks affiliated with commercial firms may be less willing to provide credit to the competitors of their commercial affiliates or may provide credit to their commercial affiliates at preferential rates or on favorable terms. Moreover, Congress expressed concern that allowing banks and commercial firms to affiliate with each other could lead to the concentration of economic power in a few very large conglomerates.2 Congress reaffirmed its desire to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce as recently as 1999, when it passed the GLB Act. That act closed the unitary-thrift loophole, which previously allowed commercial firms to acquire a federally insured savings association. At the same time and after lengthy debate, Congress decided to allow financial holding companies to engage inonlythose activities determined to be financial in nature or incidental or complementary to financial activities. The ILC exception, however, has allowed several large commercial firms to acquire an insured ILC and additional commercial firms currently have ILC acquisition proposals pending before the FDIC. H.R. 698 would narrow, but not eliminate, the potential for further mixing of banking and commerce through the ILC exception. Importantly, the bill would allow any firm to acquire or establish an ILC in the future and derive up to 15 percent of its consolidated annual revenues from commercial activities. This 15 percent commercial "basket" is quite sizable and potentially would allow new firms that acquire an ILC to have significant commercial holdings. A large U.S. financial firm potentially could meet the 15 percent test in H.R. 698 even if it owned a commercial company the size of, for example, Kohl's, U.S. Steel, Waste Management, Office Depot or Nike. No similar commercial "basket" exists for bank or financial holding companies, which generally are prohibited from engaging in commercial activities under the GLB Act. In fact, in passing the GLB Act, Congress rejected earlier proposals that would have allowed financial holding companies to engage generally in a "basket" of commercial activities or that would have allowed commercial firms to acquire a small bank without becoming subject to the BHC Act.3 It also is unclear what activities would be considered "commercial" or "financial" for ILC owners under H.R. 698. The bill does not define "financial" activities by reference to the GLB Act and, thus, would allow the development of a different definition of "financial" activities than the definition established for financial holding companies in the GLB Act. This potentially would allow the owners of ILCs to engage in activities that would be "financial" under H.R. 698, but that would be considered commercial under the GLB Act. The question of whether to allow firms engaged in commercial activities to own or acquire an insured ILC is one that has potentially far-reaching implications for the structure and soundness of the American economy and financial system. This is especially true because pressures likely will build to expand to banking organizations more generally any new policy applied to the owners of ILCs. Once permitted, any general mixing of banking and commerce also is likely to be difficult to disentangle. We believe it is important that Congress, as it has in the past, set the nation's policies with respect to the proper mixing of banking and commerce and consider carefully and deliberately whether any changes to the nation's policies on this important issue should be made. Once these decisions are made, we see no reason to generally exempt the owners of insured ILCs from the policies established by Congress: these policies should be applied to all owners of full-service insured banks. Bank Affiliations with Financial Firms.Besides restricting the mixing of banking and commerce, Congress also has placed preconditions on the ability of banks to affiliate with firms that are purely financial. The GLB Act allows a bank holding company to engage in a broad range of financial activities, including securities underwriting, various insurance activities and merchant banking,onlyif the holding company keeps all of its subsidiary depository institutions well capitalized and well managed and achieves and maintains at least a satisfactory Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) record at all of the company's subsidiary insured depository institutions. These requirements help ensure that banks operating within a diversified financial company remain financially and managerially strong and help meet the credit needs of their entire communities, including low and moderate-income families and communities. The ILC exception undermines these requirements by allowing financial firms to own and operate an FDIC-insured bank without abiding by the capital, managerial, and CRA standards established in the GLB Act. H.R. 698 does not address this significant regulatory disparity. Consolidated Supervision.The ILC exception also undermines the supervisory framework that Congress has established for the corporate owners of insured banks. ILCs are regulated and supervised by the FDIC and their chartering state in the same manner as other types of state-chartered, nonmember insured banks and the Board has no concerns about the adequacy of this existing supervisory framework for ILCs themselves. However, due to the special exception in current law, the parent company of an ILC is not considered a bank holding company. This creates special supervisory risks because the ILC's parent company and nonbank affiliates may not be subject to supervision on aconsolidatedbasis by a federal agency. History demonstrates that financial trouble in one part of a business organization can spread, and spread rapidly, to other parts of the organization. Large organizations also increasingly operate and manage their businesses on an integrated basis with little regard for the corporate boundaries that typically define the jurisdictions of supervisors. Risks that cross legal entities and that are managed on a consolidated basis cannot be monitored properly through supervision directed at any one, or even several, of the legal entity subdivisions within the overall organization. It was precisely to deal with these risks to safety and soundness that Congress established a consolidated supervisory framework for bank holding companies that includes the Federal Reserve as supervisor of the parent holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries in addition to having a federal supervisor for the insured depository institution itself. This framework allows the Federal Reserve to understand the financial and managerial strengths and risks within the consolidated organization as a whole and gives the supervisor the authority and ability to identify and resolve significant management, operational, capital or other deficiencies within the overall organizationbeforethey pose a danger to the organization's subsidiary insured banks. These benefits help explain why many developed countries, including those of the European Union, have adopted consolidated supervision frameworks and why it is becoming the preferred approach to supervision worldwide. In the United States, the BHC Act has long provided the Federal Reserve broad authority to examine a bank holding company (including a financial holding company) and its nonbank subsidiaries, whether or not the company or nonbank subsidiary engages in transactions, or has relationships, with a depository institution subsidiary.4Pursuant to this authority, the Federal Reserve routinely conducts examinations of all large, complex bank holding companies and maintains inspection teams on-site at the largest bank holding companies on an ongoing basis. These examinations, which are conducted using well-established procedures, manuals and systems, allow the Federal Reserve to review the organization's systems for identifying and managing risk across the organization and its various legal entities and to evaluate the overall financial strength of the organization. By contrast, the primary federal supervisor of a bank, including an ILC, is authorized to examine the parent company and affiliates (other than subsidiaries) of the bank only to the extent necessary to disclose the relationship between the bank and the parent or affiliate and the effect of the relationship on the bank. Using its authority under federal law, the Federal Reserve also has established consolidated capital requirements for bank holding companies. These capital requirements help ensure that a bank holding company maintains adequate capital to support its group-wide activities, does not become excessively leveraged, and is able to serve as a source of strength, not weakness, for its subsidiary insured banks. The parent companies of exempt ILCs, however, are not subject to the consolidated capital requirements established for bank holding companies and, as the FDIC has noted, may have no expectation that they should serve as a source of strength to their subsidiary ILC. Indeed, among the factors contributing to the failure of a federally insured ILC in 1999 were the unregulated borrowing and weakened capital position of the corporate owner of the ILC and the inability of any federal supervisor to ensure that the parent holding company remained financially strong. Federal law also gives the Federal Reserve broad enforcement authority over bank holding companies and their nonbank subsidiaries. This authority includes the ability to stop or prevent a bank holding company or nonbank subsidiary from engaging in an unsafe or unsound practice in connection with its own business operations, even if those operations are not directly connected with the company's subsidiary banks. On the other hand, the primary federal bank supervisor for an ILC may take enforcement action against the parent company or a nonbank affiliate of an ILC to address an unsafe or unsound practice only if the practice occurs in the conduct of theILC'sbusiness. Thus, unsafe and unsound practices that weaken the parent firm of an ILC, such as significant reductions in its capital, increases in its debt or its failure to monitor and address the risks in its nonbanking affiliates, are generally beyond the scope of the enforcement authority of the ILC's primary federal bank supervisor. Consolidated supervisory authority is especially helpful in understanding and, if appropriate, requiring mitigation of the risks to the federal safety net when a subsidiary bank is closely integrated with, or heavily reliant on, its parent organization. In these situations, the subsidiary bank may have no business independent of the bank's affiliates, and the bank's loans and deposits may be derived or solicited largely through or from affiliates. In addition, the subsidiary bank may be substantially or entirely dependent on the parent or its affiliates for critical services, such as computer support, treasury operations, accounting, personnel, management, and even premises. This appears to be the case at a number of ILCs. For example, the FDIC noted in its recent rulemaking that some of the large corporate owners of ILCs tend to use these banks in ways that involve "unusual, affiliate-dependent" business plans and data show that seven of the ten largest ILCs each have more than $3 billion in assets but fewer than seventy-five full-time employees. H.R. 698 takes an important step by recognizing that the potential lack of consolidated supervision of the parent and nonbank affiliates of an ILC creates special risks that should be addressed. The bill currently seeks to address these risks by granting the FDIC new supervisory authority for the existing and future corporate owners of ILCs (other than those that are already subject to consolidated supervision by a federal banking agency) that is similar to the authority that the Federal Reserve has with respect to bank holding companies. The Board strongly supports efforts to ensure that the existing corporate owners of ILCs are subject to consolidated supervision by a federal agency that has the same tools as the Federal Reserve to help protect the safety and soundness of insured banks and the federal safety net that supports those banks. These tools include the ability to ensure that the holding company for an industrial bank acts as a source of strength for the bank. As I will discuss later, however, the Board also strongly believes that the ILC exception should be closed to new owners of ILCs. Foreign Banks.In addition to constructing a consolidated supervisory framework for domestic banking organizations, Congress has made this type of supervisory framework a prerequisite for foreign banks seeking to acquire a bank in the United States. Following the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI)--a foreign bank that lacked a single supervisor capable of monitoring its global activities--Congress amended the BHC Act to require that foreign banks demonstrate that they are subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis in their home country before acquiring a U.S. bank or establishing a branch, agency or commercial lending company subsidiary in the United States. The ILC exception, however, allows a foreign bank that is not subject to consolidated supervision in its home country to evade this requirement and acquire an FDIC-insured bank with broad deposit-taking and lending powers. This gap in current law needs to be addressed. Fair Competition and Other Issues.The differences I have just discussed not only have safety and soundness consequences, they also have important competitive and structural consequences. The exception in current law creates an unlevel playing field among organizations that control a bank because it allows the corporate owners of ILCs to operate under a substantially different framework than the owners of other insured banks. H.R. 698 would perpetuate these competitive imbalances by continuing to grant firms that acquire an ILC significant advantages not available to the owners of other insured banks, such as the authority to engage in commercial activities and the ability to escape the CRA, capital and managerial requirements that apply to financial holding companies. These advantages will provide incentives for firms to continue to exploit the exception. These differences also create the opportunity for firms to engage in "regulatory arbitrage" and, over time, may lead to shifts in the structure and supervision of the financial system and the Federal Reserve's ability to prevent or respond quickly to financial crisis. The Board believes the best way to address the important current and potential future public policy issues raised by the ILC exception is to close--and not just narrow--the loophole going forward. This approach recognizes the simple fact that ILCsareinsured banks. Accordingly, it would require any company that acquires an ILC after a specified date to operate subject to the same activity restrictions, regulatory requirements and supervisory framework that apply to the corporate owners of other insured banks. This approach builds on and utilizes the existing regulatory and supervisory framework that Congress has established, and repeatedly reaffirmed, for the corporate owners of banks and creates a level playing field for all firms that acquire an insured bank in the future. For reasons of fairness, the Board also supports "grandfathering" the limited number of firms that currently own an ILC and are not otherwise subject to the BHC Act. Such a grandfather provision would allow these firms to continue to engage in activities not permissible for bank holding companies. However, to protect the federal safety net and limit the potential for grandfathered ILCs to operate in ways clearly at odds with the original exception, the Board believes that any grandfathered firm should be subject to consolidated supervision by a federal agency and appropriate restrictions. We would be pleased to work with the Committee and its members in developing the appropriate restrictions that would apply to the limited set of grandfathered firms. This type of coordinated solution--closing the loophole and "grandfathering" existing owners--is precisely the type of approach that Congress took in 1970, 1987 and 1999 in closing previous exceptions in the banking laws that were undermining the separation of banking and commerce and other important public policy objectives. It also is the right approach to fix the ILC loophole. Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Board's views on H.R. 698 and on the many important issues presented by ILCs. The Board and its staff would be pleased to continue to work with the Committee in developing and improving legislative language that appropriately addresses the core public policy issues raised by the ILC exception. Footnotes 1.Bank holding companies that do not qualify to be a financial holding company under the GLB Act are permitted to engage in a smaller range of activities that have been found to be "closely related to banking."Return to text 2.SeeS. Rep. No. 100-19 (1987); S. Rep. No. 91-1084 (1970); H.R. Rep. No. 84-609 (1955).Return to text 3.The GLB Act did provide certain nonbanking firms that became a financial holding company after November 1999, up to ten years todivesttheir impermissible commercial holdings if the firm was and remained "predominantly financial."See12 U.S.C. § 1843(n). All commercial investments held under this authority must be divested no later than November 12, 2009.Return to text 4.In the case of certain functionally regulated subsidiaries of bank holding companies, the BHC Act directs the Board to rely to the fullest extent possible on examinations of the subsidiary conducted by the functional regulator for the subsidiary, and requires the Board to make certain findings before conducting an independent examination of the functionally regulated subsidiary. 12 U.S.C. §1844(c)(2)(B). These limitations also apply to the FDIC and other federal banking agencies in the exercise of their more limited examination authority over the nonbank affiliates of an insured bank, such as an ILC. See 12 U.S.C. § 1831v.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from February 5 through March 19, 2007. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on March 20-21, 2007. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The summary description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board’s web site atwww.federalreserve.gov/fomc. Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 20-21, 2007
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Virginia Thank you for inviting me to talk with you today.1I would like to direct my remarks to the macroeconomic mission of the Federal Reserve System. I wish to note that these remarks reflect only my own views and not those of the Federal Reserve Board or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System. In a democratic society like our own, the ultimate purpose of the central bank is to promote the public good by pursuing a course of monetary policy that fosters economic prosperity and social welfare. In the United States, as in virtually every other country, the central bank has a more specific set of objectives that have been established by the government. This mandate was originally specified by the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 and was most recently clarified by an amendment to the Federal Reserve Act in 1977. According to this legislation, the Federal Reserve's mandate is "to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates." Because long-term interest rates can remain low only in a stable macroeconomic environment, these goals are often referred to as thedual mandate; that is, the Federal Reserve seeks to promote the two coequal objectives of maximum employment and price stability. In the remainder of my remarks today, I will describe how these two objectives are consistent with our ultimate purpose of fostering economic prosperity and social welfare. I will then talk about some important practical challenges in implementing these goals. (By the way, I wish that I could also discuss the Federal Reserve's role in promoting the stability of the financial system, another key objective of central banks, but unfortunately that would violate my own personal mandate of finishing this speech in the allotted time.) Now with respect to the first objective, the rationale for maximizing employment is fairly obvious. The alternative situation--high unemployment--is associated with human misery, including lower living standards and increases in poverty as well as social pathologies such as loss of self-esteem, a higher incidence of divorce, increased rates of violent crime, and even suicide. Furthermore, when unemployment is high, the economy has idle workers along with a reduced level of production and household income. And when factories are idle, firms generally choose not to invest in additional plant and equipment, which in turn has adverse consequences for subsequent labor productivity and economic growth. All these symptoms of high unemployment were observed during the economic devastation of the Great Depression during the 1930s, which is now just a fading memory. But even less severe recessions are associated with painful consequences for many individual workers and their families. With respect to the second objective--that of price stability--there is now a broad consensus among policymakers, academic economists, and the general public in support of the principle that maintaining a low and stable inflation rate provides lasting benefits to the economy. In particular, low and predictable inflation promotes social welfare by simplifying the savings and retirement planning of individual households and by facilitating firms' production and investment decisions. Furthermore, an environment of overall price stability contributes to economic efficiency by reducing the variability of relative prices and by minimizing the distortions that arise because the tax system is not completely indexed to inflation. Price stability also has important benefits in terms of equity. For example, an elevated inflation rate typicallyincreasespoverty because the poorest members of society do not have access to the sorts of financial instruments that would help protect them against inflation. By the way, these are not just theoretical arguments: The experience of the United States in the 1970s, and that of many other economies across a wide range of times and circumstances, demonstrates that high and unstable inflation generally detracts from the standard of living, hinders the process of capital formation and economic growth, and in some countries has even led to political and social instability. Such episodes also show that a full recovery from the adverse effects of severe inflation can take many years. Although I could spend all morning extolling the virtues of the dual mandate, let me now turn to describing some of the challenges that the Federal Reserve faces in implementing this mandate. The first challenge is determining how to interpret the dual mandate. Of course, the Federal Reserve doesn't take a literal approach to the goal of maximum employment. In that case, our policies would need to be directed at getting everyone to work at least one hundred hours a week, and we would have to discourage senior citizens from retiring and young people from attending college instead of entering the labor force. Furthermore, every modern economy has a certain level of "frictional" unemployment, which reflects the transitory periods over which individuals remain voluntarily unemployed while searching for a new job. Partly for these reasons, Federal Reserve officials and other policymakers often refer to this aspect of the dual mandate as the goal of maximum sustainable employment, and they place particular emphasis on the wordsustainable. Similarly, in promoting the goal of price stability, policymakers have generally not taken this goal literally--by aiming at complete constancy of the price level--but instead have pursued policies aimed at maintaining a low and predictable inflation rate. In particular, at a congressional hearing in mid-1988, then-Chairman Greenspan defined price stability as an environment in which households and businesses "can safely ignore the possibility of sustained, generalized price increases or decreases" in making their saving and investment decisions.2 Now let's turn to the practical challenges in conducting monetary policy to achieve the dual mandate. A central element in successful monetary policy is a strong commitment to anominal anchor, that is, the use of monetary policy actions and statements to maintain low and stable inflation. During the 1980s and 1990s, the Federal Reserve succeeded in bringing inflation down from double-digit levels to the average rate of about 2 percent that has prevailed over the past decade. Moreover, when some measures of inflation were close to 1 percent in 2003, the Federal Open Market Committee's official statements specifically noted that any further substantial decline in inflation would be unwelcome, mainly because of the risk that a falling price level (which has not occurred since the Great Depression) could cause a significant disruption to economic activity and employment. In recent years, the Federal Reserve has been quite successful in maintaining a nominal anchor. Not only has the inflation rate remained within a reasonably narrow range, but inflation expectations, as measured by spreads between inflation-indexed and non-inflation-indexed Treasury securities and by surveys of professional forecasters and the general public, have also been well anchored. Maintaining price stability is also essential for achieving the other element of the dual mandate, namely, maximum sustainable employment. First, as I have already emphasized, a low and predictable inflation rate plays a crucial role in facilitating long-term growth in employment and labor productivity. Second, although the economy will inevitably be buffeted by various shocks, in the majority of circumstances the appropriate monetary policy response to stabilize inflation also helps to stabilize employment and output fluctuations around their maximum sustainable levels. In other words, the two elements of the dual mandate are usually complementary. To see how a commitment to price stability leads to appropriate policy actions to stabilize employment and output fluctuations, we need to understand that there are two key determinants of inflation: inflation expectations and the amount of slack in the economy.3Maintaining a nominal anchor helps stabilize inflation expectations, which in turn means that rises or falls in inflation tend to be highly correlated with economic slack. Thus, stabilizing inflation also helps to stabilize economic activity around sustainable levels. To see further how this process would work, consider a negative shock to aggregate demand (such as a decline in consumer confidence) that causes households to cut spending. The drop in demand leads, in turn, to a decline in actual output relative to its potential, that is, the level of output that the economy can produce at the maximum sustainable level of employment. As a result, future inflation will fall below levels consistent with price stability, and the central bank will pursue an expansionary policy to keep inflation from falling. The expansionary policy will then result in an increase in demand that raises output back up to potential output in order to return inflation to a level consistent with price stability. For example, during the last recession the Federal Reserve reduced its target for the federal funds rate a total of 5-1/2 percentage points, and this stimulus not only contributed to economic recovery but also helped avoid an unwelcome further decline in inflation. In other cases, a tightening of the stance of monetary policy is needed to prevent an "overheating" of economic activity, thereby avoiding a boom-bust cycle in the level of employment as well as an undesirable upward spurt of inflation. A strong commitment to price stability helps reduce fluctuations in employment and output in other ways. First, when inflation expectations are well anchored, a central bank will not have to worry that expansionary policy to counter a negative demand shock will lead to a sharp rise in expected inflation--a so-called inflation scare--that will then push up actual inflation in the future. Thus, a strong commitment to a nominal anchor enables a central bank to be more aggressive in the face of negative shocks and therefore to prevent rapid declines in employment or output. Moreover, with a strong commitment to a nominal anchor, supply shocks to inflation, such as a rise in relative energy prices, are likely to have only a temporary effect on inflation. This result is exactly what we have seen in the United States. Because people are confident that the Fed will not allow inflation to remain high, the recent sharp run-up in oil prices did not lead to a sustained rise in longer-run inflation expectations. As a result, inflation rose temporarily but has now been falling back again. When inflation expectations are well-anchored, the occurrence of an adverse aggregate supply shock does not necessarily mean that the central bank must raise interest rates aggressively in order to keep inflation under control, and hence the commitment to price stability can help avoid imposing unnecessary harm on the economy and on the workers who are most vulnerable to a weakening of economic activity. Now that we see the benefits of maintaining a commitment to a nominal anchor, one might naturally think that there would also be benefits to establishing a similar sort of anchor for the maximum level of employment. But that thought would be incorrect. In particular, although the Federal Reserve can determine and achieve the long-run average rate of inflation in keeping with its mandate of price stability, the level of maximum sustainable employment isnotsomething that can be chosen by the Federal Reserve becausenocentral bank can control the level of real economic activity or employment over the longer run. As I've already emphasized, monetary policy can certainly help improve the maximum sustainable employment of the economy by maintaining low and predictable inflation. But any attempt to use stimulative monetary policy to maintain employment above its long-run sustainable level will inevitably lead to an upward spiral of inflation and therefore will actually undermine the productive capacity of the economy, with severe adverse consequences for household income and employment. Indeed, the level of maximum sustainable employment is primarily driven by the fundamental structure of the economy, including factors such as demographics, people's preferences, the efficiency of labor markets, the characteristics of the tax code, and so forth. And many policies outside the control of the Fed can have a significant effect on the efficiency of the economy and hence on the maximum sustainable level of employment. Another crucial challenge in implementing the dual mandate is that the level of maximum sustainable employmentcannotbe directly observed and is subject to considerable uncertainty. Indeed, economists do not even agree on the economic theory or econometric methods that should be used to measure the level of maximum sustainable employment. This challenge would be less formidable if the structure of the U.S. economy remained fairly constant over a sufficiently long period of time. In that case, a reasonably good estimate of the natural unemployment rate--the unemployment rate consistent with maximum sustainable employment--could be obtained from the actual long-term average rate of unemployment, and one could similarly estimate the path of potential output by fitting a trend to actual gross domestic product (GDP) data. In fact, however, such estimates can be highly misleading because the structure of the U.S. economy is highly dynamic and evolves almost continuously over time. In particular, over the past few decades the natural unemployment rate and the path of potential output have apparently moved around quite substantially. If we do not recognize the potential for such shifts, they can pose serious pitfalls for the conduct of monetary policy. It is difficult to gauge these structural changes even with the benefit of hindsight, and it is even more difficult to recognize such developments when they occur. For example, most economists now agree that the natural unemployment rate shifted upward in the late 1960s and that potential output growth shifted downward after 1970. However, perhaps because these shifts were not generally recognized until much later, monetary policy in the 1970s seems to have been aimed atunsustainablelevels of output and employment, and hence policymakers may have unwittingly contributed to a series of boom-bust cycles as well as accelerating inflation that reached double digits by the end of the decade. And although subsequent monetary policy tightening was successful in bringing inflation back under control, the toll was a severe recession in 1981-82, which pushed up the unemployment rate to around 10 percent. The opposite problem occurred in the second half of the 1990s, when the common view among economists was that the natural rate of unemployment was near 6 percent. When the actual unemployment rate dropped close to 4 percent, and the economy was growing at a rate that many economists viewed as unsustainable, there were widespread calls for the Fed to raise interest rates to prevent an acceleration in inflation. Under Chairman Greenspan's leadership, however, the Federal Reserve resisted these views because it did not see inflation pressures developing and questioned whether the common estimate of the natural rate of unemployment was correct. The result was that the Fed did not tighten monetary policy, and the economy reaped the benefits of the new economy: very low levels of unemployment and a modest decline in the inflation rate. Attempting to anchor a particular rate of growth of output and employment in the longer term could therefore lead to seriously flawed policies. As I have already noted, an attempt by the Fed to achieve growth that is higher than the underlying growth rate of productive capacity would lead to unnecessary fluctuations of employment and inflation. And trying to achieve growth that is lower than the economy's true potential growth rate would create unnecessary unemployment and generate deflationary pressures that would subsequently have to be reversed. Given the possible pitfalls of trying to anchor the level of output or employment, what is the best way for a central bank to minimize deviations of employment from its maximum sustainable level? To be sure, central banks need to form some views about the economy's potential to produce on a sustained basis. After all, as I have already noted, the amount of slack in the economy is a key determinant of inflation. But, rather than focusing on fixed estimates of potential output or the natural rate of unemployment, central banks should take an eclectic approach in assessing the overall balance of economic activity relative to productive capacity. In other words, in pursuing the dual mandate, the central bank should recognize that a wide variety of indicators drawn from labor, product, and financial markets provide information about the overall balance of supply and demand in the economy. In addition, central banks should use information from various price indicators to tell them whether the economy is overheating or running well below productive capacity. In some circumstances, a temporary tradeoff between the two elements of the dual mandate may exist. Unforeseen shocks to the economy--an adverse supply shock, for example--might lead to inflation that is temporarily above levels consistent with price stability at the same time that employment is growing more slowly than its maximum sustainable pace. In such a situation, returning inflation too quickly to levels consistent with price stability might unnecessarily exacerbate the economic weakness. Instead, while restoring price stability remains critical, the central bank should do so at a pace that does not do undue harm to the economy. Finally, central banks should respond aggressively to output and employment fluctuations on those (hopefully rare) occasions when the economy is very far below any reasonable measure of its potential. In this case, errors in measuring potential output or the natural rate of unemployment are likely to be swamped by the large magnitude of resource gaps, so it is far clearer that expansionary policy is appropriate. Furthermore, taking such actions need not threaten the central bank's credibility in its pursuit of price stability. It should be clear from my remarks today that although as a Federal Reserve official I am legally obligated to fulfill the dual mandate, I am actually an enthusiastic supporter. The best way to achieve the mandate is for the Federal Reserve to have a strong commitment to a nominal anchor to promote price stability, but with a focus on keeping employment as close as possible to its maximum sustainable level. Footnotes 1.I want to thankAndrew Levin, Brian Madigan, and Spencer Dale for their extremely helpful comments on and assistance with this speech.Return to text 2.Alan Greenspan (1988),statement before the Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs (746 KB PDF), U.S. Senate, July 13.Return to text 3.Two other important factors are import prices, which are determined by world market prices and exchange rates, and relative energy prices, such as the price of oil. However, a central bank has no control over world market or relative oil prices, and so adding these factors into the analysis does not change the basic conclusion here.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Bonnie C. Milne, a former employee and institution-affiliated party of First Interstate Bank, Casper, Wyoming. Ms. Milne, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order due to her alleged participation in violations of law, unsafe and unsound banking practices, and breaches of fiduciary duty to the Bank and its customers in connection with her embezzlement of $20,625 from the Bank. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Cheryl McMillan, a former cashier and institution-affiliated party of the Bank of Durango, Durango, Colorado. Ms. McMillan, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order due to her alleged participation in violations of law, unsafe and unsound banking practices, and breaches of fiduciary duty to the Bank and its customers in connection with an alleged embezzlement from the Bank. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Tracy Schroeder, a former branch manager and institution-affiliated party of First Interstate Bank, Bozeman, Montana. Ms. Schroeder, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order due to her alleged participation in violations of law, unsafe and unsound banking practices, and breaches of fiduciary duty to the Bank and its customers in connection with her alleged embezzlement of $34,632 from the Bank and falsification of the Bank’s books and records. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday requested public comment on proposed amendments to five consumer financial services and fair lending regulations (Regulations B, E, M, Z, and DD) to clarify the requirements for providing consumer disclosures in electronic form. In 2001, the Board published interim final rules to establish uniform standards for the electronic delivery of disclosures. However, the mandatory compliance date for these rules was later lifted and institutions are not required to comply with the interim final rules. Since that time, the Board has not taken further action with respect to the interim final rules in order to allow electronic disclosure practices to continue to develop without regulatory intervention and to allow the Board to gather further information about these practices. The proposal issued for comment today would simplify the Board’s rules by (1) withdrawing certain portions of the 2001 interim final rules that restate or cross-reference provisions of the Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act (E-Sign Act) and accordingly are unnecessary; (2) withdrawing provisions of the interim rules that may impose undue burdens on electronic banking and commerce and may be unnecessary for consumer protection; and (3) retaining certain provisions of the interim final rules that provide guidance on the use of electronic disclosures. The proposal would also implement certain provisions of the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005, which mandates certain disclosures for online credit card solicitations. The comment period ends sixty days after publication of the attached notices in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. Federal Register NoticesRegulation B (117 KB PDF)Regulation E (98 KB PDF)Regulation M (153 KB PDF)Regulation Z (221 KB PDF)Regulation DD (157 KB PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve’s public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur.
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At The Levy Economics Institute of Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York Thank you for inviting me to participate in this conference and offer my views on prospects for the U.S. economy. I should note that the opinions I will express today are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). We are now almost 5-1/2 years into the current economic expansion. A slow start in 2002 was followed by three years of strong gains in real (that is, inflation adjusted) economic activity and a substantial decline in unemployment. Initially, monetary policy was very accommodative as the FOMC focused on providing support for the recovery and avoiding an unwelcome disinflation. From early 2003 to early 2006, real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at an annual rate of 3-1/2 percent--well above consensus estimates of its underlying sustainable rate--and the unemployment rate declined to 4-3/4 percent. Since the spring of 2006, however, the expansion of the U.S. economy appears to have been undergoing a transition to a more moderate and sustainable pace. Although such a transition will no doubt be marked by some bumps in the road, it represents a desired macroeconomic rebalancing that over the longer run can help ensure sustained non-inflationary growth. One of the fundamental factors underlying the deceleration in real activity is the lagged effect of the FOMC's removal of monetary policy accommodation between June 2004 and June 2006. Another source of the rebalancing is the substantial correction in housing markets that has been under way since last spring as the unrealistic expectations about home price appreciation that fueled the extended boom in homebuilding have been unwinding. Looking ahead, the most likely outcome for the coming quarters is, in my judgment, a continued moderate rate of economic expansion accompanied by some easing of pressures on resources. With inflation expectations contained, I would expect such an economic environment to foster a gradual slowing over time in the rate of core consumer price inflation. However, the actual path for economic activity and inflation could, at times, be uneven; and as is the case for all forecasts, it involves a number of risks and uncertainties on both the downside and the upside. Turning first to the prospects for economic activity, two particular areas have emerged recently that have heightened uncertainty about the near-term outlook. The first area is housing: Where do we stand in the housing adjustment, and what effect will recent developments in subprime lending have on that adjustment? The second area is business investment: How should we interpret the incoming data showing that business spending on equipment and software has been weak this year? Regarding the housing adjustment, new single-family homes were started at an average annual rate of a bit under 1.2 million units in the first three months of this year--a pace roughly one-third below the unsustainable peak in new construction reached in mid-2005. At the beginning of the year, the ongoing cutbacks in starts of new homes, together with a lowered but fairly steady pace of home sales, were beginning to reduce the elevated backlog of new homes for sale. However, a further weakening in sales of new homes in January and February reversed some of the progress in reducing those inventories. As a result, cutbacks in new residential construction may well persist for a while. More recently, developments in the subprime mortgage market have raised some additional concern about near-term prospects for the housing sector. The sharp rise in delinquencies on variable-interest-rate loans to subprime borrowers and the exit of a number of subprime lenders from the market have led to tighter terms and standards on such loans. While these problems have caused undeniable hardship for many families and communities, spillovers to other segments of the mortgage market or to financial markets in general appear to have been minimal. Variable-interest-rate loans to subprime borrowers account for a bit less than 10 percent of all mortgages outstanding, and at this point the expected losses are relatively small. Moreover, because most subprime mortgages are securitized, the risks associated with these loans are spread widely. Banks and thrift institutions that hold mortgages are well-capitalized, and exposures of individual banks to possible subprime losses do not appear to be large. On the whole, some borrowers may find credit more difficult to obtain, but most borrowers are not likely to face a serious credit constraint. Indeed, I should note some positive news for the housing sector. Sales of existing homes strengthened a bit during January and February, and the Mortgage Bankers Association index of applications for home purchase suggests that demand has been fairly steady through early April. Also, mortgage rates are still at historically low levels, and mortgages to prime borrowers and fixed-rate mortgages to all classes of borrowers continue to show low rates of delinquency. The second major area of concern in the near-term outlook, and one that perhaps could pose noticeable downside risks, is business investment. Real outlays for new equipment and software weakened in the final quarter of 2006, and the recent data on orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods suggest that the softness in demand has extended into early this year. Part of the weakness can be clearly traced to a decline in demand for investment goods that are used heavily in residential construction. In addition, demand for goods used by the motor vehicle industry also has softened of late. But, demand for other types of non-high-tech business equipment also appears to have slowed recently, raising more fundamental questions about business views on the current and prospective environment for capital spending. To be sure, the pace of output has moderated, which typically would lead to some deceleration in capital spending. But the magnitude of the recent pullback seems to be greater than would be expected. Adding to the puzzle has been a weakening in demand for non-high-tech equipment even as financial conditions for investment have remained generally favorable. In particular, business balance sheets are strong, and although profits have slowed, profit margins remain elevated. Interest rates and credit spreads are relatively low, and firms appear to have ample ability to raise funds at a reasonable cost. The unwillingness of businesses to invest might be due to concerns about the prospects for long-term productivity growth and the expected rate of return on capital investment. Moreover, businesses may be anticipating a more pronounced deceleration in sales than would be consistent with the moderate expansion that I am expecting. Respondents to the Blue Chip Economic Indicators survey suggest that the recent reluctance to invest reflects greater uncertainty about the outlook for sales and earnings. If so, the continuation of a moderate economic expansion is likely over time to restore confidence and lead to a firming in business investment. Not all of the recent news on business spending has been to the downside, however. Demand for high-tech equipment appears to have picked up early this year after leveling off in the final quarter of 2006. Demand for computers, which was likely boosted by the introduction of the Windows Vista operating system, seems to be advancing at a healthy pace. Technological innovations--such as circuitry that boosts computer performance and lowers energy consumption--appear to be generating demand to upgrade equipment in data centers. In addition, major U.S. cable companies are forecasting a step-up in capital spending, and telecommunications carriers are planning a further expansion of fiber-optic networks. Although questions related to the prospects for housing and business spending appear to have widened the range of uncertainty about the near-term outlook, developments in other areas appear to support a continued moderate rate of economic expansion. Monthly gains in employment, while down some from last year's pace, remain solid; the average monthly increase in nonfarm payrolls over the first three months of this year was about 150,000, compared with about 190,000 in 2006. To date, job cutbacks have been centered in industries related to residential construction and manufacturing, with no indication--either from the monthly labor market reports or the weekly unemployment insurance data--of widening weakness. In addition, the incoming information on consumer spending has been consistent with a moderate pace of demand. The steady labor market has been generating income; and despite the ups and downs in energy prices, real disposable income has been trending up at about a 2-3/4 percent rate since early 2006. In addition, household credit quality remains generally favorable. As is the case for prime mortgages, delinquency rates on consumer loans are low. And despite the deceleration of house prices, the ratio of household net worth to disposable income is still elevated. Economic activity also should be supported by fiscal policy, which is likely to remain mildly stimulative this year. At the federal level, that stimulus is likely to continue to come from defense spending rather than from other outlays, which are expected to change little in real terms. Although defense outlays tend to be volatile from quarter to quarter, the available and expected appropriations should keep real defense spending on a moderate uptrend. At the state and local government level, the economic expansion in recent years has broadly restored fiscal health. Many of these governments have been spending at a moderate rate while also building their rainy-day funds, and this year they appear poised for further hiring and more construction spending. On the international trade front, recent readings on economic activity abroad have been positive, which suggests that the demand for U.S. exports of goods and services will continue to be solid. Prospects for further economic expansion in Europe and Japan appear good in the near term. And despite indications of moderation in some countries, the overall pace of economic activity in emerging economies, including China, appears to be strong. Turning now to the inflation outlook, in February the twelve-month change in core personal consumption expenditure (PCE) prices was 2.4 percent, and in March the year-over-year change in the core consumer price index (CPI) was 2.5 percent. Each of those readings was higher than the corresponding result for early 2006. Increases in market rent and in owners' equivalent rent account for much of that acceleration. Prices of consumer goods in both the PCE and CPI measures have been relatively flat for the past two years, while prices of services other than energy and shelter have been rising at about a 3 percent rate. My forecast of a gradual slowing in inflation reflects my view that making further progress in lowering inflation is desirable. Although I expect that core inflation will drift down, I recognize that achieving further reductions in inflation may take time. In the near term, the recent rebound in prices for gasoline and other petroleum-based goods is likely to put upward pressure on the costs of many non-energy goods and services. Moreover, the evolution of shelter costs, which have boosted core inflation over the past year, is difficult to predict. Here, my expectation is that as the supply of rental units increases and the market for owner-occupied housing stabilizes, the rise in rent will slow. Other concerns about prospects for inflation are related to developments on the supply side of the economy. Since last fall, the jobless rate has been hovering around 4 1/2 percent, a relatively low level by historical standards, and it fell to 4.4 percent this past month. With the labor market that tight, I am not surprised that our business contacts have been reporting shortages of workers in some occupations--both skilled and unskilled, depending on the region--and some associated wage pressures. To date, various measures of worker compensation are giving mixed signals on whether wages are accelerating. The narrowest measure, the average hourly earnings of production or nonsupervisory workers, shows a noticeable pickup in wage inflation from 3 percent in 2005 to around 4 percent more recently; another measure, hourly compensation in the nonfarm business sector rose in 2006 at close to 5 percent, also faster than a year earlier. But the employment cost index has been rising at a moderate 3 percent rate for the past two years. Whether a pickup in nominal labor compensation will lead to upward pressure on inflation will depend on several factors. Importantly, an acceleration in compensation might be offset by higher labor productivity; indeed, during most of this expansion, strong gains in labor productivity have checked the rise in unit labor costs. And, with profit margins wide, businesses might accommodate increases in labor compensation without passing them on to consumers in the form of higher prices. In these circumstances, gains in nominal compensation for workers would translate into gains in real compensation. So how is labor productivity doing? During the first three years of the current expansion, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose 3 percent per year; in the past two years, it has decelerated to 2 percent. I suspect that this slowdown does not represent a fundamental weakening in the longer-run trend, but is rather a normal cyclical transition from an above-trend rate of increase to a more sustainable rate. Of course, I also recognize a potential downside risk to the outlook for productivity, especially given the weakness in business investment that I noted earlier. Nonetheless, averaging through the entire expansion to date, the underlying rate of productivity advance still seems to be close to the 2-1/2 percent rate that has prevailed since the mid-1990s. More fundamentally, I believe that long-run inflation expectations remain a key determinant of the path of inflation. But what are the current expectations for long-term inflation? Unfortunately, that is not an easy question to answer. The results from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, readings on household opinion such as the Reuters/Michigan survey, and the spread between standard Treasury securities and Treasury inflation-protected securities--taken together--suggest that long-term inflation expectations are currently around 2 percent, although this guess is far from certain. Given my estimate of the current level of long-run inflation expectations as well as the likelihood of some easing of resource pressures in labor and product markets, I expect that core inflation will slow to around 2 percent over the next couple of years. Although I believe that inflation expectations will play a primary role in determining the course of inflation, I want to emphasize that neither economists nor policymakers understand the expectations-formation process very well. However, one aspect of expectations formation that we have come to regard as crucial is the credibility of monetary policy. Consistent with its dual mandate to foster maximum sustainable employment and price stability, the Fed must therefore continue to respond aggressively to shocks that have potentially persistent adverse effects on both inflation and real activity. And we need to monitor long-run inflation expectations closely to avoid losing credibility with the markets. In closing, I want to emphasize that the Federal Reserve will continue to play its part in ensuring the longer-run health of the economy by implementing policies designed to achieve its dual mandate. As you know, since last June the FOMC has left its target for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 percent. I recognize that uncertainties surrounding the economic outlook have increased recently, and I remain concerned that the persistence of inflation at the recent elevated rate could have adverse consequences for economic performance. However, I continue to believe that the current stance of monetary policy is likely to foster sustainable economic expansion and a gradual ebbing in core inflation. As always, future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth as implied by incoming information.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Greater Washington Jump$tart Coalition financial education event, Washington, D.C. Good morning. I am pleased to be able to be here today, at the Greater Washington Jump$tart Coalition's inaugural event, to celebrate Financial Literacy Month 2007 and to say a few words about the importance of financial education. I join other Jump$tart partners as well as professionals from the fields of banking, finance, government, and law who will be speaking to nearly 2,000 public high school students about financial literacy. It is a special privilege to be with the students here today, the juniors and seniors of Washington's own Woodrow Wilson High School. You are ambassadors of your school and indeed of Washington, our nation's capital. I know that this is a school committed to academic excellence. As you think about the time, not so far away now, when you will leave Wilson High, I hope that you will resolve to keep, throughout your life, the habits of learning and of thinking for yourself that you have gained in your years here. As you think about your future, don't forget the importance of financial literacy. Although financial matters are probably not at the front of your minds today, the day will come when you will be responsible for managing your own or your family's budget or when you will find that you need to save to get the things you want--a college education, a new car, or even your own home. To achieve these personal goals and to build financial security, you will need to understand the fundamentals of budgeting, banking, saving, and investment. It is also essential that you know how to use--properly and responsibly--the many types of credit that will be at your disposal, such as credit cards. Later this morning, my colleagues from the Federal Reserve will be talking with you about how to manage your credit. Because credit has become such an integral part of our economy, and because there are so many sources and forms of credit available, much more financial sophistication is required today than when I attended high school. As a parent of two young adults myself, I believe that helping young people become financially literate is critical for their future economic well-being and should be a high priority for educators. In addition to celebrating Financial Literacy Month 2007, we are here today to celebrate the inaugural event of the Greater Washington, D.C., chapter of the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Finance. The Coalition is a national leader among organizations that work to improve the personal financial literacy of students from kindergarten to the university level. In particular, through its biennial survey of high school seniors, Jump$tart has brought increased attention to the issue of financial literacy among youth in the United States. The results of the surveys, which have shown that students' financial knowledge is often much less extensive than we would like, remind us of the need for continued efforts to help all students--as well as adults--obtain the skills they need to navigate today's increasingly complex financial markets. This new chapter of Jump$tart has joined forces with over fifty individuals, businesses, and not-for-profit, educational, and government organizations, including the Federal Reserve Board, to increase knowledge about personal finance among schoolchildren and young adults in the Greater Washington, D.C., region. The Federal Reserve is strongly committed to Jump$tart's mission and to working closely with the local Washington, D.C., chapter--as it does with the other Jump$tart chapters around the country through its Reserve Banks and Branches--to help achieve this mission. Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation of the teachers and staff of Wilson Senior High and the administrators of the Washington, D.C., public school district here today. It is your hard work and dedication to these students that will help guide them toward successful futures. There is no higher nor more worthy objective than preparing our young people for fulfilling and productive lives. To the students of Wilson Senior High, I wish you the best of luck in the future, and I especially want to congratulate the seniors who will be graduating at the end of this term. Lastly, a special thanks to the Greater Washington, D.C., chapter of the Jump$tart Coalition and their partners for their continued support and commitment to furthering the financial education of our youth. Thank you.