The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies on Friday announced the availability of the 2007 list of distressed or underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies in which bank revitalization or stabilization activities will receive Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) consideration as “community development.” As in past releases, the 2007 list will incorporate a one-year lag period for geographies that were designated as distressed or underserved in 2006, but were not designated as such in the 2007 release. Geographies subject to the one-year lag period are eligible to receive consideration for community development activities for the twelve months following publication of the 2007 list. "Distressed nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies" and "underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies" are designated by the agencies in accordance with their CRA regulations. The criteria used to designate these areas are available on the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) web site (www.ffiec.gov/cra). The 2007 list and lists from previous years can be found on the FFIEC web site, along with data source information used to generate the list of distressed or underserved geographies for each year.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by First Busey Corporation, Urbana, to merge with Main Street Trust, Inc. and thereby acquire its subsidiary bank, Main Street Bank & Trust, both of Champaign, all in Illinois. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application of First State Bank, Conway, to establish a branch at 6039 Heber Spring Road West, Quitman, both in Arkansas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application by Huntington Bancshares Incorporated, Columbus, to acquire Sky Financial Group, Inc., Bowling Green, and its subsidiary bank, Sky Bank, Salineville, all of Ohio. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the approval of the application of The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation to become a bank holding company by merging with The Bank of New York Company, Inc., both in New York, New York, and Mellon Financial Corporation, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and thereby acquiring The Bank of New York, also in New York, and Mellon Bank, N.A., also in Pittsburgh.Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the approval of the application of The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation to become a bank holding company by merging with The Bank of New York Company, Inc., both in New York, New York, and Mellon Financial Corporation, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and thereby acquiring The Bank of New York, also in New York, and Mellon Bank, N.A., also in Pittsburgh. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the approval of an application by Victoria Mutual Building Society, Kingston, Jamaica, to establish a representative office in Miami, Florida. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today issued the host state loan-to-deposit ratios that the banking agencies will use to determine compliance with section 109 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994. These ratios update data released on June 13, 2006. In general, section 109 prohibits a bank from establishing or acquiring a branch or branches outside of its home state primarily for the purpose of deposit production. Section 109 also prohibits branches of banks controlled by out-of-state bank holding companies from operating primarily for the purpose of deposit production. Section 109 provides a process to test compliance with the statutory requirements. The first step in the process involves a loan-to-deposit ratio screen that compares a bank's statewide loan-to-deposit ratio to the host state loan-to-deposit ratio for banks in a particular state. A second step is conducted if a bank's statewide loan-to-deposit ratio is less than one-half of the published ratio for that state or if data are not available at the bank to conduct the first step. The second step requires the appropriate banking agency to determine whether the bank is reasonably helping to meet the credit needs of the communities served by the bank's interstate branches. A bank that fails both steps is in violation of section 109 and is subject to sanctions by the appropriate banking agency. The updated host state loan-to-deposit ratios are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the availability of an online Mortgage Comparison Calculator that consumers can use to compare monthly mortgage payments and the amount of equity they will build for up to six types of fixed- and adjustable-rate mortgages. The calculator, which can be accessed athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/apps/mortcalc/, is one of several resources the Board provides to help consumers make informed decisions when shopping for home loans.“We have created a tool that will allow consumers to look ahead to see how much equity they will build and what their mortgage payments might be three, five, seven or ten years down the road with different mortgage products,” said Federal Reserve Board Governor Randall S. Kroszner. The calculator will make it easy for consumers to compare monthly payments and equity accumulation among 30-year and 15-year fixed-rate mortgages, interest-only fixed-rate mortgages, adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs), interest-only ARMs, and payment-option ARMs. “These comparisons should encourage more consumers to shop around and compare mortgage offers,” Kroszner said.In addition to identifying the types of mortgages they are considering, consumers are asked to provide information on home value, primary mortgage amount, second mortgage amount (optional), private mortgage insurance (PMI) premium (optional), estimated interest rates, and expectations about future interest rates (for adjustable-rate mortgages). The calculator estimates the loan balance in future years, home equity in future years, initial monthly payment (principal and interest), future monthly payments with no interest rate change, and future monthly payments with an interest rate change.The user-friendly calculator includes a mortgage shopping worksheet, a glossary of mortgage terms, and links to the Board’s other consumer education resources on mortgages.
The Federal Reserve Board announced the panelists for its public hearing under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) on June 14, 2007. They include key players in the home mortgage market, including the subprime sector--lenders, brokers, secondary market participants, consumer advocacy and community development organizations, academics and researchers, and state regulators. "Although they play different roles, all of the panelists share a common goal: encouraging responsible mortgage lending for the benefit of individual consumers and the American economy as a whole," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Randall S. Kroszner, who will chair the hearing. Governor Kroszner will be joined by Sandra Braunstein, director of the Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, and Leonard Chanin, associate director. "Our main purpose is to gather information on how we might craft rules to stop fraud and abusive practices, but that are also sharply and clearly drawn to avoid the unintended consequence of restricting consumers' access to responsible subprime credit," Governor Kroszner said. Several state officials are expected to participate in the hearing and share their experiences with drafting laws and rules to combat predatory lending efficiently and effectively. The Board's agenda and list of panelists is attached. Agenda
The Federal Reserve Board announced Friday that it is seeking nominations for appointments to its Consumer Advisory Council. The Council advises the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under various consumer financial services laws and on other matters.The group meets in Washington, D.C., three times a year. Ten new members will be appointed to serve three-year terms beginning in January 2008. Nominations should include a résumé and the following information about nominees: Nominations should also include the complete name, organization name, title, address, telephone number, e-mail address, and fax number of the nominator. Letters of nomination with complete information, including a résumé for each nominee, must be received by August 24, 2007.Nominations not received by August 24 may not be considered. Electronic nominations are preferred.The appropriate form can be accessed at:http://www.federalreserve.gov/forms/cacnominationform.cfm If electronic submission is not feasible, the nominations can be mailed (not sent by facsimile) to Sheila Maith, Assistant Director and Community Affairs Officer, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC 20551.The Board's notice is attached. Federal Register Notice52 KB PDF|TEXT
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear today to discuss the accuracy of credit reports and the rules pertaining to furnishers of information to consumer reporting agencies ("furnisher rules") required under the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 (FACT Act), which amended the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). IntroductionThe accuracy of credit reports is vital because inaccuracies in credit reports can result in a consumer being denied credit or paying higher rates for credit. Inaccurate information can be introduced into credit reports by a variety of means, including mistakes in public records or data processing errors made by furnishers in connection with the information they provide. Other causes are the reporting of fraudulent accounts opened as a result of identity theft, the mixing or commingling of the files of consumers who have similar names or Social Security numbers, or data processing errors made by consumer reporting agencies in connection with the information they receive. Also, information that is correct at the time it is furnished is sometimes not updated in a timely manner. Furnishers and consumer reporting agencies share responsibility for ensuring the accuracy of credit reports.Prior to the FACT Act, the FCRA imposed duties on both consumer reporting agencies and furnishers with regard to the accuracy of information in credit reports. The FCRA’s existing dispute process allows consumers to contact consumer reporting agencies to dispute the accuracy of credit report information, and it requires a furnisher to assist in an investigation and correct any errors in the information furnished.Congress adopted the FACT Act in 2003 to enhance the accuracy of credit reports and improve the dispute process. Among other things, the FACT Act gives consumers the right to request free copies of their credit reports annually from each of the three nationwide credit bureaus. This tool makes it possible for consumers to play a more active role in ensuring the accuracy of their own credit reports.Several other provisions focus on the specific duties of furnishers to ensure the accuracy of the information they report to consumer reporting agencies and to strengthen the dispute process. Under section 312 of the FACT Act, the federal banking agencies1the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA), and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) (collectively "the agencies") must establish guidelines for use by furnishers to ensure the accuracy and integrity of the consumer information they report to a consumer reporting agency, and they must write regulations requiring furnishers to adopt reasonable policies and procedures to implement the guidelines. In addition, section 312 requires the agencies to identify the circumstances when a furnisher must investigate a consumer’s dispute about the accuracy of credit report information based on a complaint that comes to the furnisher directly from the consumer, rather than through a consumer reporting agency. The FACT Act also required the Board to issue a model notice for creditors’ use when notifying consumers about the furnishing of negative information to credit bureaus, which the Board published in final form in June 2004. Finally, the FACT Act requires certain studies relating to the accuracy of credit report information and the dispute process. The Board and the FTC jointly submitted a report to Congress in August 2006 regarding the dispute process study. The accuracy study was assigned to the FTC. The interagency rulemakings to develop the furnisher accuracy and integrity guidelines and direct dispute rules have not yet been completed.An advance notice of proposed rulemaking(ANPR) relating to these interagency rules was published in March 2006. The agencies are currently working to develop a proposal. Consumer Reporting in the United StatesThe consumer reporting system in the United States is based largely on the voluntary submission of information by creditors and others to three major nationwide consumer reporting agencies or credit bureaus--Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion. These credit bureaus collect information about consumers and sell the information in their files to creditors and others who have a permissible purpose under the FCRA to obtain and use the information. The databases of the three nationwide credit bureaus contain detailed information that is widely used to determine whether to grant consumers credit or insurance or whether to offer employment, rental housing, or other products and services to consumers, as well as the terms that may be offered to consumers.The credit reporting system also includes a number of smaller consumer reporting agencies that operate on a regional or local basis. These consumer reporting agencies typically contract for the right to house some or all of the consumer data that they own on the computer systems of one of the major credit bureaus. Some consumer reporting agencies specialize by collecting and maintaining data pertaining only to certain topics, such as employment history, residential or tenant history, medical records or payments, check writing histories, or insurance claims. The credit reporting business also includes "resellers" that buy consumer reports from one or more credit bureaus, add value to the consumer report (for example, by merging files from multiple credit bureaus), and resell to users who have a permissible purpose. For example, some resellers specialize in selling merged-file reports to mortgage lenders.Much of the information that consumer reporting agencies collect, maintain, and sell is furnished voluntarily by banks, credit unions, finance companies, insurance companies, doctors and hospitals, debt collectors, and landlords. However, as there is no requirement to furnish consumer information to consumer reporting agencies and since furnishers incur costs and obligations by participating in the credit reporting system, some potential furnishers decide not to submit consumer data to consumer reporting agencies. Moreover, not all furnishers provide the same type of information. Many report full account payment information to consumer reporting agencies (positive information when an account is current and negative information when an account is delinquent), but some report only negative information. This is particularly true for accounts related to medical, telecommunications, and utility debts. Some credit card issuers do not furnish data on consumers’ credit limits. Finally, some furnishers provide information to only one or two of the nationwide credit bureaus, while others may report only to one of the specialized consumer reporting agencies.The Importance of Accuracy in Consumer Reports Current Legal Requirements, Board Enforcement, and Industry PracticesExisting FCRA Responsibilities of FurnishersRecognizing the importance of data accuracy in credit reports, Congress imposed requirements on furnishers in the FCRA, as amended by the FACT Act, to ensure the accuracy of the data that are furnished to consumer reporting agencies and to require furnishers to investigate disputes about accuracy when notified by a consumer reporting agency about a dispute.Under the FCRA, a person may not furnish information about a consumer to any consumer reporting agency if the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the information is inaccurate. However, the FCRA provides that this standard does not apply to a furnisher that clearly and conspicuously provides consumers with an address for submitting notices of dispute. Nevertheless, if a consumer sends a dispute to that address challenging the accuracy of any information the furnisher has provided to a consumer reporting agency about the consumer, and the information is, in fact, inaccurate, the furnisher must not report the incorrect information to any consumer reporting agency in the future.In addition, the FCRA generally imposes the following obligations on furnishers that regularly and in the ordinary course of business furnish information to one or more consumer reporting agencies: Moreover, the FCRA generally requires any furnisher of information to a consumer reporting agency to do the following: Existing FCRA Dispute ProcessThe FCRA establishes a comprehensive dispute process that allows a consumer to dispute the accuracy or completeness of information in the consumer’s credit file with the consumer reporting agency that maintains the file. When the consumer reporting agency receives such a dispute, it must notify the furnisher. Both the furnisher and the consumer reporting agency have responsibilities under the FCRA for investigating and resolving the dispute. Duties of the Consumer Reporting Agency. If a consumer disputes the accuracy or completeness of any information in the consumer’s file, the consumer reporting agency must: Board Oversight of FurnishersThe Federal Reserve System examines state-member banks and other entities over which it has FCRA enforcement authority for compliance with the FCRA’s existing furnisher provisions. The OCC is responsible for enforcing the FCRA against national banks. The FDIC is responsible for enforcing the FCRA against state non-member banks. The OTS is responsible for enforcing the FCRA against thrifts. The NCUA is responsible for enforcing the FCRA against federal credit unions. The FTC is responsible for enforcing the FCRA against most other entities, including consumer reporting agencies, non-bank finance companies, state-chartered credit unions, utilities, retailers, and others.State-member banks will be cited for violating the law if Reserve Bank examiners find violations of the FCRA’s furnisher provisions. Between January 1, 2004, and May 1, 2007, examiners cited three banks for violations of section 623 of the FCRA. In each case, the bank failed to comply with the negative information notice requirement.The Federal Reserve System also investigates consumer complaints against state-member banks. The Reserve Banks have cited banks for violating the FCRA based on those complaints when warranted. The Board maintains a database of consumer complaints against state-member banks. Between January 1, 2004, and May 1, 2007, the Federal Reserve System received approximately 360 consumer complaints against state-member banks relating to the furnishing of inaccurate account information to consumer reporting agencies. For most of the complaints received, there was no violation of the FCRA. Four of the consumer complaints received during this period, however, revealed violations of the FCRA and prompted the Reserve Bank to cite the bank. These violations are in addition to the three violations noted above. Thus, during the forty-month period surveyed, the Federal Reserve System cited a total of seven violations of the furnisher provisions of the FCRA, three identified during bank examinations and four resulting from consumer complaints.In many cases in which there was no violation, the bank made an accommodation to the consumer to resolve the complaint. For example, in one case, the complaining consumer believed she had paid her account in full and closed it, but her credit report indicated that the account was delinquent. The Reserve Bank found that the consumer had paid the balance in full at one point, but found no evidence of a request to close the account. Unpaid fees continued to accrue on the account and therefore the delinquency remained on the consumer’s credit report. The bank agreed to waive the unpaid fees and close the account after it learned of the complaint. In approximately forty cases, the bank made an error and corrected the error. Of course, not every bank error constitutes a violation of the FCRA. For example, in one case, the consumer filed a complaint asserting that her credit card account was current and that the bank had erroneously reported to the credit bureau that her account was delinquent. The Reserve Bank’s investigation found that the bank had not updated its files to reflect the complaining consumer’s new address. Therefore, the consumer had not received periodic statements at her new address and, consequently, her account was past due. Because the bank made the error, it updated its files and instructed the credit bureaus to remove the negative information from the consumer’s account history.FACT Act Dispute StudyCompliance with Existing Dispute Responsibilities. The FACT Act required the Board and the FTC jointly to study the extent to which consumer reporting agencies and furnishers comply with the FCRA’s existing requirements to investigate disputes about the accuracy of credit reports. The Board and the FTC submitted their report (Dispute Study) to Congress in August 2006.6In preparing the Dispute Study, the Board solicited public comment about the practices of furnishers under the existing dispute process.When a consumer reporting agency notifies a furnisher of information about receipt of a dispute from a consumer, the FCRA requires the notice to include all relevant information received from the consumer. The Dispute Study offers some insight into how the three nationwide credit bureaus typically provide information to the furnisher using a consumer dispute verification (CDV) form sent by mail or fax or an electronic automated consumer dispute verification (ACDV) form that is prepared by the credit bureau. The nature of the dispute is reflected in the form, with one or two codes (out of a total of twenty-six codes) typically used to summarize the nature of the consumer’s dispute. If the credit bureau deems it necessary, a narrative summary is provided to supplement the dispute codes.The nationwide credit bureaus typically do not forward to the furnisher documents provided by the consumer to support his or her claim. Consumer groups that provided comments to the Board and the FTC as part of the Dispute Study criticized this practice as a flaw in the current dispute process and as inconsistent with the statute’s requirement for the credit bureau to provide "all relevant information" received from the consumer to the furnisher. The nationwide credit bureaus, on the other hand, have taken the position that providing to the furnisher a code that summarizes the consumer’s dispute satisfies the requirement to provide "all relevant information" to the furnisher.Direct Disputes.The Dispute Study also examined current practices of furnishers regarding disputes they receive directly from consumers about the accuracy of information reported to consumer reporting agencies. Most furnishers that commented reported that they investigate and attempt to resolve disputes received directly from consumers using procedures similar to those used for investigating disputes received through a consumer reporting agency, even though they are not currently required to do so. Some furnishers that commented reported that they provide or plan to provide a specific address or other information to enable consumers to initiate a dispute directly with them.Enforcement Actions and Complaints. As part of the Dispute Study, several banking agencies contributed data about enforcement actions and complaints. The Board and the FDIC looked at violations of the furnisher dispute provisions by state-chartered banks and found very few violations. In addition, the Board, FDIC, and OCC surveyed their complaint databases and found only a small number of complaints alleging that furnishers failed to properly reinvestigate information disputed by consumers.Recommendations. In the Dispute Study, the Board and the FTC did not make any recommendations for further legislative action related to the dispute process because some of the new FACT Act requirements on furnishers and consumer reporting agencies have only been implemented recently and others still need to be implemented. The Board and the FTC agreed that further legislative action would be premature.Status of the FACT Act RulemakingsThe FACT Act amended the FCRA to enhance the ability of consumers to combat identity theft, improve the accuracy of consumer reports, restrict the use of medical information in credit eligibility determinations, and allow consumers to exercise greater control regarding the type and amount of marketing solicitations they receive. Many provisions of the FACT Act are not self-executing, but require the issuance of implementing rules before taking effect. A number of these implementing rules must be developed on an interagency basis by the Board, the other federal banking agencies, the NCUA, the FTC, and, in one instance, the Securities and Exchange Commission.There are two reasons for the delay in completing the furnisher rules under section 312 of the FACT Act. One reason has to do with setting priorities. Given the number of rulemakings required under the FACT Act and the complexity of many of those provisions, the agencies had to set priorities. In setting priorities, the agencies were guided by two principles. The agencies gave priority to working first on those rulemakings for which Congress set a statutory deadline for completion, such as for the medical information rules. Congress set statutory deadlines for completing some, but not all, of the rulemakings, and did not set a statutory deadline for completing the interagency furnisher rulemakings. The agencies also gave priority to working on rulemakings that address areas where federal consumer protection law is less developed. For example, identity theft is a serious problem and federal consumer protections for identity theft are less developed than the consumer protections relating to furnisher responsibilities. Therefore, the agencies worked to develop the identity theft red flags provisions, which were proposed in August 2006, before turning to the furnisher rules.A second reason has to do with the interagency process itself. On the one hand, interagency rulemakings ensure that different perspectives are considered in developing a rule and that all agencies have a say in the outcome. On the other hand, the interagency rulemaking process generally is a less efficient way to develop new regulations. Frequently, it can be challenging to achieve a consensus among the different agencies involved in an interagency rulemaking. As a result, interagency rulemakings can take considerably longer to complete than rulemakings that are assigned to a single agency. In the case of the FACT Act, these challenges are compounded by the fact that we are not dealing with a single interagency rulemaking but with multiple interagency rulemakings.There are three rulemakings required by the FACT Act that pertain to the duties of furnishers. One of these rulemakings, which did not involve multiple agencies, was completed in 2004. The two interagency rulemakings dealing with furnishers under section 312 have not yet been completed. The status of each of these rulemakings is summarized below.Negative Information NoticeThe FACT Act requires a financial institution that furnishes negative information to a consumer reporting agency regarding credit extended to a customer to provide a notice to the customer about the furnishing of negative information. This provision applies to financial institutions that extend credit and regularly furnish information to nationwide consumer reporting agencies. For example, a financial institution must inform a customer that it has provided or may provide information about late payments, missed payments, or other defaults to credit bureaus. The statute requires the Board to prescribe a model disclosure that financial institutions may use to comply with this requirement. The Board fulfilled its statutory mandate by publishing amodel disclosurein theFederal Registerin June 2004, following notice and a period of public comment.Accuracy and Integrity GuidelinesThe FACT Act requires the agencies to establish and maintain guidelines for use by each furnisher regarding the accuracy and integrity of the consumer information that the furnisher provides to consumer reporting agencies. In addition, the agencies must prescribe regulations requiring furnishers to establish reasonable policies and procedures for implementing the accuracy and integrity guidelines. The agencies must consult and coordinate with one another so that, to the extent possible, the regulations published by each agency are consistent and comparable.Developing these regulations and guidelines is a complex task. In fact, Congress instructed the agencies to take a deliberative approach in developing the accuracy and integrity guidelines by specifically directing the agencies to: In March 2006, the agencies took the first step in this process by publishing an ANPR regarding the interagency furnisher rules (71Fed. Reg.14,419 (Mar. 22, 2006)). Two purposes of the ANPR were to gather information about the four elements the agencies must consider in developing the accuracy and integrity guidelines and to seek public input regarding reasonable policies and procedures for implementing the guidelines.Commenters on the ANPR identified certain furnisher activities that may compromise the accuracy and integrity of consumer reports. These activities include: Commenters also provided input on reasonable policies and procedures that furnishers should implement to ensure the accuracy and integrity of the information they provide to consumer reporting agencies. Suggestions included maintaining proper internal controls, training employees, conducting regular audits, using standardized reporting methods, requiring furnishers to review documents provided by the consumer, and requiring debt collectors and debt sellers to improve their practices.One challenge in developing the accuracy and integrity guidelines is to ensure that they address only those inaccuracies introduced into credit reports by furnisher actions, rather than by the actions of other parties. For example, some commenters on the ANPR noted that inaccuracies can result from the conversion or translation of furnished data by the consumer reporting agency using proprietary algorithms, even when the furnished data is accurate. In such cases, the consumer reporting agency would be the party responsible for introducing the inaccuracy, but the guidelines will not apply to them.Furnishers can do a number of things to improve the accuracy of the information they furnish to consumer reporting agencies. All furnishers should establish and implement policies and procedures to ensure the accuracy of the information that they furnish. Such policies and procedures may include implementing appropriate controls, training employees, and conducting regular audits of furnishing activities. As the 2003 and 2004 Board staff studies noted, the inaccurate, incomplete, or duplicative reporting of collection accounts by debt collectors is one particular area of concern. I expect these items to be addressed in the accuracy and integrity guidelines.Furnishers, however, cannot take full responsibility for improving the accuracy of credit reports. Consumer reporting agencies need to examine their policies and procedures to ensure that they are not introducing errors into credit reports, for example, through data translation or data conversion errors or through the mixing or commingling of information about two consumers. Errors can also exist in public records, such as bankruptcy court data, that consumer reporting agencies include in credit reports. Finally, consumers now have access to free annual copies of their credit reports from each of the nationwide credit bureaus. Consumers should obtain their free annual credit reports and check them for accuracy.Direct Dispute RegulationsThe FACT Act requires the agencies jointly to prescribe regulations that identify the circumstances under which a furnisher is required to reinvestigate a dispute concerning the accuracy of information contained in a consumer report based on a direct request by the consumer. Development of this rule is also a complex task. As it did with the accuracy and integrity guidelines, Congress instructed the agencies to take a deliberative approach in developing these regulations by specifically directing the agencies to weigh the following considerations: Another purpose of the March 2006 ANPR was to gather information with regard to each of the four considerations that the agencies must weigh when promulgating the direct dispute rules. Commenters on the ANPR had a variety of views about when furnishers should be required to investigate alleged errors in credit reports based on direct communication from the consumer.Many industry commenters believed that there were few, if any, circumstances in which furnishers should be required to investigate direct disputes. Some believed that disputes initiated through a consumer reporting agency tend to be handled more quickly and are less prone to error. Others believed that having a single point of contact is more efficient for consumers who find multiple errors on their credit reports. Finally, others noted that furnishers are not equipped to resolve certain types of errors, such as errors involving commingled account information or mixed files.On the other hand, some industry commenters suggested that investigations of direct disputes should be required only in connection with the most complicated types of disputes, such as those alleging fraud or identity theft. According to industry commenters, financial institutions generally investigate disputes received directly from consumers even though the FCRA currently does not require them to do so.Consumer group commenters said that furnishers should be required to investigate direct disputes. These commenters noted that most furnishers already have obligations under other laws to investigate disputes received from consumers regarding many of their major product categories, such as credit cards and mortgages. These commenters also believed that a direct dispute rule would mitigate problems that arise when furnishers either do not receive, or receive but fail to consider, documentation provided by the consumer to the consumer reporting agency.One challenge for the agencies in developing direct dispute rules is to determine when direct disputes would provide benefits to consumers, such as improved consumer report accuracy and expedited dispute resolution, without imposing undue costs or burdens on furnishers and the consumer reporting system. For example, a system in which consumers routinely submit duplicate disputes to both furnishers and consumer reporting agencies would likely impose undue costs and burdens on furnishers and the consumer reporting system. A complicating factor is the fact that in many cases a consumer who discovers an inaccuracy in his or her credit report may not know whether the furnisher or the consumer reporting agency caused the error.ConclusionCredit report accuracy is vital because inaccuracies can result in a consumer being denied credit or paying higher rates for credit. Responsibility for ensuring accuracy must be shared by furnishers and consumer reporting agencies. Consumers can also play an active role by obtaining free copies of their credit reports annually and checking them for accuracy. The existing FCRA standards that apply to furnishers regarding the accuracy of credit report information and the investigation of disputes provide meaningful protections for consumers. However, improvements to the furnisher rules can and should be made where appropriate. The Board and the Reserve Banks enforce the existing FCRA furnisher standards against state-member banks through the examination process and assist consumers in resolving complaints about the reporting of inaccurate information to consumer reporting agencies. To supplement these important consumer protections, the Board is committed to working with the other agencies to complete the interagency furnisher rulemakings as expeditiously as possible. Footnotes 1.The federal banking agencies are the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Board), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS).Return to text 2.Robert B. Avery, Raphael W. Bostic, Paul S. Calem, and Glenn B. Canner,An Overview of Consumer Data and Credit Reporting, Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 89, at 47-73 (Feb. 2003) (2003 Board staff study); Robert B. Avery, Paul S. Calem, Glenn B. Canner, and Shannon C. Mok,Credit Report Accuracy and Access to Credit, Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 90, at 297-322 (Summer 2004) (2004 Board staff study).Return to text 3.Consumer Federation of America and National Credit Reporting Association,Credit Score Accuracy and Implications for Consumers(Dec. 17, 2002), athttp://www.consumerfed.org/pdfs/121702CFA_NCRA_Credit_Score_Report_Final.pdf(258 KB)Return to text 4.The FTC’s first and second interim reports to Congress regarding this ongoing study are available athttp://www.ftc.gov/reports/FACTACT/FACT_Act_Report_2006.pdf(34 KB) andhttp://www.ftc.gov/reports/facta/041209factarpt.pdf(1.1 MB)Return to text 5.2003 Board staff study; 2004 Board staff study.Return to text 6.Report to Congress on the Fair Credit Reporting Act Dispute Process(August 2006) (hereafter "Dispute Study").Return to text
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Madam Chair Maloney, Ranking Member Gillmor, members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve Board's May 23, 2007, proposal to revise the credit card disclosures required by current Truth in Lending Act (TILA) regulations. The Board'sproposed revisions to Regulation Z, which implements TILA, also apply to other revolving credit accounts not secured by a residence. However, I will focus my remarks on credit cards, the subject of this hearing and by far the most common form of open-end accounts that are not home-secured. Many more households have obtained credit cards since the Board last reviewed TILA regulations comprehensively in 1981. In the early 1980s, less than half of American families had at least one general purpose credit card (43 percent in 1983), and now close to three quarters have at least one (71 percent in 2004). The increase was sharpest among lower-income families. From 1983 to 2004, the share of families in the lowest income quintile that hold a credit card jumped from 11 percent to 37 percent. Not only are more consumers holding credit cards, consumers are using their cards more. Total charges on credit cards increased by about four times from 1991 to 2004 alone.1 Growth in credit card use is explained in part by consumers switching from other forms of credit such as installment loans. Growth has also been enhanced by changes in consumer preferences related to the convenience and security of using card forms of payment rather than cash. Another substantial contributor has been the development of credit scoring and risk-based pricing, which has increased use of credit cards by consumers who traditionally lacked access because of poor or limited credit histories. As credit cards have become more commonplace, they also have become more complicated. Even a relatively simple credit card account is more complex than the fixed-payment installment loan it may have replaced. Moreover, most credit cards can no longer be described as relatively simple. Once, a card may have allowed the user to make purchases or obtain cash advances and applied a single annual percentage rate, or APR, to each feature. Fees were limited to a fee for cash advances, an annual fee on the account, and perhaps a fee if the consumer paid late. Today, a card may also offer balance transfers and treat different classes of purchases and cash advances as different features, each with its own APR. These APRs adjust much more frequently to respond to changes in the market or to changes in a borrower's credit risk profile. The typical card no longer has an annual fee, but it has many other fees tied to a variety of features, or to requirements of the credit agreement, or to a growing number of optional services. All of these developments have joined to produce the seeming paradox that credit cards are both widely used and widely criticized. The Board is keenly aware of concerns over the fairness and transparency of card marketing and account terms. There is, for example, a concern that issuers advertise low introductory rates while downplaying that these rates can increase sharply. Observers worry that the varied reasons that rates can increase, sometimes by a factor of two or three, are not made clear when the consumer applies for the card, starts to use it, or builds up a substantial balance. Further, there are concerns that issuers' methods of calculating interest, such as the ways they choose to allocate customers' payments to different balances, are confusing or not clearly disclosed. More broadly, the presence in the market of terms seemingly unfavorable to consumers appears to some to indicate that the market is not fully competitive. The Board's Goals and Process The goals of our proposed revisions to credit card disclosures are to aid consumer decisionmaking and improve competition. More effective disclosures make information about terms and pricing easier for consumers to obtain and understand. When that happens, individual consumers are less likely to fall into "traps for the unwary" and are more able to choose products that offer the best combination of features and pricing to meet their personal financial needs. Better dissemination of information about credit card terms and pricing also enhances competition among credit card issuers, which, in turn, helps generate products that consumers want. To achieve these goals, the Board's proposal seeks to ensure that consumers receive key information about the costs of credit card transactions in ways they can understand, in formats they can use, and at times when it is most helpful. To help us craft a proposal to meet these specific objectives, we considered the traditional sources: public input we received in over250 comment letters, available sources of data and information, and our own long experience implementing TILA. We also considered what consumers, themselves, had to say. As part of extensive consumer testing, we interviewed consumers individually about their use and understanding of different disclosures. Consumers told us what information they find useful when making credit decisions and what information they ignore. We learned which words and formats for presenting information promote understanding and which do not. These lessons are reflected in a myriad of preliminary judgments we have made about appropriate disclosure content, format, and timing. The judgments required were not always clear-cut. Frankly, it is sometimes difficult to determine which transaction terms are most important because consumers use credit cards in many different ways. It is also difficult to determine how much information about those terms is enough; what information should be highlighted, and what should be disclosed less prominently; what information should be disclosed early on in the transaction, and what can be reserved for later. The Board also must balance a rule's specificity, which makes disclosures more consistent and reduces the risk of non-compliance, with its flexibility, which reduces operational burdens and ensures that disclosures can be adapted to changes in credit products and practices. In addition, the Board tried to ensure that creditor compliance and operational burdens are justified by the expected benefits to consumers and competition, and to reduce existing burdens if they are not warranted. Developing effective credit card disclosures is particularly challenging because of the complicated and dynamic nature of the product. First, explaining the effective cost of credit before the consumer uses the card is difficult because key elements affecting the cost, such as whether the consumer will pay off balances regularly or carry balances that incur finance charges, are unknown. So TILA requires disclosures that provide consumers several terms that, together, determine the effective cost of credit: the periodic rate and nominal APR, other charges such as fixed and minimum fees, the grace period, and the balance calculation method. Clearly and simply explaining what these terms mean and how collectively they determine the cost of credit is difficult. Second, effectively disclosing credit card pricing becomes more difficult as credit card pricing grows more complex with the spread of risk-based pricing and penalty pricing and the "unbundling" of the price of a credit card into many different types of rates and fees. Clearly explaining costs contingent on future events that might seem remote when disclosures are made and promoting awareness of the total cost--not just component costs--pose additional challenges. Third, credit card pricing and features will continue to change, which means that we must try to craft disclosure requirements that work today and as products change. The Board's Proposal Taking all of this into account, the Board has developed a comprehensive proposal to revise Regulation Z that includes the following specific elements: We are committed to providing the public a meaningful opportunity to evaluate and comment on these and other elements of the proposal, most of which are detailed inAppendix I. The Board has posted to its web site alengthy report (7.7 MB PDF)of its consumer testing, which forms the basis for major elements of the proposal, and has explained the reasons for the proposal in some detail in over 300 pages of "supplementary information." The public has four months tosubmit comment letters, which the Board expects will contain many useful responses and suggestions. I want to say more about two elements of the proposal that we expect will elicit vigorous comment. The first is the proposed new notification requirement when rates are raised. With some exceptions, the current regulation requires that notice be mailed fifteen days before a rate increase takes effect. The Board is concerned that this notice can leave consumers too little time to react and possibly to shop for alternative sources of credit or pay off the existing credit card balance under existing terms. Further, one of the current exceptions to the fifteen-day notice requirement is for rate increases that are penalties (for example, for exceeding the credit limit). The Board believes that consumers will not necessarily anticipate penalty-based rate increases when the penalty was disclosed in credit agreements they received months, or even years, earlier. Thus, the Board has proposed to lengthen the notice period for a rate increase to forty-five days and require advance notification of penalty-based rate increases as well. In practice, consumers would have the benefit of more than a month to pursue their options, and creditors would forego collecting some interest revenue. The Board wants to receive comments addressing whether the costs are justified by the benefits. The two alternative proposals concerning the effective APR on the periodic statement also are expected to elicit vigorous comment. The effective APR reflects the cost of interest and certain other finance charges imposed during the statement period. As an example, a cash advance carries an effective APR that reflects both interest assessed on the balance in the billing period and any fee charged by the creditor for the cash advance. The effective APR can be quite high, often much higher than the nominal APR, in part because it amortizes the cost of credit, including fees, over one month. Although consumer groups argue that the resulting "sticker shock" helps consumers make better credit shopping and account management decisions, creditors argue that it confuses consumers and misleads them to think the cost of credit is higher than it is. Consumer testing conducted for the Board suggests that many consumers have a limited understanding, if any, of the effective APR, but it also suggests that clearer presentation of the disclosure can improve understanding. Thus, the proposal seeks to present the effective APR more clearly to consumers with more straightforward terminology and better formatting that promotes understanding. In addition, the proposal seeks to improve consumer understanding and reduce creditor uncertainty by specifying more clearly than the present regulation which fees are to be included in the effective APR. However, because of inherent limitations of the calculation--such as the need to assume the repayment period--and continued concern that adequate consumer understanding may be difficult to achieve, the Board is also seeking comment on an alternative proposal to eliminate the disclosure. When evaluating these two alternatives, and any others the public comments might suggest, the Board will consider the comments as well as the results of additional consumer testing. Conclusion Madam Chair, in closing, let me emphasize the Federal Reserve's commitment to ensuring that consumers get key information about credit card terms in ways they can understand, in formats they can use, and at times when it is most helpful. We appreciate efforts in the Congress and among consumer groups and the credit card industry to ensure that disclosure practices are in line with the needs of consumers. As my testimony this morning indicates, more complex pricing and continuous change in the marketplace make the task of writing rules for effective disclosure challenging. Nevertheless, the combination of extensive review, substantial public input, and systematic consumer testing has enabled us to propose changes that we believe will further the original goals of the Truth in Lending Act to promote economic stability and competition through the informed use of credit. I look forward to our continuing efforts in this regard, and I am happy to address any questions you might have. Footnotes 1.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2006),Report to the Congress on Practices of the Consumer Credit Industry in Soliciting and Extending Credit and their Effects on Consumer Debt and Insolvency (94 KB PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System), tables 3 and 6.Return to text Summary of Proposed Changes to the Federal Reserve Board's Regulation Z The following summary is organized according to the major disclosures required under Regulation Z. For more information, see theFederal Register noticethe Board approved on May 23, 2007. Advertisements Regulation Z requires that advertisements that contain certain information about the cost of a loan disclose additional information to give the consumer a fuller picture of the cost. The regulation also requires that terms advertised actually be available. Advertising discounted rates. Under a proposal that would implement a Bankruptcy Act requirement, creditors that advertise a discounted initial annual percentage rate (APR) in connection with an application or solicitation would have to place the term "introductory" or "intro" near each mention of that rate. Close to the first mention, creditors would disclose prominently the introductory rate's duration and the higher rate that would apply afterwards. Creditors would also disclose, in the "Schumer box," the conditions under which consumers could lose the discount prematurely (e.g., if the consumer pays late). Advertising "fixed" rates. Consumer testing indicated that many consumers believe that a rate advertised as "fixed" will not change and do not understand that "fixed" may only mean that the rate does not vary based on changes in an index or formula. Under the proposal, an advertisement may refer to a rate as "fixed" only if the advertisement specifies a period during which the rate cannot increase for any reason (and the agreement does not give the creditor the right to increase it during that period), or if the rate will not increase while the plan is open. Advertising minimum payments. Consumers commonly are offered the option to finance the purchase of goods or services (such as appliances or furniture) by establishing an open-end credit plan, which may or may not be accessed by a credit card. These offers often advertise monthly minimum payments associated with the purchase. Under the proposal, advertisements stating a minimum monthly payment for an open-end credit plan to finance the purchase of goods or services must state, as prominently as the minimum payment, the time it would take to pay the balance and the total amount the consumer would pay if the consumer made only minimum payments. Credit Card Applications and Solicitations; the "Schumer box" Under Regulation Z, credit card issuers are required to provide information about key costs and terms with their applications and solicitations in the form of a table often referred to as the "Schumer box." The table is intended to help consumers focus on the most important terms when comparing offers and deciding whether to apply for a credit card account. A model of the proposed new Schumer box is attached. Format. Consumer testing showed that the basic format of the Schumer box, the vertical presentation of information in a tabular format with headings on the left-hand side, is quite effective. Testing also suggested, however, that reorganizing the information, adding certain new information, and removing other information would make the box more effective in disclosing today's more complex pricing of credit cards. The proposed new Schumer box reflects these lessons. For example, consistent with testing findings, it separates the box into two parts, "interest rates and interest charges" and "fees." In the first part, it presents each major type of APR, such as a cash advance APR and a penalty APR, in a separate row instead of grouping them under the single heading "other APRs." The fee section divides fees into major categories, such as transaction fees and penalty fees; today these fees may appear below the box, where testing confirms consumers do not readily notice them. Cross-references between the interest and fees sections were found to help ensure that consumers understand that both types of costs can apply to the same transaction. The proposed new Schumer box also incorporates graphic techniques such as a minimum font size of ten points, judicious bolding of text, and vertical alignment of key numbers. Other changes to the content and format of the Schumer box are discussed below. Rates based on creditworthiness. A creditor may disclose at solicitation a range of APRs or several discrete APRs because it will determine a particular applicant's rate based on an evaluation of creditworthiness. The proposal would require the creditor to disclose in simple terms, tested with consumers, that the rate the applicant receives would be based on the applicant's creditworthiness. Adjustable rates. Currently, if an application or solicitation offers a variable APR, the creditor must disclose inside the Schumer box the index or formula and the margin used to determine the rate. Additional details, such as how often the rate may change, must be disclosed outside the box. Consumer testing indicated that few consumers use details such as the index and margin when shopping for a card and, moreover, that consumers may be distracted or confused by such details. Under the proposal, information about variable APRs would be reduced to a single phrase indicating the APR varies "with the market," along with a reference to the type of index, such as "Prime." Details about the rate's determination would continue to be disclosed to consumers at account opening. Fees. Participants in consumer testing often did not notice fees if they were disclosed outside the Schumer box, as is common today. The proposal requires card issuers to disclose inside the box the most common penalty fees, namely, fees for paying late, exceeding a credit limit, or making a payment that is returned. The fee disclosure must also refer the consumer to the penalty rate if, for example, paying late could also trigger the penalty rate. The most common transaction fees, such as cash advance fees and balance transfer fees, also would be disclosed inside the box. Penalty pricing. The proposal would make several improvements to the Schumer box to increase consumers' understanding of default, or penalty, pricing. Currently, credit card issuers must disclose inside the box the APR that will apply in the event of the consumer's default. However, they must disclose the actions that may trigger the penalty APR outside the box, where, according to consumer testing, this information often goes unnoticed. Under the proposal, therefore, card issuers would be required to include inside the box the specific triggers of a penalty APR--such as paying late on the account. Creditors would also disclose the rate that will apply, the balances to which the penalty rate will apply, and the circumstances under which the penalty rate will expire or, if true, the fact that the penalty rate could apply indefinitely. The proposal would require card issuers to use the term "penalty APR" because testing demonstrated that some consumers misinterpret the term "default rate." Creditors can use the term "default" to refer to one late payment, but consumers sometimes understand "default" to imply a more serious breach, or to mean something else entirely. Payment allocation/loss of grace period. The proposal would add a new disclosure to the Schumer box about the effect on credit costs of creditors' payment allocation methods. It is common for a creditor to allocate payments first to low-rate balances such as promotional balance transfers. Consumers who make purchases at a higher rate will not be able to take advantage of any "grace period" on the higher-rate purchases until they pay off the entire lower-rate balance transfer, which they may not have intended to do until the promotional rate expired. Consumer testing indicated that consumers are often confused about this aspect of balance transfer offers; testing also indicated that a disclosure that is short and simple while accurate and complete is challenging to achieve. The proposal seeks to balance these objectives in a new disclosure that alerts consumers that they will pay interest on their purchases until they pay the transferred balance in full. Subprime accounts. Subprime credit cards, cards offered to consumers with low credit scores or with credit problems, sometimes have substantial fees associated with opening the account. Typically, these fees are billed to consumers on the first periodic statement, and can substantially reduce the amount of credit available to the consumer. For example, the initial fees on an account with a credit limit of $250 may reduce the available credit to less than $100. Consumers have complained that they were not aware that so little credit would be available to them. To address this concern, the proposal would require a card issuer offering a low credit limit and high initial fees or security deposits (25 percent or more of the minimum credit limit) to include in the Schumer box the amount of available credit the consumer would have after paying the fees or security deposit, assuming the consumer received the minimum credit limit. Account-Opening Disclosures Regulation Z requires creditors to disclose rates, charges, and related terms such as grace period and balance calculation method before the first transaction on the account. Consumers' rights and responsibilities in the case of unauthorized use or billing disputes must also be explained. Currently, Regulation Z imposes few format requirements on these disclosures and creditors typically integrate them with the cardholder agreement, which is usually dense and long. Account-opening summary table. The proposal requires creditors to include a table summarizing the most important terms in an easy-to-follow format, substantially similar to the Schumer box the consumer typically would have seen with the application. An example of this new table is attached. Fees. Under the current rules, a creditor must disclose any fee that is a "finance charge" or "other charge" in the written account-opening disclosures and generally has no obligation to disclose it again, unless the charge is increased. New fees added to the plan after account opening must be disclosed before they take effect and later if they increase. (Of course, after a fee is charged, it must appear on the periodic statement; disclosure at that stage is discussed later.) Creditors have sometimes had difficulty determining whether a particular fee is properly classified as a "finance charge" or "other charge," or as neither of these. Although the regulation and commentary give specific guidance, sometimes new services develop before the guidance can be updated. When that happens, creditors can find it difficult to determine if the fee for the service must be disclosed in writing at account opening (or before the fee takes effect, if a service is added later). This uncertainty can pose legal risks for creditors that act in good faith to comply with the law, and it can lead to inconsistent disclosure to consumers. Moreover, it is not clear that consumers benefit from requiring creditors to disclose every potential fee in writing and at account opening. It may be months, and possibly years, until the consumer requests the service for which the fee is imposed. Furthermore, the consumer may request the service by telephone for speed and convenience, and not expect to have to wait for a written disclosure before the transaction can be completed. The proposal seeks to address these potential limitations of the present rule while taking into account the Truth in Lending Act's (TILA) requirement to disclose plan-related charges before they are imposed. Accordingly, under the proposal, the rules would be revised to (1) specify precisely the charges that creditors must disclose in writing at account opening (interest, minimum charges, transaction fees, annual fees, and penalty fees such as for paying late), which would be listed in the summary table referred to above; and (2) permit creditors to disclose other charges, typically fees for optional services that may be used infrequently, orally or in writing before the consumer agrees to or becomes obligated to pay the charge. To prevent abuse of this flexibility, the proposal requires that an oral disclosure be clear and conspicuous, and that it be given when the consumer would likely notice it. Periodic Statements Once an account has been opened, creditors are required to provide periodic statements reflecting the account activity for each billing cycle, typically monthly. The statement must identify each transaction on the account, such as a purchase or cash advance. It must also identify each "finance charge" (using that term) and other charges imposed as part of the plan during the cycle. And it must identify the periodic rate(s) and corresponding annual percentage rate(s), also known as the nominal APR, that applied during the last cycle. If finance charges were imposed in the form of fees (e.g., a cash advance fee), as well as (or instead of) monthly interest, then the statement must disclose an effective APR reflecting thetotalfinance charge, with limited exceptions. Under amendments to TILA made by the Bankruptcy Act that are implemented in this proposal, creditors must also disclose information about the cost of paying late or making only the minimum payment due. A model of the periodic statement that reflects the revisions discussed below is attached. Transactions. As the regulation currently permits, transactions are often presented in chronological order and not by transaction type. Participants in consumer testing found it easier to read and use statements where similar types of transactions are grouped together. Accordingly, the proposal requires creditors to group similar transactions together by type, such as purchases, cash advances, and balance transfers. Fee and interest charges. The proposal contains a number of revisions to the periodic statement to improve consumers' awareness and understanding of charges they have incurred in the form of fees or interest. Consumer testing indicated that consumers have difficulty understanding the term "finance charge." They are more likely to conceive of their charges as "interest," the charge that results from applying a rate to a balance, and "fees," such as a cash advance fee or a late payment fee. Consumer testing also indicated that many consumers more easily compute the number and amount of fees when the fees are itemized and grouped together. Participants noticed fees and interest charges more readily when they were located near the transactions. Also, many participants more quickly and accurately determined the total charges for the billing cycle when a total fee amount for the cycle was disclosed, as well as the total interest. These findings led the Board to propose four changes to fee disclosures on the periodic statement. First, creditors would no longer have to label charges as "finance charges;" they would instead classify charges as "fees" or "interest." Second, creditors would be required to group all charges together in a discrete place on the statement under the headings "fees" and "interest charges." Third, these charges would appear near the transaction items. Fourth, creditors would disclose the total fees and total interest imposed for the cycle, and the totals for the year to-date. The effective APR. The effective APR disclosed on periodic statements reflects the cost of interest and certain other finance charges imposed during the statement period. For example, for a cash advance, the effective APR reflects both interest assessed on the balance in the statement period and any fee assessed for the advance. The effective APR can be quite high, often much higher than the nominal APR, in part because it amortizes the cost of credit, including fees, over one month. Although consumer groups argue that the resulting "sticker shock" helps consumers make better credit shopping and account management decisions, creditors argue that it confuses consumers and misleads them to think the cost of credit is higher than it is. Consumer testing suggests that many consumers have a limited understanding, if any, of the effective APR, but it also suggests that clearer presentation of the disclosure can improve understanding. Thus, the proposal seeks to present the effective APR more clearly to consumers, giving it an intuitive label of "fee inclusive APR" and placing it next to other, related information such as the interest and fees it includes. In addition, the proposal seeks to improve consumer understanding and reduce creditor uncertainty by specifying more clearly than the present regulation which fees are to be included in the effective APR. However, because of inherent limitations of the disclosure (such as the need to assume the repayment period) and continued concern that an adequate level of consumer understanding may be difficult to achieve, the Board is also seeking comment on an alternative proposal to eliminate the disclosure. When evaluating these alternatives and any others the public comments suggest, the Board will consider the public comments as well as additional consumer testing the Board plans to conduct. Late payments. The Bankruptcy Act requires creditors to disclose the payment due date (or if different, the date after which a late-payment fee may be imposed) along with the amount of the late-payment fee. The proposal implements this requirement and adds a requirement to disclose the penalty APR that could be triggered by a late payment. Creditors would be required to disclose the penalty fee and rate close to the due date. If the creditor uses an early cut-off time on the payment due date, the time would also have to be disclosed near the date. Minimum payments. The proposal implements a requirement of the Bankruptcy Act that card issuers warn their customers on the periodic statement about the higher cost of making only minimum payments, give a hypothetical example of the time to repay a balance with minimum payments, and refer the customer to a toll-free telephone number for an estimate of the time to repay the current balance if paying only the minimum.1In testing conducted by the Board and in separate testing conducted by the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO), participants who typically carry credit card balances found an estimated repayment period based on terms that apply to their own account more useful than a hypothetical example. Accordingly, the proposal gives card issuers incentives to provide a more precise estimate of the time to repay and to place this estimate on the periodic statement. The incentives include exemptions from the requirements to maintain a toll-free telephone number and disclose the warning and hypothetical example. Changes in Consumer's Interest Rate and Other Account Terms Regulation Z requires creditors to provide advance written notice of some changes to the terms of an open-end plan. When notices are required, they must be sent fifteen days before the effective date of the change. Creditors need not notify consumers before they increase a rate for default or delinquency, or as a penalty for other conduct if the credit agreement specifically provides for an increase. Timing. Allowing creditors to mail a notice fifteen days before increasing the cost of credit can leave consumers too little time to receive the notice, shop for alternative credit, and possibly pay off the existing credit card account. Accordingly, the Board is proposing to require sending a notice at least forty-five days before the effective date of the change, which would give consumers over a month to pursue their options. Penalty rates. Credit agreements sometimes define defaults that trigger rate increases quite broadly, and often provide that the increased rate will apply to all existing balances, including balances with low promotional rates. Months, or years, after receiving the credit agreement, a consumer may no longer remember that certain behaviors will trigger a rate increase and, therefore, may be surprised to learn, after the fact, that the rate has increased. Thus, the proposal would require a creditor to send a notice forty-five days before increasing the consumer's rate for default or delinquency or as a penalty for other conduct, to give the consumer time to shop for alternative credit sources and possibly pay off the account. The proposal does not limit actions creditors may take to mitigate risk, such as lowering the credit limit or suspending credit privileges. Format. Change-in-terms disclosures, like account-opening disclosures, are commonly interspersed with other disclosures and written in small print and dense prose. Consumer testing indicates that many consumers set the documents containing these disclosures aside without reading them. Under the proposal, creditors must highlight critical changes in a summary table. Creditors that enclose their notices with periodic statements must place this table on the periodic statement above the transactions list, where consumer testing suggests consumers are most likely to notice it. Checks that Access a Credit Card Account Many credit card issuers provide accountholders with checks that can be used to obtain cash, pay the outstanding balance on another account, or purchase goods and services directly from merchants. The solicitation letter accompanying the checks may emphasize a low introductory APR for these checks. The proposed revisions would require creditors to disclose other rates and fees that will apply if the checks are used, rather than simply suggest the consumer review the disclosures provided at account opening. To ensure the disclosures are conspicuous, creditors would be required to place the rates and fees in a table on the same page as the checks. Right to Dispute Billing Errors The Board also has proposed several revisions to substantive and procedural protections TILA provides consumers. Four proposed revisions, in particular, would clarify Regulation Z in ways that strengthen consumers' rights to dispute billing errors on credit cards and other forms of revolving credit. First, if a creditor determined that no error occurred, the proposal would make clear that the creditor may not impose finance charges or other charges until the grace period (if any) in the credit agreement has elapsed. Second, if a creditor credited a borrower's account for a disputed transaction, the proposal would make clear that the creditor may not reverse the credit after two billing cycles or ninety days, whichever period is shorter; this clarification is meant to ensure finality. Third, the proposal would make clear that the right to dispute billing errors covers check transactions that access open-end accounts. Fourth, the proposal would make clear that the right to dispute errors applies to purchases of goods or services made using a third-party payment intermediary, such as a person-to-person Internet payment service. Attachments Appendix I Footnotes 1.Card issuers must establish and maintain their own toll-free telephone numbers to provide the repayment estimates, except that depository institutions having assets of $250 million or less may rely for two years on a number the Board is required to establish and maintain for them, and non-depository creditors may rely on a number the FTC is required to establish and maintain for them.Return to text
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the public hearing under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA), Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. I am pleased to be here today to chair the Federal Reserve Board'spublic hearingunder the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA). The hearing will focus specifically on how the Board might use its rulemaking authority under HOEPA to address concerns about abusive mortgage lending practices. In the course of this hearing, we will hear from key players in the home mortgage market: lenders, brokers, secondary market participants, consumer advocacy and community development organizations, academics and researchers, and state regulators. Although they play different roles, all share a common goal: encouraging responsible mortgage lending for the benefit of individual consumers and the American economy as a whole. The Congress enacted HOEPA in 1994 in response to concerns about abusive lending in the home equity market, and the Federal Reserve Board was given broad authority to implement its provisions and to adopt regulations that the Board finds to be necessary and proper to effectuate its purposes. In addition, the Board has the responsibility to prohibit acts or practices it finds unfair or deceptive, or otherwise designed to evade HOEPA. The Board understands its rulemaking responsibility under HOEPA but is not alone in facing the important task of preventing unfair and deceptive practices. Other regulators share in our responsibility to ensure responsible mortgage lending through enforcement powers. The states have extensive regulatory authority--and responsibility--under their own anti-predatory lending statutes, various other relevant legal authorities, and especially their mortgage industry licensing acts--which give them considerable control over the activities of mortgage brokers and lenders. Many of the states, including notably those that are represented on this afternoon's panel, have been very active in reining in bad actors in their mortgage markets. The FTC also shares in our enforcement responsibilities under HOEPA and other federal laws. Finally, the other federal financial regulatory agencies each have a duty to enforce federal consumer protection laws, including HOEPA, with respect to the depository institutions under their respective supervisory ambits. In light of the sheer magnitude of the task, we are very pleased that these regulators all contribute to the goal of ensuring a healthy, competitive, and responsible mortgage market. We are committed to working closely with other federal and state regulators to ensure that the laws that protect consumers are enforced. HOEPA also directs the Board to hold hearings such as the one we hold today, to assess the effectiveness of regulations and laws in protecting consumers. Hearings provide us with valuable information. Inour most recent prior hearings, held last summer in four cities around the country, our goals included assessing the effectiveness of our 2001 amendments to the HOEPA rules in curbing abusive lending practices while preserving access to credit. We also wanted to gather information on the effectiveness of the mortgage disclosures required by our Regulation Z, pursuant to the Truth in Lending Act, to inform our review of those disclosures, which is underway now. Rising foreclosures in the subprime market over the past year have led the Board to consider whether and how it should use its rulemaking authority to address these concerns. In doing so, however, we must walk a fine line. We must determine how we can help to weed out abuses while also preserving incentives for responsible lenders. A robust and responsible subprime mortgage market benefits consumers by allowing borrowers with blemished or limited credit histories to become homeowners, access the equity in their homes, or have the flexibility to refinance their loans as needed. In this task we have several tools at our disposal. These include required disclosures by lenders, rules to prohibit abusive practices, principles-based guidance with supervisory oversight, less formal efforts to work with industry participants to promote best practices, and consumer education materials. The Federal Reserve currently is conducting a thorough review of its policies with respect to each of these tools. Last year, together with other federal banking regulators, we issued guidance concerning so-called nontraditional mortgages. We have also issued proposed supervisory guidance concerning underwriting standards and disclosures for subprime mortgages. The agencies are finishing their review of the comments received and expect to issue the final version soon. And the Federal Reserve produces a range of consumer education materials, including information to help potential borrowers understand adjustable-rate and other alternative mortgages, and we actively promote financial education by partnering with outside organizations. The two tools that we will focus on today, however, are lender disclosures to consumers and rules that prohibit or restrict lending practices. Disclosures provide information that is critical to the effective functioning of markets. A core principle of economics is that markets are more competitive, and therefore more efficient, when accurate information is available to all participants. Information helps consumers by improving their ability to compare mortgage products and to choose those that will help them meet their personal goals. We are keenly aware, however, of the substantial volume of disclosures and other documents that mortgage lending already entails, and we are sensitive to the risk that too much information may be of practically as little value to many consumers as no information at all. Accordingly, we intend to consider mortgage disclosures comprehensively, with an eye to improving their usefulness to consumers, while remaining mindful of the total burden for industry. Perhaps most importantly, we will engage in extensive consumer testing of mortgage disclosures, to ensure that disclosures provide information that consumers can readily use. Our goal is better disclosures, not necessarily more disclosures. We also recognize that disclosures may not always be sufficient to combat abusive practices. Because some bad lending practices may require additional measures, the Federal Reserve will seriously consider how we might use our rulemaking authority to address abusive practices without restricting consumers' access to beneficial financing options and responsible subprime credit. In addition to improved disclosures, regulations that restrict or prohibit practices that are "unfair or deceptive" may also be necessary. We have heard concerns about consumers being steered into mortgages they cannot afford and of repeated refinancings involving closing costs that strip away a borrower's home equity. Today, we will gather information on how we might craft rules to stop such abusive practices. We also will seek information from state officials regarding their experiences with drafting laws and rules to combat predatory lending efficiently and effectively. During today's hearing, we will seek information from panelists on certain specific questions. I would like to close by briefly touching on some of those. There are four terms or practices that have been most frequently cited as troublesome in the mortgage market, especially the subprime and home equity markets. They are: At least some of these practices can be beneficial to at least some consumers. For example, an informed borrower might choose a loan with a prepayment penalty in exchange for a lower interest rate or lower closing costs. On the other hand, prepayment penalties also can be abusive, such as when a borrower is unaware that an adjustable rate mortgage loan has a substantial prepayment penalty that will extend beyond the first adjustment of the loan's interest rate, making it costly or impossible for the borrower to refinance the loan to avoid a higher interest rate and payment. We hope to gather information that helps us determine whether rules can prevent the abusive use of loan terms or practices while preserving their use in instances where they provide benefits to consumers. Giving adequate consideration to a borrower's ability to repay a loan obviously benefits both borrowers and lenders. Recently, the Board and the other federal financial regulatory agencies issued guidance reinforcing our collective belief that principles of prudent underwriting require consideration of a borrower's repayment ability. For example, the agencies have provided that lenders should qualify borrowers for nontraditional mortgage products such as interest-only loans and payment option adjustable-rate mortgage products based on a fully-indexed rate and fully amortizing payment. Some have urged the Board to adopt this broad principle as a rule, while others have urged the Board to preserve for lenders the flexibility to exercise their judgment in determining the likelihood that a given borrower can repay a loan. While it seems self-evident that adequate consideration of repayment ability is necessary, our experience in crafting the guidance taught us that this principle is far easier to articulate in general terms than in detailed, prescriptive rules stating which underwriting practices constitute "adequate" consideration. This is especially true in the context of mortgage credit underwriting, which can depend on such a great number of pertinent, consumer-specific considerations. Agenda
Eric Rosengren will become president and chief executive officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston effective July 23, 2007, announced Lisa M. Lynch, chair of the Bank's board of directors and head of the directors' presidential search committee. Eric Rosengren will succeed Cathy E. Minehan who will retire from the Boston Fed on July 22, 2007, after 13 years as president and nearly 40 years of service in the Federal Reserve System. Eric Rosengren joined the Boston Fed as an economist in 1985 and is currently Executive Vice President and Head of Supervision, Regulation and Credit at the Boston Fed and Chief Discount Officer. Before leading the Supervision, Regulation and Credit Department, Eric Rosengren was Vice President and head of the Banking and Monetary Policy section of the Bank's Research Department. "After conducting a national search that identified several superbly qualified candidates we have decided that Eric Rosengren is our choice to lead the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston," said Lisa Lynch, William L. Clayton Professor of International Economic Affairs at Tufts University's Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy. "He has made significant contributions to scholarly research in macroeconomics, monetary policy, international banking, and risk management. Much of his research has focused on how financial problems can impact the real economy and has been published in the top journals in economics. He has been extremely innovative in banking supervision including creating a group within supervision that now provides System leadership in quantitative risk modeling. In addition, he has significant international regulatory experience related to the Basel II Capital Accord. He is unique within the Federal Reserve System for having provided leadership in both research and banking supervision. He is very familiar with the opportunities and challenges facing the Boston Federal Reserve Bank and more generally the Federal Reserve System." Lynch also said, "We are grateful for the leadership our current President Cathy Minehan has provided to the Boston Bank, the Federal Reserve System, and more generally in civic and community affairs in New England. We wish her well as she pursues new opportunities." "It has been a great honor working with Cathy Minehan whose leadership has resulted in the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's outstanding reputation in the region and in the Federal Reserve System." Rosengren said. "Cathy has followed in the rich tradition of Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Presidents in having a significant impact on issues of monetary, supervisory, and payments policy. With the rapid changes occurring in financial markets and the economy, I look forward to working with the excellent staff at the Boston Fed to promote economic growth, stable prices, and financial stability. New England has a vibrant academic community and prominence in financial services, the life sciences, and in other high technology areas. I am eager to develop relationships with business and community leaders that can further contribute to the economic success of this dynamic region." Commenting on the appointment Cathy Minehan said, "Eric is a highly valued colleague and a major contributor to the management of the Bank and to policy formation within the Federal Reserve System, particularly in the supervisory area. His expertise, experience, clear-eyed focus, and keen ability to motivate staff will ensure the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston continues its excellent contributions to all aspects of System work." Eric Rosengren, 50, received a Master of Science and Ph.D. in economics from the University of Wisconsin-Madison and a B.A. with highest honors in economics from Colby College. For more information please see the following link:http://www.bos.frb.org/economic/econbios/rosengre.htm The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston is one of the twelve regional Banks in the Federal Reserve System, and serves the First District, which encompasses all six New England states with the exception of Fairfield County in Connecticut. As part of the nation's central bank, the Boston Fed promotes sound growth and financial stability in New England and the nation. The Bank contributes to local communities, the region, and the nation through its high-quality research, regulatory oversight, and financial services, and through its commitment to leadership and innovation.
The federal financial regulatory agencies today issued a finalStatement on Subprime Mortgage Lendingto address issues relating to certain adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) products that can cause payment shock. The statement describes the prudent safety and soundness and consumer protection standards that institutions should follow to ensure borrowers obtain loans they can afford to repay. These standards include a fully indexed, fully amortized qualification for borrowers and cautions on risk-layering features, including an expectation that stated income and reduced documentation should be accepted only if there are documented mitigating factors that clearly minimize the need for verification of a borrower's repayment capacity. Consumer protection standards include clear and balanced product disclosures to customers and limits on prepayment penalties that allow for a reasonable period of time, typically at least 60 days, for customers to refinance prior to the expiration of the initial fixed interest rate period without penalty. The statement reinforces the April 17, 2007 interagencyStatement on Working with Borrowers, in which the agencies encouraged institutions to work constructively with residential borrowers who are financially unable or reasonably expected to be unable to meet their contractual payment obligations on their home loans. Workout arrangements that are consistent with safe and sound lending practices are generally in the long-term best interest of both the financial institution and the borrower. The agencies published the proposedStatement on Subprime Mortgage Lendingfor comment on March 8, 2007. Comments were received from financial institutions, trade associations, consumer and community organizations, members of Congress, state and local officials, and members of the public. The agencies made a number of changes to the proposal to respond to commenters' concerns and to provide additional clarity. TheStatement on Subprime Mortgage Lendingis attached.
David FettigFSPC Spokesman(612) 204-5274 Minneapolis, Minn. The Federal Reserve Banks today announced changes to their check operations as consumers and businesses continue the shift from using paper checks toward electronic payments. As part of a longer-range strategy, the Federal Reserve Banks have selected Philadelphia, Cleveland, Atlanta and Dallas as regional check processing sites that are expected to provide the full range of check processing services through at least mid-2011. Other remaining sites will have their operations scaled back. These scaled-back sites will all print substitute checks, but some will also capture paper checks. The regional sites will provide a full range of check processing services and receive processing volumes from the other sites in a phased transition. These changes are expected to begin in 2008, and the Reserve Banks will continue to review this check infrastructure annually to respond to further change within the nation’s payments system and to meet statutory requirements for long-term cost recovery. “These changes will enable the Reserve Banks to continue to provide high-quality check processing services to depository institutions throughout the country well into the future while further encouraging the use of electronics within the nation's check collection system," said Gary Stern, chairman of the Reserve Banks’ Financial Services Policy Committee and president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. "At the same time, these changes will facilitate ongoing efficiency improvements for the Reserve Banks’ check processing operations in line with the continuing shift in consumer and business preferences for electronic payments. In addition, these changes support our long-term business strategy to use the authority provided by Check 21 to collect more checks electronically, reducing the reliance on the physical transportation of checks.” Today’s announcement marks the Reserve Banks’ fifth annual review of their check infrastructure. Since 2003, the Reserve Banks have reduced the locations where they process checks from 45 to 22, with one other site (Nashville) scheduled to discontinue operations this summer. Three other sites previously scheduled to discontinue check operations (Helena, San Francisco and Kansas City) will remain as print-only sites. The table below describes how check operations will be affected at each Reserve Bank location. Atlanta, Ga. Cleveland, Ohio Philadelphia, Pa. Dallas, Texas Utica, N.Y. Memphis, Tenn. Third quarter 2008 Cincinnati, Ohio Fourth quarter 2008 Seattle, Wash. Fourth quarter 2008 Windsor Locks, Conn. Print only/Philadelphia First quarter 2009 Charlotte, N.C. Print only/Atlanta Second quarter 2009 Minneapolis, Minn. Capture and print/Cleveland Third quarter 2009 Baltimore, Md. Print only/Philadelphia Fourth quarter 2009 Chicago, Ill. Capture and print/Cleveland First quarter 2010 Denver, Colo. Capture and print/Dallas Second quarter 2010 Print only/Atlanta Third quarter 2010 Des Moines, Iowa Print only/Cleveland Fourth quarter 2010 Los Angeles, Calif. Capture and print/Dallas Fourth quarter 2010 As a result of the actions announced today, the Reserve Banks expect to reduce their overall check staff by approximately 1,740 positions. Some staff reductions may occur through attrition and there may be some opportunities for reassignment. To assist affected staff, the Reserve Banks will offer a variety of programs, including separation packages, extended medical coverage, and career transition assistance. The Reserve Banks earned revenues in 2005 and 2006 that exceeded the actual and imputed costs of providing check services to depository institutions as well as their targeted level of profitability for the first time in several years. But check volumes have continued to decline, and further decline is anticipated in the coming years. The most recent Federal Reserve study of the nation’s payment system revealed that about 37 billion checks were paid in the United States in 2003—down from 42 billion in 2001 and 50 billion in 1995—as electronic payments, including those made by credit cards, debit cards, and automated clearinghouse transactions, increased considerably. Further Reserve Bank restructuring efforts will be necessary as check volumes continue to decline and as more depository institutions begin to collect checks electronically using the authority provided by Check 21. The Federal Reserve Banks’ long-term check processing strategy is to reduce costs and restructure their check processing operations in line with declining check volumes while encouraging the greater use of electronics in the collection of checks. This strategy will allow the Reserve Banks to meet the expectations of the 1980 Monetary Control Act. That act requires the Federal Reserve to set prices to recover, over the long run, its total operating costs of providing payment services to financial institutions, as well as the imputed costs it would have incurred and the profits it would have expected to earn had the services been provided by a private business firm. Federal Reserve System2007 Check Restructuring Fact Sheet Federal Reserve check processing locations:The Reserve Banks today process checks at 22 sites nationwide with one other site (Nashville) scheduled to discontinue operations this summer. Three other sites previously scheduled to discontinue check operations (Helena, San Francisco and Kansas City) will remain as print-only sites. An additional 14 sites announced today are scheduled for reduced operations between 2008 and early-2011. Staff levels:The Federal Reserve System, including the Board of Governors, employs over 21,000 staff nationwide; approximately 3,300 of these employees work in the check function. National check volumes:By Federal Reserve estimates, roughly 37 billion checks were paid in the United States in 2003, down from about 42 billion in 2001 and 50 billion in 1995 (based on data from the Reserve Bank’s latest available payments study). The Reserve Banks handled over 10 billion checks and electronic images in 2006. Regional processing site, capture and print site, and print-only site definitions:A regional check processing site will retain all of the functionality that exists in current processing locations. For instance, these sites will process paper checks and electronic images as well as print substitute checks, and provide reconcilement and settlement services. A capture and print site will convert paper checks to Check 21 items and print and dispatch substitute checks. A print-only site will print and dispatch substitute checks. Listing of specific Federal Reserve locations and check functions (as of end of first quarter 2011) District 1:Boston, Mass. (head office, no check processing); Windsor Locks, Conn. (print substitute checks)** District 2:New York City, N.Y. (head office; a payments operations center is located in East Rutherford, N.J., no check processing); Buffalo, N.Y. (branch, no check processing); Utica, N.Y. (print substitute checks)** District 3:Philadelphia, Pa. (head office, regional check processing site) District 4:Cleveland, Ohio (head office, regional check processing site); Cincinnati, Ohio (branch, print substitute checks)**; Pittsburgh, Pa. (branch, no check processing) District 5:Richmond, Va. (head office, no check processing); Baltimore, Md. (branch, print substitute checks)**; Charlotte, N.C. (branch, print substitute checks)** District 6:Atlanta, Ga. (head office, regional check processing site); Birmingham, Ala. (branch, no check processing); Jacksonville, Fla. (branch, print substitute checks)**; Miami, Fla. (branch, no check processing); Nashville, Tenn. (branch, no check processing)*; New Orleans, La. (branch, no check processing) District 7:Chicago, Ill. (head office, the payments center is located at Midway Airport, capture and print substitute checks)**; Detroit, Mich. (branch, no check processing); Des Moines, Iowa (print substitute checks)** District 8:St. Louis, Mo. (head office, print substitute checks)**; Little Rock, Ark. (branch, no check processing); Louisville, Ky. (branch, no check processing); Memphis, Tenn. (branch, print substitute checks)** District 9:Minneapolis, Minn. (head office, capture and print substitute checks)**; Helena, Mont. (branch, print substitute checks)* District 10:Kansas City, Mo. (head office, print substitute checks)*; Denver, Colo. (branch, capture and print substitute checks)**; Oklahoma City, Okla. (branch, no check processing); Omaha, Neb. (branch, no check processing) District 11:Dallas, Texas (head office, regional check processing site); El Paso, Texas (branch, no check processing); Houston, Texas (branch, no check processing); San Antonio, Texas (branch, no check processing) District 12:San Francisco, Calif. (head office, no check processing)*; Los Angeles, Calif. (branch, capture and print substitute checks)**; Phoenix, Ariz. (cash processing facility); Portland, Ore. (branch, no check processing); Salt Lake City, Utah (branch, no check processing); Seattle, Wash. (branch, capture and print substitute checks)** * Previously announced sites that will be discontinuing check processing operations.** Site from today’s announcement that will be discontinuing full-service check processing operations.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of a final rule to create an exception for transactions of $15 or less from Regulation E's requirement that receipts be made available to consumers for transactions initiated at an electronic terminal. Regulation E implements the Electronic Fund Transfer Act. The rule is intended to facilitate the ability of consumers to use debit cards in retail environments where making receipts available may not be practical or cost effective. The effective date of the final rule is thirty days from the date of publication in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. The Federal Register notice is attached. Federal Register Notice66 KB PDF|TEXT
Governor Kevin Warsh At the European Economics and Financial Centre, London, England Thank you for the opportunity to speak today about financial intermediation and developments in the capital markets. New financial instruments and changing models of financial intermediation are having a profound impact on global financial markets. London, home to one of the world’s fastest growing and much admired financial centers, represents a most appropriate venue to discuss these changes.1 During the past few decades--particularly the last few years--we have witnessed an escalating supply of new financial instruments scarcely able to match surging demand. Through the technique of unbundling risks--dividing them by category and tranche--financial instruments proliferated to enable risks to be borne by those most willing to accept them. And with the benefit of ample liquidity, which I described in previous remarks as broadly equal to confidence, financial products quickly found deep markets, ensuring robust trading.2 Indeed, liquidity-fueled innovation has made markets substantially more “complete”--that is, more risks are more readily priced and traded without significant diminution in value than in prior periods.3The concept of “complete markets” is, in my view, a useful, aspirational, and theoretical construct, even though perfectly complete markets, in which every agent is able to costlessly trade claims on every state of the world, represents an unachievable goal. After all, the fundamental departures from the complete markets paradigm--transactions costs and asymmetric information--will never vanish. Nevertheless, in these heady times, one wonders whether some market participants may treat recent developments as a testament to an all-but-assured path to complete markets. In my remarks today, I will discuss how liquidity and financial innovation are making markets more complete--or more precisely, less incomplete--than in earlier periods.4I will also describe how the acceleration toward complete markets conflated the roles among financial intermediaries. Finally, I will consider the possible consequences should this trend toward complete markets be slowed or upended by some form of negative liquidity shock. Financial Intermediation: Remembering the “Good Old Days”Broadly speaking, intermediaries facilitate the transfer of capital and risk between borrowers and savers. The case for financial intermediation rests on two premises:(1) borrowers hold superior information about their own financial condition and prospects than prospective providers of capital; (2) the search and screening costs to match creditors and debtors without the services of trusted third parties are prohibitive. The history of financial intermediation, thus, is the story of individual types of institutions--FDIC-insured commercial banks, SEC-registered broker dealers, Federal Reserve-supervised holding companies, just to name a few--adapting their products and practices to meet customer demands. Traditionally, commercial banks played critical roles as principals in the financial intermediation process. Community banks today--to a somewhat greater degree than their larger money-center brethren--most clearly retain the traditional commercial banking approach to financial intermediation. Community banks finance relatively opaque entities, such as private companies and households. They raise funds primarily by issuing demand deposits. They deploy capital by underwriting loans, monitoring borrowers, and retaining some loans in portfolio as long-term investments. Of course, when banks originate and hold loans, they internalize the costs of their own underwriting standards, and so have strong incentives to screen borrowers and enforce contractual covenants, as appropriate.5 Investment banks also served important roles in financial intermediation. Somewhat unlike commercial banks, investment banks traditionally acted more as agents, distributing, rather than holding, most of their resulting exposures. They focused predominantly on the business of underwriting; that is, helping firms gain access to the public securities markets. In this role, investment banks added value to the intermediation process, in part, by de facto certification of a company’s operations, practices, and prospects. As repeat players in the underwriting business, investment banks sought to maintain prudent underwriting standards to bolster their reputations as effective screeners of companies. In so doing, they built significant value in their distribution networks. Financial intermediation has also long been provided by less-regulated institutions. For decades, relatively high net worth, sophisticated investors formed private pools of capital to invest their funds. To allow flexibility in their investments, these pooled investment vehicles were structured to be exempt from regulation as investment companies. Reflecting the nature of the investor base, these informal pools often sought to gain exposure to asset classes to diversify their portfolios. These traditional roles of financial intermediaries seem, somehow, oddly quaint in 2007. As I will next describe, financial intermediaries have been transformed by their own actions‑‑their massive investments in human and technological capital to develop new financial products‑‑and by the worldwide rise in liquidity that has added depth and resiliency to the markets for these new products. The Brave New World: Massive Financial Innovation and Ample LiquidityNo single statistic can put the recent surge of financial product and market innovation into perspective. I will, however, cite a few illustrative indicators. The value added by the U.S. financial sector gives a rough sense of the effect these innovations have had on the U.S. economy. In 1960, financial services accounted for about 3-1/2 percent of U.S. gross domestic product. By 2006, that percentage had more than doubled. Securitized products are one important area of product and market innovation. Of the $3.6 trillion in net borrowing in U.S. credit markets in 2006, $820 billion, or nearly one-fourth, was securitized. As of year-end 2006, roughly 30 percent of the outstanding balances of corporate bonds and household credit resided in asset-backed securities. In addition, use of derivative products has soared; the notional amount of interest rate swaps and options has tripled in the past four years to nearly $300 trillion. The notional amount of credit default swaps has almost quintupled in only two years, from $6.4 trillion outstanding in 2004 to $29 trillion in 2006. Product and market innovations, such as these, have contributed to the high degree of liquidity found today in global financial markets. As I have discussed in prior remarks, “liquidity” in the sense of “trading liquidity” reflects the ability to transact quickly without exerting a material effect on prices. Underlying this concept is the fact that although the many buyers and sellers have different views on the most likely outcomes, the distributions of possible outcomes for which they demand risk-based compensation can be quantified. Liquidity exists when investors are confident and willing to take risks. Liquidity, then, can be viewed as confidence on the part of buyers and sellers of securities. By disaggregating a security into its constituent risk components, financial innovation can unlock this liquidity. Strong global economic performance provides another important support for the high liquidity and levels of confidence in today’s capital markets. Many economies have achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of real output and core inflation in the past twenty years or so. Liquidity can flourish if investors interpret strong performance to mean that future economic outcomes will be benign and that “tail” realizations are either highly improbable or, at the very least, quantifiable and, hence, can be traded upon.6 There is little doubt, then, that liquidity in most financial markets is high today and that investors seem willing to take risks, even at today’s market-prevailing prices. In the United States, term premiums on long-term Treasury yields are very low, corporate bonds appear to be nearly “priced for perfection,” and stock prices are setting new records. Credit markets are highly accommodative for issuers, and the volume of loans to finance highly leveraged transactions is escalating rapidly. These prices, terms and credit conditions may reflect solid economic fundamentals--low output and inflation uncertainty, healthy corporate balance sheets, and corporate profits that exceed market expectations--and if so, they may help to ease the effects of fluctuations in liquidity should they occur. The prices and conditions may also reflect increased appetite for risk; or, far less auspiciously, they may be indicative of investor overconfidence. The Brave New World: More Complete Markets and Conflating RolesThe powerful combination of liquidity and financial innovation has made markets seemingly more complete--that is, more risks are priced and traded without undue penalty owing to their unique nature or shallowness of the relevant financial market. Financial innovation, by definition, makes markets more complete by expanding the set of available types of securities and reducing transaction costs. And liquidity provides some degree of assurance that funds will readily flow into new structures and new securities. The benefits of more complete markets are three-fold. First, they allow firms and households to hedge a variety of risks, a considerable benefit when volatility is costly. Second, they make it more feasible for investors to fine tune the risk-return profiles of their portfolios. The concomitant reduction in risk premiums required by investors should reduce capital costs for all economic agents. Third, risks once held within the four walls of financial institutions are converted into tradable securities and distributed and dispersed to a broader base of institutions and interests. Liquidity and financial innovation have also led to a conflation of the roles played by financial intermediaries, themselves. Intermediation has moved increasingly to financial markets and away from regulated bank institutions. The core functions of financial institutions‑‑creating, distributing, and owning risk‑‑have remained the same, but the type of firm performing the various functions appears to have changed dramatically. This conflation of roles has the potential to alter some incentives in the credit extension process. And these roles may well change with further product and market developments, and, not least of all, due to a potential ebbing of liquidity. First, consider the changing role of commercial banks. In the syndicated loan market, lead banks have increasingly distributed large shares of syndicated loans to other banks and institutional lenders, many in the form of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs). In addition, commercial banks in some cases now sell entire loans rather than retain them on their books. Indeed, they now securitize a variety of credit exposures, such as credit cards and mortgages, and sell them to structured entities. While banks still maintain large loan exposures, including most recently those for “equity bridges,” the increased trend to distribute rather than hold some residual risks is unmistakable. Second, consider the critical role played by investors purportedly with high tolerance for risk. A CLO structure does not in and of itself convert a pool of low-rated securities into tranches of high-rated securities through some form of alchemy. Rather, a class of investors must be willing to hold the most concentrated risks as residual claimants. Today, that role appears to be tailor-made for hedge funds, and sometimes the trading desks at leading investment banks. By serving as willing counterparties in a variety of contracts, these institutions, in my view, are serving as a critical linchpin in the development of more complete markets. Third, consider the evolving role of investment banks, no longer just originating and distributing primary securities, but increasingly owning assets in portfolio. The more traditional agent role surely provided an enviable advantage in gauging investor appetite for new securities. Similarly, their expertise in pricing public securities may have served them well in developing new financial products--so well in fact that they are increasingly creating and underwriting new securitized and risk-management products. As part of their modern-day underwriting role, investment banks sometimes hold (at least for a time) the residual or other tranches, of these new products. Even more recently, many one-time broker-dealers have increased their principal investing by serving as general partners of private equity funds. Changes in intermediation roles certainly raise potential challenges, though they may be alleviated somewhat by reputation and other market-based factors. The increased specialization of some commercial banks as originators and distributors--and less as long-term owners--of some loans may have lessened their incentives to screen borrowers, and to write and monitor loan covenants. Notably, this incentive problem may be more pronounced when they sell an entire loan, as in mortgage securitization programs, and less so when the bank retains some portion of the loan, as with syndicated loans. Moreover, in the subprime mortgage market, for example, some believe that investment banks that pool and structure loans might have insufficient incentives in some cases to effectively screen. After all, critics assert, a borrower walks into a commercial bank for a loan, not into the investment bank that packages and distributes the loan through a structured vehicle. Greater liquidity or confidence does little to mitigate these problems; indeed, it could exacerbate them if confidence begets complacency. For instance, if in liquid times, investors in structured products become complacent, they may not fully evaluate or accurately model the nature of the underlying assets in structured entities. Complacent investors also may be willing to buy new debt offerings that are light on traditional covenants if they come to believe that outcomes are assuredly benign. Moreover, without strong covenants on existing debt, firms can raise additional funds without triggering defaults, which may decrease defaults in the short run, but perhaps increase them in the long run. In these cases, this “gloss” of confidence could cause a misallocation of resources, if companies or consumers without compelling prospects for full repayment nonetheless readily obtain credit. We, as policymakers, should be careful, and indeed humble, in making definitive judgments in this fast-changing area. Investment banks and commercial banks with enduring reputations--and growing private pools seeking permanent capital--are wont to protect their credibility and financial strength, even in liquid market conditions. To the extent that investment banks hold portions of the equity or lower-rated tranches of the securitized pools, they have strong incentives to screen effectively. Moreover, evidence from secondary markets that suggests that investors differentiate securitized pools according to the identity of the originating banks, and not just by credit ratings, provides some comfort that traditional certification functions are at work. What Happens When Liquidity Falters?Of course, we as policymakers should be careful not to suffer from a failure of imagination in considering the causes and consequences of an unexpected negative shock to liquidity. (Surely, financial innovators have not suffered from a lack of imagination.) Indeed, we must ask ourselves what may happen when liquidity falters. Well, consider the consequence if stock prices sold off globally, implied volatility jumped, and record trading volumes overwhelmed the trading capacity on the stock exchanges. Consider a spike in a measure of implied U.S. equity-market volatility so large that it would be in the top 1/2 of one percent of one-day changes in nearly a generation. Then, reflect on the likely divergence of opinions on the possible causes of such a rapid change in sentiment‑‑perhaps it was a freefall in stock prices in a growing emerging-market economy, or escalating concerns about lending standards in some markets, or rapidly changing animal spirits eroding investor confidence. Well, it does not take a long memory to recall that this scenario played out for a few days in late February, a bit more than three months ago. As you all know, share prices quickly recovered, and implied volatility reverted to near-record low levels. What lessons can be drawn from such an episode? Perhaps because of more complete markets, shocks to liquidity are less likely to become self-fulfilling and less likely to impose more lasting damage. That hypothesis seems particularly credible when the shock is based neither on rapidly changing economic fundamentals nor a genuine breakdown in market infrastructure. In the recent episode, opportunistic capital apparently viewed large movements in asset prices as trading opportunities. Or, perhaps, striking as it was, we have not yet witnessed a scenario that subjects the latest product innovations and behavior of market participants to a sufficiently stringent stress test. Some highly-leveraged private pools of capital may be unable to ride out bouts of very high turbulence if they are compelled to sell assets to meet margin calls or withdrawals, and by so doing, amplify the initial shocks. The losses would be sharper and correlations would be higher for assets in which markets quickly become shallow. In theory, to the extent that more complete markets yield deeper, more robust asset markets and better-diversified positions, the dynamics of the disturbance should be more manageable. But, the question of actual experience versus theory remains. Of course, a reduction in liquidity rooted in economic fundamentals would likely be more protracted and beget far more serious consequences. In a period of sustained and diminished liquidity, it is indeed plausible that financial intermediaries could revert to their traditional roles, thereby likely worsening the efficiency and completeness of markets. In such a case, those who pine for the good old days and purported good old roles of commercial and investment banks might not enjoy the economic environment that accompanies their return. Even so, over the long-term, I remain a watchful optimist: Reductions in liquidity are unlikely to turn back the clock on financial innovation. The knowledge of how to bundle, distribute, and price risk cannot be erased from our collective memories. Nor can this knowledge be walled off from the rest of the world by one country or financial center. The culture of capitalism remains on the march. First-mover advantages are growing, even while the half-life of financial innovation is shrinking. The growth of competing financial centers around the globe is testament to the enduring power of financial innovation and the dynamism of financial intermediaries. In my judgment, while the completeness of markets will remain an elusive goal, and the depth and breadth of financial markets will invariably be tested in ways that punish the ill-advised and unprepared, the secular trend toward more complete markets is unlikely to abate. Cyclical variances, however, are far more difficult to predict with precision. Perhaps, then, we should consider the growth in financial innovation as being analogous to Moore’s Law, which has for more than a generation accurately predicted the growth in computing power of a transistor at constant cost.7Neither Moore’s Law nor the development of new financial products is a mathematical or physical certainty based on some geometric extrapolation or law of the universe. Rather, it is an ex post description of that which already transpired, an occurrence caused by a healthy mix of investment in human and technological capital, a culture of capitalism, and sound regulatory and legal policies. As a result, meaningful erosion of any these core elements could impair the future evolution of financial products and jeopardize the continued development of markets. ConclusionInnovations in financial products and practices, combined with strong liquidity, have accelerated the trend toward more complete markets. These changes have altered the roles of traditional financial intermediaries. In so doing, the products and practices of financial intermediation have, in my view, forever changed. As for the financial intermediaries themselves, they will continue to evolve with changing economic and financial risks. Indeed perhaps some may retreat to the practices of an earlier era if liquidity falters. In this case, markets may, for a time, become less complete. However, I believe that the advances of intellectual capital and the culture of capitalism will likely continue to increase the ability of markets to transfer risk even as liquidity fluctuates. As policymakers, we should continually review the changing financial landscape.8Our regulatory and supervisory responses should be as dynamic as the financial intermediaries and the products they proffer, while adhering to our long-standing objectives to promote financial stability, investor protection, and market integrity. In general, our regulatory frameworks should not be based on a product or class of institutions. Rather, we should strive to develop common, principles-based, risk-focused approaches that can adapt as intermediaries makes choices about whether to be originators, distributors or owners of risk (or all of the above). Among the key elements of such approaches are an emphasis on robust stress testing, enhanced counterparty risk management, and safe and efficient market infrastructures. Footnotes 1.The opinions I will be expressing are my own and do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.Nellie LiangandDaniel M. Covitz, of the Federal Reserve Board’s staff, provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text 2.Kevin Warsh (2007), “Market Liquidity: Definitions and Implications,” speech delivered at the Institute of International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington, March 5, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/warsh20070305a.htm.Return to text 3.The notion of complete markets in an idealized economy was first formalized in Kenneth J. Arrow and Gerard Debreu (1954), “Existence of Equilibrium for a Competitive Economy,”Econometrica,vol. 22 (July), pp. 265-90.Return to text 4.While some of the data I cite are U.S.-based, the trends of financial innovation and strong liquidity are also apparent in many other advanced economies.Return to text 5.Insurance of commercial bank deposits has the potential to mitigate these incentives to screen and monitor borrowers.Return to text 6.Other sources of liquidity include increased international capital flows as a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries, which have flowed to U.S. and other financial markets with sound legal and regulatory structures. See Warsh (2007), “Market Liquidity: Definitions and Implications” for discussion.Return to text 7.Moore’s Law, attributed to Gordon Moore, co-founder of Intel, is the empirical observation that the number of transistors on an integrated circuit doubles about every eighteen to twenty-four months.Return to text 8.See Ben S. Bernanke (2007), “Regulation and Financial Innovation,” speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s 2007 Financial Markets Conference, May 15,www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20070515a.htm.Return to text
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 percent. Economic growth appears to have been moderate during the first half of this year, despite the ongoing adjustment in the housing sector. The economy seems likely to continue to expand at a moderate pace over coming quarters. Readings on core inflation have improved modestly in recent months. However, a sustained moderation in inflation pressures has yet to be convincingly demonstrated. Moreover, the high level of resource utilization has the potential to sustain those pressures. In these circumstances, the Committee's predominant policy concern remains the risk that inflation will fail to moderate as expected. Future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Thomas M. Hoenig; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Cathy E. Minehan; Frederic S. Mishkin; Michael H. Moskow; William Poole; and Kevin M. Warsh.
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the Econometric Society at Duke University Lecture, Durham, North Carolina Governor Mishkin presented identical remarks at the New Perspectives on Financial Globalization Conference, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C., on April 26, 2007 In the United States and many other countries, students learn that the key to success is hard work. Yet when we look at many developing countries, we see people who work extremely hard for long hours. Their wages are low, and so they remain poor. And as a whole, their countries remain poor. If hard work does not make a country rich, what does? The right institutions are essential. Nobel laureate Douglass North defines institutions as the "rules of the game in a society, or, more formally, humanly devised constraints that shape human intervention." (North, 1990, p. 3). Among the institutions that are most crucial to economic growth are those that enable a country to allocate capital to its most productive uses. Such institutions establish and maintain strong property rights, an effective legal system, and a sound and efficient financial system. In recent years, the field of economic development has come to the conclusion that "institutions rule" and are critical to economic growth.1An extensive literature focuses on financial development as a significant force driving economic development.2 However, developing good institutions that foster financial development is not easy: It takes time for institutions to evolve and adapt to local circumstances. In addition, vested interests in poor countries often oppose the necessary reforms because they believe that such reforms will weaken their power or allow other people to cut into their profits. How can poorer countries overcome these obstacles? How can they change the distribution of power to forge the political will to promote institutional reform? The answer is globalization. I should note that the opinions I will express today are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Elements of Institutional ReformBefore examining the role of globalization in promoting financial development, let’s first look briefly at what steps must be taken to build an institutional infrastructure that will ensure a well-functioning financial system. 1. Develop strong property rights.Strong property rights are needed to encourage productive investment because it will not be undertaken if the returns on investment are likely to be taken away by the government or others. Hernando de Soto, in his important bookThe Mystery of Capital, argues that the inability of the poor in developing countries to acquire property rights is a central reason that they are unable to gain access to capital and so remain mired in poverty. For example, the use of collateral is a crucial tool that helps the financial system make loans because it reduces losses when loans go sour. A person who would pledge land or capital for a loan must, however, legally own the collateral. Unfortunately, as de Soto has documented, legalizing the ownership of capital is extremely expensive and time consuming for the poor in developing countries. In one of his many astonishing examples, obtaining legal title to a dwelling on urban land in the Philippines required taking 168 bureaucratic steps through 53 public and private agencies over a period of 13 to 25 years. 2. Strengthen the legal system.A legal system that enforces contracts quickly and fairly is an essential step in supporting strong property rights and financial development. For example, lenders write restrictive covenants into loan contracts to prevent borrowers from taking on too much risk, but such covenants have value only if they can be legally enforced. An inefficient legal system in which loan contracts cannot be enforced will prevent productive lending from taking place. If setting up legitimate businesses or obtaining legal title to property is too expensive, the poor will never have access to the legal system and will be cut off from lending that could help them start small businesses and escape poverty.3Setting up a simple business in the United States generally requires only filling out a form and paying a nominal licensing fee. In contrast, de Soto's researchers found that legally registering a small garment workshop in Peru required 289 days; at 6 hours per day, the cost was about $1,200, which was approximately thirty times the monthly minimum wage. The lack of property rights for all but the very rich, as documented by de Soto, is a serious impediment to financial development. 3. Reduce corruption. Government is often the primary source of financial repression in developing countries. Rapacious governments whose rulers treat their countries as personal fiefdoms are not uncommon: We have seen these governments in Saddam Hussein's Iraq, Robert Mugabe's Zimbabwe, and Ferdinand Marcos's Philippines. Even officials in less tyrannical governments have been known to use the power of the state to get rich. Not surprisingly, then, many governments pay lip service to property rights but do not encourage a rule of law to protect them. Eliminating corruption is essential to strengthening property rights and the legal system. When corrupt officials demand bribes, they reduce the incentives for entrepreneurs to make investments. The ability to buy off judges weakens the enforcement of legal contracts that enable the economic and financial system to function smoothly.4 4. Improve the quality of financial information.High-quality financial information is essential to well-functioning financial markets. If lenders cannot figure out what is going on in a firm, they will be unable to screen out good from bad credit risks or to monitor the firm to ensure that it does not take on too much risk at the lender’s expense. To make reliable and accurate information more accessible, accounting standards must be high enough so that prospective lenders can make sense of what is in a business’s books. Rules that require businesses to disclose information must be enforced to enable prospective investors to make sensible decisions about whether the business deserves to get their hard-earned money. 5. Improve corporate governance. For people to be willing to buy stocks, another way to channel funds to business, rules must be established to ensure that the managers of corporations act in the stockholders’ interest. If managers find it easy to steal from the corporation, or to use funds for their own personal use rather than for the benefit of the company, no one will want to invest in the company. Finding the right balance of control between management and stockholders is a challenge with which even we in the United States continue to struggle. 6. Develop sound, prudential regulation and supervision of the banking system.Banks are the main institutions that allocate credit in developing countries. The skills necessary for bank officers to assess risks and make good lending decisions are critically important and often scarce. Poor lending policies may cause too much capital to be channeled toward low-return projects and insufficient capital to be directed toward the high-return projects needed to propel income and growth. Moreover, deterioration in banks' balance sheets caused by insider lending or excessive risk-taking that leads to a proliferation of bad loans can cause banks to cut back sharply on lending, with negative effects on the economy. If the deterioration in banks’ balance sheets is severe enough, it can result in banking and currency crises that substantially disrupt the economy, phenomena that unfortunately have been all too common in developing countries over the past several decades.5Preventing banking crises must start with prudentialregulation, in which rules set by the government ensure that banks have sufficient capital and manage risks well. To guarantee that these regulations are enforced, the government must also engage in prudentialsupervision, in which it monitors banks by examining them on a regular basis to ensure that they are complying with government regulations. The role of microfinance in developing countries is receiving much attention these days. Microfinance is a positive development; it has clearly helped substantial numbers of poor people escape poverty, and the Nobel Peace Prize awarded to Muhammad Yunus for his pioneering efforts in this area was certainly well deserved.6However, microfinance is not a substitute for the institution building I am talking about here. Globalizing to Advance Institutional ReformNow that we understand what kinds of institutions are needed to promote financial development and economic growth, let’s turn to the question of how developing countries can improve the likelihood that these institutions are developed. One of the most powerful weapons for stimulating institutional development is globalization. Wealth is not something that can be attained by remaining closed off to the rest of the world. Poorer countries would do better by embracing globalization--that is, opening their financial markets and their markets for goods and services to other nations so that funds, goods, and, often, the ideas that accompany them can flow in. Such inflows can help them achieve reforms that build productivity and wealth that will benefit all their citizens. Of course, countries need to take care that the foundations of the fundamental institutions discussed above are in place, and they must monitor the pace of reform. Opening financial marketsNow let’s look at how opening financial markets to foreigners promotes financial development. Globalizing the domestic financial system by opening financial markets to foreigners encourages financial development and growth in wealth in two ways. First, opening financial markets to foreign capital directly increases access to capital and lowers its cost for those with productive investments to make.7We know that labor is cheap in poor countries, and so we might think that capital would be especially productive there. Just think of how hugely profitable a factory might be in a country where wages are one-tenth of those in the United States. Although some of that differential would likely reflect the higher productivity of American workers, capital should, nevertheless, have extremely high returns in such countries, and, in principle, we should expect substantial flows of capital from rich countries (where the returns on capital should be relatively low) to poor countries (where they should be far higher). Such capital flows could lead to substantial benefits for poor countries in the form of larger capital stocks, higher productivity, and more rapidly growing incomes. In fact, as we well know, at present capital flows are moving, on net, from poor countries to rich ones, that is, in a direction opposite to the one we would expect. Many reasons have been proposed for this apparent paradox, but one of them certainly is the weakness of financial systems in poor countries, as described earlier. This point leads us to a second benefit of financial globalization: Opening markets to foreign financial institutions promotes reforms to the financial system that improve its functioning. Allowing foreign financial institutions to operate in an emerging-market country brings in expertise and best practices, such as those designed to screen good from bad credit risks and to monitor borrower activities to reduce the amount of risk they take.8Because of their familiarity with more-advanced financial systems, foreign financial firms also are likely to increase the pressure on the domestic government to institute reforms that will make the financial system work more effectively. As domestic financial institutions start to lose business to better-run and more trustworthy foreign institutions, they will realize the need for a better legal and accounting infrastructure that will make it easier for them to make loans to new customers. Domestic financial institutions will then be far more likely to advocate for and support the reforms that achieve this result. Of course, this is not to say that in a genuinely corrupt and anticompetitive environment financial globalization, by itself, can still engender an efficient, dynamic, and modern financial system. Recent research has shown that when some countries opened up to international capital markets too soon in the absence of some basic supporting conditions, vulnerabilities to sudden stops of capital flows increased. Thus, some preconditions must exist with respect to a minimum level of institutional quality, financial market development, and macroeconomic stability before financial globalization can further improve financial market and institutional development.9That said, given these preconditions and some constituency for progress and reform, financial globalization can be a powerful force in support of such efforts. Opening trade in goodsNext, let’s consider how opening domestic markets to foreign goods can promote the development of better institutions. Although not immediately obvious, opening domestic markets to foreign goods, known as"trade liberalization," can be a key driver of financial development. It can weaken the political power of entrenched business interests that might otherwise block institutional reforms, a point that is emphatically made by Rajan and Zingales (2004) in their bookSaving Capitalism from the Capitalists. Trade liberalization, which promotes a more competitive environment, will lower the revenue of entrenched firms so that they will need greater access to external sources of capital. Thus, they will be more likely to support reforms that promote a deeper and more efficient financial system. In fact, research indicates that a deeper financial sector is positively associated with greater trade openness (Rajan and Zingales, 2003; Svaleryd and Vlachos, 2002). Free trade also promotes financial deepening by reducing corruption. High tariffs breed corruption because importers have incentives to pay customs officials to look the other way when the importers avoid tariffs by smuggling in goods. Not surprisingly, countries that restrict international trade are found to be more corrupt (Ades and Di Tella, 1994). Even when developing countries are unwilling to tear down all barriers to imports of foreign goods, they can still generate incentives for institutional reform by removing obstacles that prevent domestic producers from engaging in international trade. Facilitating production for overseas markets creates a greater need for a well-functioning financial system because, to compete effectively in the international arena, firms need better access to capital. If they can’t get capital, they won’t be able to make the investments they need to increase productivity and price their goods competitively. Accordingly, international trade creates a demand for reforms that will make the financial system more efficient. The case of China We are seeing how the globalization of trade is driving financial reform in China. As Chinese enterprises increasingly enter international markets, they need a better financial system that can ensure that the allocation of their high domestic savings is done efficiently and is responsive to market developments. Although it has taken time, globalization is helping to generate the demand for an improved financial system, which is driving the reform process. The Communist leadership recognizes that the old development model must change. The government has announced that state-owned banks are being put on the path to be privatized and has allowed foreign investment in China’s banking system ($20 billion in 2005).10The government is also engaged in legal reform to make contracts more enforceable. In August 2006, the National People’s Congress enacted a new bankruptcy law that gives creditors greater protection if a firm goes bankrupt, and last month it approved a law that gives individuals more legal protection for their property.11 China, of course, is an example of a country that has actively encouraged exports as a means of propelling its economic growth and development. To some extent, China may have gone too far in its use of policy to promote export growth. Increased reliance on market-determined prices will help ensure that the allocation of resources into the export sector does not exceed their efficient use. The goal should be to raise productivity toward world-class standards in all sectors of the economy. Recently China’s authorities have agreed that some rebalancing of the sources of growth away from exports and toward domestic demand is in order. Among China’s East Asian neighbors, the importance of developing industries to meet demand for domestic uses also is receiving increasing attention. The problem of export restrictions Nevertheless, developing production for exports may still be useful for those countries at the lowest rungs of the developmental ladder, and it is surprising that many of the world’s poorest developing countries still not only do not encourage an export orientation but in fact maintain a regime of taxes, restrictions, and other policies that effectively discourage it. This problem remains especially serious in some African economies and may help explain why their growth performance has been so disappointing. The primary way that governments discourage exports is by imposing large taxes on them. Because high export taxes are one method of obtaining revenue, governments may be attracted to them to solve their budget problems. They may also use these taxes to punish their political opponents, who are often involved in a particular export industry. The government can then distribute the resulting revenue to their supporters. The most pernicious forms of export taxes are those that are hidden through the government’s setting a fixed official exchange rate that artificially keeps the domestic currency at a value well above what it would be worth in terms of foreign currency (say, U.S. dollars) in a free market. The government then makes it illegal to sell dollars for the larger amount of domestic currency that could be obtained in the black market. The difference between the official exchange rate and the free, black-market rate (often called the "black-market premium") imposes a tax on exporters because they are forced to sell the dollars they earn to the government or to the central bank at the official rate, and thus they receive a much lower price for their goods in terms of the domestic currency. Although in recent decades a great many countries have abandoned currency controls and dismantled their black markets, such controls still exist in some of the poorest economies, especially in Africa. In some countries, the tax from the black-market premium is confiscatory. An example from history illustrates this point. In 1982 Ghana had a black-market premium of more than 1,000 percent, and so exporters of cocoa (primarily from a tribe different from that of the ruling government party) were getting only 6 percent of the world price. Given such a high tax rate, it came as no surprise that cocoa exports, which had accounted for 19 percent of Ghana’s gross domestic product in the 1950s, accounted for only 3 percent by 1982 (Easterly, 2001, p. 222). During the twenty years when the black-market premium was so high, the average income of Ghanaians fell 30 percent. Like many such unwarranted controls on economic life, high black-market premiums also breed corruption, with all its negative effects, because they create strong incentives to bribe officials or to smuggle goods to avoid paying the black-market-premium tax. (Indeed, one of the reasons that governments in poorer countries often use this method of taxation rather than an explicit tax is that it allows government officials to get rich from the bribes they receive.) Other Gains from Trade LiberalizationAlthough we have been focusing on how globalization promotes financial development, we shouldn’t forget that trade globalization, which involves both trade liberalization and an export orientation, is a key driver of economic growth for reasons additional to those already mentioned.12 The first economics course that college students encounter always teaches the concept of comparative advantage: By trading with another country, you can focus your production on what you are really good at so that your productivity will be high. This higher productivity then leads to higher economic welfare. Trade liberalization, more importantly, promotes competition in domestic markets, which in turn forces domestic firms to increase productivity and make better products, both of which drive economic growth. If a foreigner produces a better product that can be imported, domestic firms must make a better product at a lower price to keep selling their product at home. One graphic example of how trade promotes competition occurred in India, which up until 1991 had protected its tool industry with a 100 percent tariff (tax on imports). After the Indian government cut the tariff sharply, Taiwanese firms initially grabbed one-third of the Indian market. Over the next decade, however, Indian firms boosted their productivity almost to the levels of Taiwanese firms, thereby winning back the domestic market. Eventually Indian tool firms became so efficient that they were able to start selling their goods abroad and became substantial exporters.13 Decreasing barriers to imports also helps promote exports. Increased competition from imports lowers the profits firms can earn by focusing solely on the domestic market, and so they naturally concentrate more of their energy on exporting. Moreover, trade liberalization helps developing countries gain access to foreign markets in advanced countries, as illustrated by the fact that the United States, through free-trade agreements, has been more willing to lower tariffs for countries such as Mexico and Chile if they do the same for the United States. Empirical evidence indicates that trade liberalization has positive effects on productivity and economic growth for both importing and exporting countries: It has even been found to be associated with more-rapid increases in life expectancy and a reduction in infant mortality.14Yet, as is often the case in economics, empirical evidence is never completely clear cut: Some economists question whether the evidence strongly supports a positive link between trade liberalization and growth.15Nonetheless, the logic of the benefits of trade liberalization and the preponderance of the evidence supporting its positive effects lead most members of the economics profession, including me, to the following conclusion: Trade liberalization is highly beneficial not only for the overall economy but also for its constituent sectors. The resulting economic growth is a rising tide that raises all boats and is an important tool for poverty alleviation. But even if trade liberalization is not adopted, giving domestic producers the opportunity to sell goods to rich countries’ markets can be an important engine for growth in the world’s poorest countries. One crucial way that governments in developing countries can encourage exports is by providing the transportation infrastructure--ports, roads, and airports--that make it easier for businesses to send their goods abroad. Because foreigners don’t have a natural predilection to buy your goods, you have to be supercompetitive--your goods have to be better and cheaper than the goods made in foreign countries. Domestic firms have to focus even more on being highly productive, and boosting productivity will lead to rapid economic growth. Japan’s experience shows what focusing on exporting can accomplish. In the immediate aftermath of World War II, Japan was a poor country. Its economic infrastructure had been destroyed by the war. To convince Americans and others to buy Japanese products, Japanese firms had to produce goods that were cheaper and better than their American-made counterparts. As a result, the export industries in Japan became enormously productive and supercompetitive. Productivity grew, and three decades after World War II, Japan became one of the richest countries in the world. South Korea, one of the great Asian success stories even with its crisis in the late 1990s, had very high barriers to trade until the 1990s, and its early development strategy did not include opening its domestic market to foreign goods. However, through its export sector, South Korea has participated fully in global markets, and this participation has been a key to its success. South Korea’s development strategy focused on promoting its export sector, and it is the export sector that led to high productivity and economic growth. Indeed, all examples of successful growth stories in developing economies (China, Japan, South Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, Chile) have involved export sectors that met the test of international competition, and some of these economies have also pursued trade liberalization. In almost all the industrializing East Asian economies, future growth will likely have to follow a more balanced path that relies less on exports and more on production for the domestic market. Such adjustments are needed not only to secure such economies’ further development but also to alleviate the pattern of external imbalances around the global economy. It is in the world’s poorest countries--especially in Africa and Latin America--that additional participation in global markets has the highest priority. Only by embracing global markets can developing countries raise living standards.16Trade liberalization has a critical role to play in economic growth by directly stimulating domestic firms to become more productive. And along with financial globalization, it can also encourage emerging-market economies to develop the institutions that foster financial development. Globalization should be one of the highest priorities for developing countries. The Role of Advanced CountriesCan we in the advanced countries help? Yes, we can do so by supporting the opening of our markets to goods and services from emerging-market countries. By encouraging these countries to increase their participation in global markets, we create exactly the right incentives for them to implement the hard measures that will enable them to grow rich. As we have seen, exporters have strong incentives to be productive so that they can take advantage of access to our markets, and thus they will make the investments needed for growth. They also will push for the institutional reforms to make financial markets more efficient and promote financial deepening. By getting financial markets to work well, exporters will have access to the capital they need to increase their business.Opening our markets to emerging-market countries is an important way that those in advanced countries can help emerging-market economies become successful. While providing aid to poor countries can, in the right circumstances, help eradicate poverty, it often will not work because it usually does not create the right incentives to promote economic growth. A handout is almost never as effective as a hand up.Some are concerned about the consequences for us if we in the United States allow free competition in our markets for goods and services from countries where wages are low. Keeping many countries poor and their workers unproductive may seem to be to our benefit. But as shown in the examples of post-World War II recovery in Europe and Japan, and in the rapid growth in the 1970s and 1980s in the newly industrialized economies of Asia, higher standards of living throughout the global economy actually work to our benefit. Prosperity in our trading partners creates growing markets for U.S. exports of high-value goods. And over time, as workers’ productivity abroad rises, so will their wages and incomes. It is true that the changes brought about in our economy by globalization impose significant costs onsomedomestic workers. We need to develop policies to help those workers without undermining the global trading system. The costs to us of damaging that system would far outweigh the benefits that some might gain from protectionist measures. Promoting trade liberalization helps us not only do good but also do well.ReferencesAcemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2001)."The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,"American Economic Review, vol. 91 (December), pp. 1369-1401.Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2005). "Institutions as the Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth," in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds.,Handbook of Economic Growth,vol. 1, part 1. Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 385-472.Ades, Alberto, and Rafael Di Tella (1994). "Competition and Corruption," Institute of Economics and Statistics Discussion Paper Series 169. Oxford: University of Oxford.Alfaro, Laura, and others (2004)."FDI and Economic Growth: The Role of Local Financial Markets,"Journal of International Economics, vol. 64 (October), pp. 89-112.Armendariz de Aghion, Beatriz, and Jonathan Morduch (2005).The Economics of Microfinance.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey and Robin L. Lumsdaine (2002)."Dating the Integration of World Equity Markets,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 65 (August), pp. 203-47.Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (2004).In Defense of Globalization. New York: Oxford University Press.Bourguignon, Francois, Diane Coyle, Raquel Fernandez, Francesco Giavazzi, Dalia Marin, Kevin O’Rourke, Richard Portes, Paul Seabright, Anthony Venables, Thierry Verdier, and L. Alan Winters (2002).Making Sense of Globalization: A Guide to the Economic Issues,CEPR Policy Paper Series 8. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, July.Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, and Robert Marquez (2006)."Lending Booms and Lending Standards,"Journal of Finance, vol. 61 (October), pp. 2511-46.Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache (2005)."Cross-Country Empirical Studies of Systemic Bank Distress: A Survey (422 KB PDF),"IMF Working Paper Series WP 05/96. Washington: International Monetary Fund, May.de Soto, Hernando (2000).The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else.New York: Basic Books.Dollar, David (1992)."Outward-Oriented Developing Economies Really Do Grow More Rapidly: Evidence from 95 LDCs, 1976-1985,"Economic Development and Cultural Change, vol. 40 (April), pp. 523-44.Dollar, David, and Paul Collier (2001).Globalization, Growth, and Poverty: Building an Inclusive World Economy.New York: Oxford University Press.Easterly, William (2001).The Elusive Quest for Growth:Economists’ Adventures and Misadventures in the Tropics.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.Easterly, William, and Ross Levine (2001). "It’s Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized Facts and Growth Models,"World Bank Economic Review, vol. 15 (2), pp. 177-219.Easterly, William, and Ross Levine (2003)."Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments Influence Economic Development,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 50 (January), pp. 3-39.Edwards, Sebastian (1998)."Openness, Productivity, and Growth: What Do We Really Know?"Economic Journal, vol. 108 (March), pp. 383-98.Eichengreen, Barry (2001). "Capital Account Liberalization: What Do Cross-Country Studies Tell Us?"World Bank Economic Review, vol. 15 (3), pp. 341-65.Frankel, Jeffrey A., and David Romer (1999)."Does Trade Cause Growth?"American Economic Review,vol. 89 (June), pp. 379-99.Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2004)."Do Institutions Cause Growth?"NBER Working Paper Series 10568. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June.Goldberg, Linda (2004)."Financial-Sector FDI and Host Countries: New and Old Lessons,"NBER Working Paper Series 10441. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April.Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones (1999)."Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output per Worker Than Others?"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 114 (February), pp. 83-116.Harrison, Ann (1996)."Openness and Growth: A Time-Series, Cross-Country Analysis for Developing Countries,"Journal of Development Economics, vol. 48 (March), pp. 419-47.Henry, Peter Blair (2000a)."Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market Equity Prices,"Journal of Finance,vol. 55 (2), pp. 529-64.Henry, Peter Blair (2000b)."Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms?"Journal of Financial Economics58 (1-2), pp. 301-34.Jones, Benjamin F., and Benjamin A. Olken (2005)."The Anatomy of Start-Stop Growth,"NBER Working Paper Series 11528. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July.Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kray, and Pablo Zoido-Lobaton (1999)."Governance Matters,"Policy Research Working Paper Series 2196. Washington: World Bank, October.Kearl, James R., Clayne L. Pope, Gordon C. Whiting, and Larry T. Wimmer (1979)."A Confusion of Economists?"American Economic Review,vol. 69 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 28-37.Klein, Michael W. (2005)."Capital Account Liberalization: Institutional Quality and Economic Growth: Theory and Evidence,"NBER Working Paper Series 11112. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February.Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei (2006)."Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal (758 KB PDF),"IMF Working Paper Series WP 06/189. Washington: International Monetary Fund, August.Lee, Ha Yan, Luca Antonio Ricci, and Roberto Rigobon (2004)."Once Again, Is Openness Good for Growth?"Journal of Development Economics, vol. 75 (December), pp. 451-72.Levine, Ross (2004)."Finance and Growth,"NBER Working Paper Series 10766. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September; forthcoming in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds.,Handbook of Economic Growth.Amsterdam: North Holland.Levine, Ross and Sara Zervos (1998)."Capital Control Liberalization and Stock Market Development,"World Development26, pp. 1169-84.Mauro, Paolo (1995)."Corruption and Growth,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 110 (August), pp. 681-712.North, Douglass C. (1990).Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.North, Douglass C., and Robert Paul Thomas (1973).The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic History.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales (2003)."The Great Reversals: the Politics of Financial Development in the 20th Century,"Journal of Financial Economics69 (1), pp. 5-50.Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales (2004).Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists: Unleashing the Power of Financial Markets to Create Wealth and Spread Opportunity.Princeton: Princeton University Press.Rodriguez, Francisco, and Dani Rodrik (2001). "Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s Guide to the Evidence," in Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual2000. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi (2002)."Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development,"NBER Working Paper Series 9305. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November.Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Andrew M. Warner (1995). "Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995:1,pp. 1-118.Schmukler, Sergio L. (2004)."Financial Globalization: Gain and Pain for Developing Countries (307 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,Economic Review,vol. 89(Q2), pp. 39-66.Svaleryd, Helena, and Jonas Vlachos (2002)."Markets for Risk and Openness to Trade: How Are They Related?"Journal of International Economics,vol. 57 (August), pp. 369-95.Temple, Jonathan (1999)."The New Growth Evidence,"Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37 (March), pp. 112-56.Wei, Shangjin (1997)."How Taxing Is Corruption on International Investors?"NBER Working Paper Series 6030. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May.Weil, David N. (2005).Economic Growth.Boston: Addison-Wesley.Winters, L. Alan, Neil McCulloch, and Andrew McKay (2004)."Trade Liberalization and Poverty: The Evidence So Far,"Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 42 (March), pp. 72-115.Wolf, Martin (2004).Why Globalization Works.New Haven: Yale University Press.World Bank (2001).Finance for Growth: Policy Choices in a Volatile World.New York: Oxford University Press.World Bank (2005).Doing Business in 2005: Removing Obstacles to Growth.Washington: World Bank.Footnotes1.A large literature shows the importance of good institutions to economic growth. See, for example, North and Thomas (1973); Hall and Jones (1999); Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001); Easterly and Levine (2001); Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi (2002); Easterly and Levine (2003); Glaeser and others (2004); and the recent survey by Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005). Kaufmann and others (1999) also point to the importance of various aspects of good governance.Return to text2.An excellent nontechnical survey of the extensive empirical evidence on the link between financial development and economic growth can be found in World Bank (2001). See also Levine (2004) and Schmukler (2004).Return to text3.A discussion of how the costs of doing business vary across a number of countries is in World Bank (2005).Return to text4.Research finds that increases in corruption are associated with lower growth (for example, Mauro, 1995). Wei (1997) also finds that corruption significantly reduces foreign direct investment, which is generally considered to be beneficial to growth.Return to text5.A survey of the literature that links a lack of sufficient prudential regulation and supporting institutions to excessive risk-taking and the possibility of a subsequent banking crisis is in Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2005). Dell’Ariccia and Marquez (2006) also argue that under certain circumstances lending booms can make the banking system more unstable and can lead to a higher probability of a banking crisis.Return to text6.The literature on microfinance is vast. One thorough discussion is in Armendariz de Aghion and Morduch (2005).Return to text7.When stock markets in emerging-market countries are opened to foreign capital, dividend yields fall, average stock prices increase, and liquidity goes up. See Levine and Zervos (1998); Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002); and Henry (2000a,b).Return to text8.This argument is made in World Bank (2001) and Goldberg (2004).Return to text9.An excellent discussion of the literature on financial globalization using a unified conceptual framework is in Kose and others (2006). Studies focusing more specifically on the necessary preconditions for, and the appropriate sequencing of, financial reforms, macroeconomic policies, and institutional development, on the one hand, and capital account liberalization, on the other, include Eichengreen (2001), Alfaro and others (2004), and Klein (2005).Return to text10.The four largest state-owned banks, with 70 percent of China’s bank deposits, are scheduled to be privatized in the following order: the Construction Bank, the Bank of China, the Industrial and Commercial Bank, and the Agricultural Bank.Return to text11.The new law becomes effective on June 1, 2007, but reportedly will not apply to state-owned enterprises until 2008.Return to text12.Indeed, almost all economists think that trade liberalization, a key element of globalization, is a good thing. For example, in Kearl and others (1979), 97 percent of economists agreed (generally or with some provisions) with the statement that "tariffs and import quotas reduce general economic welfare." A typical view advocating trade liberalization is expressed by Jagdish Bhagwati, one of the most prominent trade theorists in the world, in Bhagwati (2004).Return to text13.This example comes from Weil (2005, p. 322) and is described more extensively in Dollar and Collier (2001).Return to text14.The literature on the effects of trade liberalization on growth and poverty is immense. See the surveys in Temple (1999); Bourguignon and others (2002); Winters, McCulloch, and McKay (2004); and Wolf (2004). Earlier studies found that trade openness was associated with higher growth rates (Dollar, 1992; Sachs and Warner, 1995; and Edwards, 1998). However, because the direction of causation from this evidence is difficult to establish, other researchers have used instrumental variable procedures to establish causality from trade liberalization to growth (for example, Frankel and Romer, 1999). Using a different approach to identify the direction of causation, Lee, Ricci, and Rigobon (2004) also find that trade openness has a positive effect on growth.Return to text15.For example, Harrison (1996) and especially Rodriguez and Rodrik (2000).Return to text16.The finding in Jones and Olken (2005) that growth take-offs are primarily associated with large and steady expansions in international trade provides further support for this view.Return to text Can we in the advanced countries help? Yes, we can do so by supporting the opening of our markets to goods and services from emerging-market countries. By encouraging these countries to increase their participation in global markets, we create exactly the right incentives for them to implement the hard measures that will enable them to grow rich. As we have seen, exporters have strong incentives to be productive so that they can take advantage of access to our markets, and thus they will make the investments needed for growth. They also will push for the institutional reforms to make financial markets more efficient and promote financial deepening. By getting financial markets to work well, exporters will have access to the capital they need to increase their business. Opening our markets to emerging-market countries is an important way that those in advanced countries can help emerging-market economies become successful. While providing aid to poor countries can, in the right circumstances, help eradicate poverty, it often will not work because it usually does not create the right incentives to promote economic growth. A handout is almost never as effective as a hand up. Some are concerned about the consequences for us if we in the United States allow free competition in our markets for goods and services from countries where wages are low. Keeping many countries poor and their workers unproductive may seem to be to our benefit. But as shown in the examples of post-World War II recovery in Europe and Japan, and in the rapid growth in the 1970s and 1980s in the newly industrialized economies of Asia, higher standards of living throughout the global economy actually work to our benefit. Prosperity in our trading partners creates growing markets for U.S. exports of high-value goods. And over time, as workers’ productivity abroad rises, so will their wages and incomes. It is true that the changes brought about in our economy by globalization impose significant costs onsomedomestic workers. We need to develop policies to help those workers without undermining the global trading system. The costs to us of damaging that system would far outweigh the benefits that some might gain from protectionist measures. Promoting trade liberalization helps us not only do good but also do well. References Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2001)."The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,"American Economic Review, vol. 91 (December), pp. 1369-1401. Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2005). "Institutions as the Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth," in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds.,Handbook of Economic Growth,vol. 1, part 1. Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 385-472. Ades, Alberto, and Rafael Di Tella (1994). "Competition and Corruption," Institute of Economics and Statistics Discussion Paper Series 169. Oxford: University of Oxford. Alfaro, Laura, and others (2004)."FDI and Economic Growth: The Role of Local Financial Markets,"Journal of International Economics, vol. 64 (October), pp. 89-112. Armendariz de Aghion, Beatriz, and Jonathan Morduch (2005).The Economics of Microfinance.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey and Robin L. Lumsdaine (2002)."Dating the Integration of World Equity Markets,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 65 (August), pp. 203-47. Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (2004).In Defense of Globalization. New York: Oxford University Press. Bourguignon, Francois, Diane Coyle, Raquel Fernandez, Francesco Giavazzi, Dalia Marin, Kevin O’Rourke, Richard Portes, Paul Seabright, Anthony Venables, Thierry Verdier, and L. Alan Winters (2002).Making Sense of Globalization: A Guide to the Economic Issues,CEPR Policy Paper Series 8. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, July. Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, and Robert Marquez (2006)."Lending Booms and Lending Standards,"Journal of Finance, vol. 61 (October), pp. 2511-46. Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache (2005)."Cross-Country Empirical Studies of Systemic Bank Distress: A Survey (422 KB PDF),"IMF Working Paper Series WP 05/96. Washington: International Monetary Fund, May. de Soto, Hernando (2000).The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else.New York: Basic Books. Dollar, David (1992)."Outward-Oriented Developing Economies Really Do Grow More Rapidly: Evidence from 95 LDCs, 1976-1985,"Economic Development and Cultural Change, vol. 40 (April), pp. 523-44. Dollar, David, and Paul Collier (2001).Globalization, Growth, and Poverty: Building an Inclusive World Economy.New York: Oxford University Press. Easterly, William (2001).The Elusive Quest for Growth:Economists’ Adventures and Misadventures in the Tropics.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Easterly, William, and Ross Levine (2001). "It’s Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized Facts and Growth Models,"World Bank Economic Review, vol. 15 (2), pp. 177-219. Easterly, William, and Ross Levine (2003)."Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments Influence Economic Development,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 50 (January), pp. 3-39. Edwards, Sebastian (1998)."Openness, Productivity, and Growth: What Do We Really Know?"Economic Journal, vol. 108 (March), pp. 383-98. Eichengreen, Barry (2001). "Capital Account Liberalization: What Do Cross-Country Studies Tell Us?"World Bank Economic Review, vol. 15 (3), pp. 341-65. Frankel, Jeffrey A., and David Romer (1999)."Does Trade Cause Growth?"American Economic Review,vol. 89 (June), pp. 379-99. Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2004)."Do Institutions Cause Growth?"NBER Working Paper Series 10568. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. Goldberg, Linda (2004)."Financial-Sector FDI and Host Countries: New and Old Lessons,"NBER Working Paper Series 10441. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April. Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones (1999)."Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output per Worker Than Others?"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 114 (February), pp. 83-116. Harrison, Ann (1996)."Openness and Growth: A Time-Series, Cross-Country Analysis for Developing Countries,"Journal of Development Economics, vol. 48 (March), pp. 419-47. Henry, Peter Blair (2000a)."Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market Equity Prices,"Journal of Finance,vol. 55 (2), pp. 529-64. Henry, Peter Blair (2000b)."Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms?"Journal of Financial Economics58 (1-2), pp. 301-34. Jones, Benjamin F., and Benjamin A. Olken (2005)."The Anatomy of Start-Stop Growth,"NBER Working Paper Series 11528. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July. Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kray, and Pablo Zoido-Lobaton (1999)."Governance Matters,"Policy Research Working Paper Series 2196. Washington: World Bank, October. Kearl, James R., Clayne L. Pope, Gordon C. Whiting, and Larry T. Wimmer (1979)."A Confusion of Economists?"American Economic Review,vol. 69 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 28-37. Klein, Michael W. (2005)."Capital Account Liberalization: Institutional Quality and Economic Growth: Theory and Evidence,"NBER Working Paper Series 11112. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei (2006)."Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal (758 KB PDF),"IMF Working Paper Series WP 06/189. Washington: International Monetary Fund, August. Lee, Ha Yan, Luca Antonio Ricci, and Roberto Rigobon (2004)."Once Again, Is Openness Good for Growth?"Journal of Development Economics, vol. 75 (December), pp. 451-72. Levine, Ross (2004)."Finance and Growth,"NBER Working Paper Series 10766. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September; forthcoming in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds.,Handbook of Economic Growth.Amsterdam: North Holland. Levine, Ross and Sara Zervos (1998)."Capital Control Liberalization and Stock Market Development,"World Development26, pp. 1169-84. Mauro, Paolo (1995)."Corruption and Growth,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 110 (August), pp. 681-712. North, Douglass C. (1990).Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. North, Douglass C., and Robert Paul Thomas (1973).The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic History.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales (2003)."The Great Reversals: the Politics of Financial Development in the 20th Century,"Journal of Financial Economics69 (1), pp. 5-50. Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales (2004).Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists: Unleashing the Power of Financial Markets to Create Wealth and Spread Opportunity.Princeton: Princeton University Press. Rodriguez, Francisco, and Dani Rodrik (2001). "Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s Guide to the Evidence," in Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual2000. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi (2002)."Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development,"NBER Working Paper Series 9305. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November. Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Andrew M. Warner (1995). "Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995:1,pp. 1-118. Schmukler, Sergio L. (2004)."Financial Globalization: Gain and Pain for Developing Countries (307 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,Economic Review,vol. 89(Q2), pp. 39-66. Svaleryd, Helena, and Jonas Vlachos (2002)."Markets for Risk and Openness to Trade: How Are They Related?"Journal of International Economics,vol. 57 (August), pp. 369-95. Temple, Jonathan (1999)."The New Growth Evidence,"Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37 (March), pp. 112-56. Wei, Shangjin (1997)."How Taxing Is Corruption on International Investors?"NBER Working Paper Series 6030. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May. Weil, David N. (2005).Economic Growth.Boston: Addison-Wesley. Winters, L. Alan, Neil McCulloch, and Andrew McKay (2004)."Trade Liberalization and Poverty: The Evidence So Far,"Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 42 (March), pp. 72-115. Wolf, Martin (2004).Why Globalization Works.New Haven: Yale University Press. World Bank (2001).Finance for Growth: Policy Choices in a Volatile World.New York: Oxford University Press. World Bank (2005).Doing Business in 2005: Removing Obstacles to Growth.Washington: World Bank. Footnotes 1.A large literature shows the importance of good institutions to economic growth. See, for example, North and Thomas (1973); Hall and Jones (1999); Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001); Easterly and Levine (2001); Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi (2002); Easterly and Levine (2003); Glaeser and others (2004); and the recent survey by Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005). Kaufmann and others (1999) also point to the importance of various aspects of good governance.Return to text 2.An excellent nontechnical survey of the extensive empirical evidence on the link between financial development and economic growth can be found in World Bank (2001). See also Levine (2004) and Schmukler (2004).Return to text 3.A discussion of how the costs of doing business vary across a number of countries is in World Bank (2005).Return to text 4.Research finds that increases in corruption are associated with lower growth (for example, Mauro, 1995). Wei (1997) also finds that corruption significantly reduces foreign direct investment, which is generally considered to be beneficial to growth.Return to text 5.A survey of the literature that links a lack of sufficient prudential regulation and supporting institutions to excessive risk-taking and the possibility of a subsequent banking crisis is in Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2005). Dell’Ariccia and Marquez (2006) also argue that under certain circumstances lending booms can make the banking system more unstable and can lead to a higher probability of a banking crisis.Return to text 6.The literature on microfinance is vast. One thorough discussion is in Armendariz de Aghion and Morduch (2005).Return to text 7.When stock markets in emerging-market countries are opened to foreign capital, dividend yields fall, average stock prices increase, and liquidity goes up. See Levine and Zervos (1998); Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002); and Henry (2000a,b).Return to text 8.This argument is made in World Bank (2001) and Goldberg (2004).Return to text 9.An excellent discussion of the literature on financial globalization using a unified conceptual framework is in Kose and others (2006). Studies focusing more specifically on the necessary preconditions for, and the appropriate sequencing of, financial reforms, macroeconomic policies, and institutional development, on the one hand, and capital account liberalization, on the other, include Eichengreen (2001), Alfaro and others (2004), and Klein (2005).Return to text 10.The four largest state-owned banks, with 70 percent of China’s bank deposits, are scheduled to be privatized in the following order: the Construction Bank, the Bank of China, the Industrial and Commercial Bank, and the Agricultural Bank.Return to text 11.The new law becomes effective on June 1, 2007, but reportedly will not apply to state-owned enterprises until 2008.Return to text 12.Indeed, almost all economists think that trade liberalization, a key element of globalization, is a good thing. For example, in Kearl and others (1979), 97 percent of economists agreed (generally or with some provisions) with the statement that "tariffs and import quotas reduce general economic welfare." A typical view advocating trade liberalization is expressed by Jagdish Bhagwati, one of the most prominent trade theorists in the world, in Bhagwati (2004).Return to text 13.This example comes from Weil (2005, p. 322) and is described more extensively in Dollar and Collier (2001).Return to text 14.The literature on the effects of trade liberalization on growth and poverty is immense. See the surveys in Temple (1999); Bourguignon and others (2002); Winters, McCulloch, and McKay (2004); and Wolf (2004). Earlier studies found that trade openness was associated with higher growth rates (Dollar, 1992; Sachs and Warner, 1995; and Edwards, 1998). However, because the direction of causation from this evidence is difficult to establish, other researchers have used instrumental variable procedures to establish causality from trade liberalization to growth (for example, Frankel and Romer, 1999). Using a different approach to identify the direction of causation, Lee, Ricci, and Rigobon (2004) also find that trade openness has a positive effect on growth.Return to text 15.For example, Harrison (1996) and especially Rodriguez and Rodrik (2000).Return to text 16.The finding in Jones and Olken (2005) that growth take-offs are primarily associated with large and steady expansions in international trade provides further support for this view.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings for April 23 and May 7, 2007. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against RBC Centura Bank, Raleigh, North Carolina, a state member bank. RBC Centura Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board’s Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act.The Order requires RBC Centura Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $106,930, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund.A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Prohibition against Joy McClard, previously an employee of the former Cumberland Bank, Franklin, Tennessee.Ms. McClard, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order, which was based on her alleged participation in the embezzlement of funds from the bank and falsification of the bank's books and records.A copy of the Order is attached. The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Prohibition against Joy McClard, previously an employee of the former Cumberland Bank, Franklin, Tennessee. Ms. McClard, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order, which was based on her alleged participation in the embezzlement of funds from the bank and falsification of the bank's books and records. A copy of the Order is attached. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Prohibition against William R. Kahler, a former officer of Primebank, LeMars, Iowa, a state member bank. Mr. Kahler, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order, which was based on his conviction for an offense taking place during his previous employment at Iowa-Nebraska State Bank, Sioux City, Iowa, an FDIC-insured bank. A copy of the Order is attached.
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the Institute of International Finance 2007 Spring Membership Meeting, Athens, Greece Thank you for inviting me to participate in this conference and offer my views on prospects for the U.S. economy. I should note that the opinions I will express today are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. After increasing at about a 3-1/2 percent annual rate from early 2003 to early 2006, the pace of economic expansion in the United States stepped down last spring, with real gross domestic product rising since then at about a 2 percent pace. Yesterday, the Department of Commerce announced that real GDP increased at an annual rate of 0.6 percent in the first quarter, a downward revision of its earlier estimate. Activity was held down in the first quarter, in part, by several factors that seem likely to prove transitory--for example, a drop in exports, a significant reduction in inventory investment, and a decline in defense spending. My view and, it seems, the view of many private forecasters is that economic growth will pick up as we move through the year, with the rate of expansion close to potential by 2008. In recent quarters, weakness in the housing market has been the major source of the slowdown in the growth of real GDP. Indeed, declines in real residential investment held down the growth of output nearly 1-1/4 percentage points in the second half of last year and another 1 percentage point in the first quarter of this year. After an extended boom in housing, the demand for homes began to weaken in mid-2005. By the middle of 2006, sales of both new and existing homes had fallen considerably from their peak levels. Homebuilders responded to the drop in demand by sharply curtailing construction. Even so, the inventory of unsold homes rose dramatically. Sales of new homes weakened further in the first part of this year, and the inventory of unsold homes continued to rise. The latest data for the housing market have been mixed. Sales of single-family existing homes fell 2-1/2 percent in April to a level 5 percent below the rate posted in the second half of last year. In the market for new homes, however, sales jumped in April, which brought them back in line with the average rate posted in the second half of 2006. The inventory of unsold new homes also improved a bit in April. Nonetheless, the supply of unsold homes is still quite high by historical norms, and further production adjustments by homebuilders seem likely, thereby suggesting that the drag on economic activity from the housing correction will continue in coming quarters. Another area of softness has been business spending for new equipment, which slowed toward the end of last year and remained anemic in the first quarter of 2007. Part of the slowing reflected weaknesses in the construction industry, and also in the motor vehicle industry. While high-tech has been a bright spot, the demand in other industries generally was tepid. Still, incoming data support prospects for an improvement in investment. Orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft rose in April for a second month. In addition, business sentiment--as measured, for example, by the Institute for Supply Management survey of purchasing managers--has moved higher lately. More generally, sound business financial conditions--solid balance sheets, high profits, and relatively low interest rates and credit spreads--also should support stronger investment going forward. Let me turn now to the consumer sector. Until the early part of this year, continuing increases in employment and income helped personal consumption expenditures provide a source of strength for overall growth. More recently, consumption growth has slowed, in part because of the effects of higher oil prices on real income. Looking forward, consumer spending should be supported by the likelihood of further gains in employment. Private nonfarm payroll employment increased 63,000 in April, and the latest data on initial claims for unemployment insurance as well several other labor market indicators point to additional advances in hiring. On the international trade front, recent readings on economic activity abroad have been quite positive. Moreover, many of the forward-looking indicators of activity suggest that prospects for further economic expansion in Europe and Japan appear good in the near term. Despite indications of moderation in some emerging-market economies, the overall pace of activity in these countries, including China, appears to be strong. These factors suggest that the demand for U.S. exports of goods and services will continue to be solid. I will now turn from aggregate demand to aggregate supply and inflation. One important influence on aggregate supply and inflation is the trend growth rate of labor productivity. From 1995 to 2000, productivity in the nonfarm business sector increased at an average annual rate of 2-1/2 percent. It then accelerated to a rate of about 3 percent during the first half of this decade despite a recession, the fall of the dot-com market, a broad stock market correction, terrorism, and corporate governance scandals. However, in the early part of 2006, productivity growth slowed markedly, and it has increased at less than a 1 percent rate over the past four quarters. The recent deceleration raises the possibility that the trend has slowed significantly. If the trend has slowed, that could have important implications for the conduct of monetary policy. But the deceleration also could reflect, at least in part, cyclical dynamics in response to a slowing economy. Indeed, estimates of trend productivity from a variety of outside forecasters, which generally range from 2 percent to 2-3/4 percent, point to the possibility that much of the recent weakness will prove transitory. Of course, the middle of this range would suggest a modest slowdown from the consensus estimate from a year or so ago, which was around 2-1/2 percent. In any event, the possibility of a slowing in trend productivity is a risk to the outlook that I will continue to monitor. Another potential influence on inflation is the degree of pressure on resources.1In the labor market, the unemployment rate declined over the course of 2006 from about 5 percent to 4-1/2 percent, and so far this year it has remained close to that level. Reflecting the tightening of the labor market as well as the pressure on top-line inflation from increases in energy prices in recent years, the rate of increase in hourly compensation, although volatile, appears to be moving up. But the markup of prices over unit labor costs is still high by longer-run standards, and the wide margin implies that firms have the capacity to absorb increases in unit labor costs, at least for a while. As for price inflation, over the twelve months ending in April, the consumer price index excluding food and energy was up 2.3 percent, the same increase as in the preceding twelve months. Inflation as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy rose 2.1 percent over the twelve months ending in March (the latest available data). The most recent consensus forecast for total CPI inflation (on a fourth-quarter to fourth-quarter basis) is 3.0 percent in 2007 and 2.4 percent in 2008.2The anticipated moderation in inflation apparently reflects the expectation that the impetus from energy and other commodity prices will wane. In addition, inflation pressures should be restrained by the cumulative effects of monetary policy actions and other factors restraining the growth of aggregate demand. Perhaps most important for the inflation outlook, inflation expectations appear to remain contained. Median long-run inflation expectations from the Reuters/Michigan survey moved up to 3.1 percent in April, but this level is still in the narrow range seen over the past few years.3Long-run inflation compensation derived from spreads between yields on nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury securities stood at 2.4 percent on May 30 (ten-year, adjusted for carry effect), in the middle of the range observed since the turn of the year. Let me close with a few comments on what I see as some of the more important risks to the outlook for the U.S. economy. One potential upside risk is that consumer demand, which has show resilience in the face of high energy prices and the challenges in the housing market, grows at a faster pace than expected, thereby increasing pressures on resource utilization. One risk on the downside is the possibility that new home construction will weaken substantially further or that weakness in the housing market will spill over to other sectors and dampen aggregate demand significantly. Such an outcome could be prompted by a more pronounced weakening of home sales, a larger-than-expected drag on the housing market from the inventory of unsold homes, or more adverse developments in financial markets. Although developments in nonprime mortgage markets are causing hardship for many individuals and families, to date these challenges do not appear to be having a broad impact on economic activity. As you know, delinquency rates on subprime variable-rate mortgages have sharply increased. However, subprime variable-rate mortgages account for, at most, one in ten home-loan borrowers, and delinquency rates for most other types of residential mortgages remain low. Thus, relative to the broaderhousingmarket, the troubles in the subprime market should remain contained. Furthermore, the effects of rising subprime delinquencies have not seriously spilled over to the broaderfinancialmarkets. Risk premiums on subprime residential-mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) and derivative products have widened considerably, as investors are requiring higher returns. However, the issuance of subprime RMBS has slowed only moderately. Lenders have tightened standards and terms, but much more so on subprime and nontraditional mortgages than on prime loans.4Risk spreads on corporate bonds and premiums on credit default swaps for investment banks with some exposure to subprime markets have risen only slightly. Moreover, we see no serious effects on banks or thrift institutions; for the most part, the troubled lenders have not been institutions with federally insured deposits. Even so, foreclosure starts are rising so an increasing number of homeowners face the prospect of losing their home. Before continuing my assessment of the macro risks, I would like to take a moment to describe some of the current regulatory responses to the problems of elevated delinquencies and foreclosures. First, the Federal Reserve Board and the other federal financial institution regulators have already been encouraging the banks and thrifts that they supervise to work with borrowers who may be having trouble meeting their mortgage payments and for whom workouts are in the interest of both parties.5The federal regulators also issued draft supervisory guidance earlier this year to remind lenders of the importance of sound underwriting standards and clear disclosures, particularly in the case of subprime variable-rate mortgages.6In addition, we are actively considering how to make mortgage disclosures more effective and empower consumers to make better-informed decisions to achieve their financial goals.7We will, for example, review whether advertisements adequately disclose the limits of low initial rates and potential payment changes. Finally, on June 14, I will be chairing the fifth in a series of hearings on how the Board might use its rulemaking authority under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act, or HOEPA, to address concerns in the mortgage lending market. The purpose of the hearing is to gather information to evaluate how the Federal Reserve can prevent predatory lending in a way that also preserves incentives for responsible lenders to continue to lend. The Federal Reserve will do all that it can to prevent fraud and abusive mortgage lending practices. However, any new rules should be drawn clearly to avoid creating legal or regulatory uncertainty that could have the unintended consequence of restricting consumers' access to responsible subprime credit. Another area of possible financial risk that we are watching is leveraged lending.8Business borrowing for mergers and acquisitions and for corporate refinancing has been quite robust over the past few years as firms have taken advantage of relatively low interest rates to reduce their cost of capital. As underwriters have brought these deals to the market, the good earnings of corporate borrowers and several years of very low defaults have encouraged lenders and investors to fund hundreds of billions of dollars in leveraged loans. However, with this growth we are seeing some trends in the leveraged loan market that warrant closer monitoring: Deals continue to be structured with thin pricing, more leverage, and looser covenants than is typical for non-investment-grade borrowers. Further, originating banks are capitalizing on the strong investor demand for these loans by underwriting to distribute them, including through securitization, while holding only nominal exposures themselves. Although defaults and other indicators of borrower distress still remain low, and banks’ exposures are so far quite manageable, supervisors are mindful that high levels of leverage can lead to credit problems relatively quickly for both borrowers and lenders when conditions turn. We want to ensure that any adverse events do not materially affect the banking industry and hope to encourage market participants to employ more-realistic expectations and structures in underwriting riskier corporate loans. Turning to inflation risks, the high level of resource utilization continues to have the potential to put additional upward pressure on inflation. And, of course, higher oil prices and the possibility of further increases also pose an upside risk to inflation. With these concerns in mind, the latest statement issued by the Federal Open Market Committee again highlighted the risk that inflation could fail to moderate as expected, and I believe that the risks to the inflation outlook are primarily to the upside. The statement also noted that future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information. I will continue to monitor these developments, as well as those in financial markets, very closely. Footnotes 1.Kroszner, Randall S. (2007), “The Changing Dynamics of Inflation,” speech delivered at the 2007 Annual Washington Economic Policy Conference of the National Association for Business Economics, Arlington, Virginia, March 12, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/Kroszner20070312a.htm.Return to text 2.Blue Chip Economic Indicators(2007), May 10 (New York: Aspen Publishers), p. 3.Return to text 3.Richard Curtin (2007), “April 2007 Survey Results,”Reuters/University ofMichiganSurveys of Consumers(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan), April.Return to text 4.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007), “The April 2007 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices,” May, www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/SnLoanSurvey/200705.Return to text 5.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2007), "Federal Regulators Encourage Institutions to Work with Mortgage Borrowers Who Are Unable to Make Their Payments," press release, April 17, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20070417a.htm.Return to text 6.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2007), "Agencies Seek Comment on Subprime Mortgage Lending Statement," press release, March 2, www.federalreserve.gov//newsevents/press/bcreg/20070302a.htm.Return to text 7.Randall S. Kroszner (2007), “Creating More Effective Consumer Credit Disclosures,” speech delivered at the George Washington University School of Business, Financial Services Research Program Policy Forum, Washington, June 1, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speeches/Kroszner20070523a.htm.Return to text 8.A leveraged loan is commonly defined as a syndicated loan, typically to a riskier borrower, with an interest rate of at least libor plus 125 basis points.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced amendments to Appendix A of Regulation CC that reflect the restructuring of the Federal Reserve's check processing operations in the Twelfth District. These amendments are part of a series of amendments to Appendix A associated with the previously-announced restructuring of the Reserve Banks’ check processing operations. Appendix A provides a routing number guide that helps depository institutions determine the maximum permissible hold periods for most deposited checks. As of August 18, 2007, the head office of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco no longer will process checks, and banks currently served by that office will be reassigned to the Los Angeles branch office of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. To ensure that the information in Appendix A accurately describes the structure of check processing operations within the Federal Reserve System, the final rule deletes the reference in Appendix A to the San Francisco Reserve Bank’s head office and reassigns the routing numbers listed thereunder to the Reserve Bank’s Los Angeles branch office. To coincide with the effective date of the underlying check processing changes, the amendments are effective August 18, 2007. As a result of these changes, some checks deposited in the affected regions that currently are nonlocal checks will become local checks that are subject to shorter permissible hold periods. The Board's notice is attached. Federal Register Notice50 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Open Market Committee on Friday announced its tentative meeting schedule for 2008: January 29-30 (Tuesday-Wednesday) March 18 (Tuesday) April 29-30 (Tuesday-Wednesday) June 24-25 (Tuesday-Wednesday) August 5 (Tuesday) September 16 (Tuesday) October 28-29 (Tuesday-Wednesday) December 16 (Tuesday) January 27-28, 2009 (Tuesday-Wednesday)
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy in the Twenty-first Century Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia Economic growth and prosperity are created primarily by what economists call "real" factors--the productivity of the workforce, the quantity and quality of the capital stock, the availability of land and natural resources, the state of technical knowledge, and the creativity and skills of entrepreneurs and managers. But extensive practical experience as well as much formal research highlights the crucial supporting role that financial factors play in the economy. An entrepreneur with a great new idea for building a better mousetrap typically must tap financial capital, perhaps from a bank or a venture capitalist, to transform that idea into a profitable commercial enterprise. To expand and modernize their plants and increase their staffs, most firms must turn to financial markets or to financial institutions to secure this essential input. Families rely on the financial markets to obtain mortgages or to help finance their children's educations. In short, healthy financial conditions help a modern economy realize its full potential. For this reason, one of the critical priorities of developing economies is establishing a modern, well-functioning financial system. In the United States, a deep and liquid financial system has promoted growth by effectively allocating capital and has increased economic resilience by increasing our ability to share and diversify risks both domestically and globally. Just as a healthy financial system promotes growth, adverse financial conditions may prevent an economy from reaching its potential. A weak banking system grappling with nonperforming loans and insufficient capital or firms whose creditworthiness has eroded because of high leverage or declining asset values are examples of financial conditions that could undermine growth. Japan faced just this kind of challenge when the financial problems of banks and corporations contributed substantially to sub-par growth during the so-called "lost decade." As the topic of this conference reminds us, financial conditions may affect shorter-term economic conditions as well as the longer-term health of the economy. Notably, some evidence supports the view that changes in financial and credit conditions are important in the propagation of the business cycle, a mechanism that has been dubbed the "financial accelerator." Moreover, a fairly large literature has argued that changes in financial conditions may amplify the effects of monetary policy on the economy, the so-called credit channel of monetary-policy transmission. In fact, as I will discuss, these two ideas are essentially related. As someone who (in a former life) did research on both of these topics, I thought it might be useful for me to provide a somewhat personal overview of the financial accelerator and credit channel ideas and their common underlying logic. Along the way I will offer a few thoughts on where future research might be most productive. Market Frictions and the Real Effects of Financial and Credit ConditionsEconomists have not always fully appreciated the importance of a healthy financial system for economic growth or the role of financial conditions in short-term economic dynamics. As a matter of intellectual history, the reason is not difficult to understand. During the first few decades after World War II, economic theorists emphasized the development of general equilibrium models of the economy with complete markets; that is, in their analyses, economists generally abstracted from market "frictions" such as imperfect information or transaction costs. But without such frictions, financial markets have little reason to exist. For example, with complete markets (and if we ignore taxes), we know that whether a corporation finances itself by debt or equity is irrelevant (the Modigliani-Miller theorem). The blossoming of work on asymmetric information and principal-agent theory, led by Nobel laureates Joseph Stiglitz and George Akerlof and with contributions from many other researchers, gave economists the tools to think about the central role of financial markets in the real economy. For example, the classic 1976 paper by Michael Jensen and William Meckling showed that, in a world of imperfect information and principal-agent problems, the capital structure of the firm could be used as a tool by shareholders to better align the incentives of managers with the shareholders' interests. Thus was born a powerful and fruitful rejoinder to the Modigliani-Miller neutrality result and, more broadly, a perspective on capital structure that has had enduring influence. My own first job as an academic was at Stanford University, where I arrived as an assistant professor in the Graduate School of Business in 1979. At the time, Stanford was a hotbed of work on asymmetric information, incentives, and the principal-agent problem; and even though my field was macroeconomics, I was heavily influenced by that intellectual environment. I became particularly interested in how this perspective on financial markets could help explain why financial crises--that is, extreme disruptions of the normal functioning of financial markets--seem often to have a significant impact on the real economy. Putting the issue in the context of U.S. economic history, I laid out, in a 1983 article, two channels by which the financial problems of the 1930s may have worsened the Great Depression (Bernanke, 1983). The first channel worked through the banking system. As emphasized by the information-theoretic approach to finance, a central function of banks is to screen and monitor borrowers, thereby overcoming information and incentive problems. By developing expertise in gathering relevant information, as well as by maintaining ongoing relationships with customers, banks and similar intermediaries develop "informational capital." The widespread banking panics of the 1930s caused many banks to shut their doors; facing the risk of runs by depositors, even those who remained open were forced to constrain lending to keep their balance sheets as liquid as possible. Banks were thus prevented from making use of their informational capital in normal lending activities. The resulting reduction in the availability of bank credit inhibited consumer spending and capital investment, worsening the contraction. The second channel through which financial crises affected the real economy in the 1930s operated through the creditworthiness of borrowers. In general, the availability of collateral facilitates credit extension. The ability of a financially healthy borrower to post collateral reduces the lender's risks and aligns the borrower's incentives with those of the lender. However, in the 1930s, declining output and falling prices (which increased real debt burdens) led to widespread financial distress among borrowers, lessening their capacity to pledge collateral or to otherwise retain significant equity interests in their proposed investments. Borrowers' cash flows and liquidity were also impaired, which likewise increased the risks to lenders. Overall, the decline in the financial health of potential borrowers during the Depression decade further impeded the efficient allocation of credit. Incidentally, this information-based explanation of how the sharp deflation in prices in the 1930s may have had real effects was closely related to, and provided a formal rationale for, the idea of "debt-deflation," advanced by Irving Fisher in the early 1930s (Fisher, 1933). The External Finance Premium and the Financial AcceleratorBoth real and monetary shocks produced the Great Depression, and in my 1983 paper I argued that banking and financial markets propagated both types of impulses, without distinguishing sharply between the two. My subsequent research and that of many others looked separately at the role of financial conditions in amplifying both monetary and nonmonetary influences. On the nonmonetary side, Mark Gertler and I showed how, in principle, the effects of a real shock (such as a shock to productivity) on financial conditions could lead to persistent fluctuations in the economy, even if the initiating shock had little or no intrinsic persistence (Bernanke and Gertler, 1989). A key concept in our analysis was the external finance premium, defined as the difference between the cost to a borrower of raising funds externally and the opportunity cost of internal funds. External finance (raising funds from lenders) is virtually always more expensive than internal finance (using internally generated cash flows), because of the costs that outside lenders bear of evaluating borrowers' prospects and monitoring their actions. Thus, the external finance premium is generally positive. Moreover, the theory predicts that the external finance premium that a borrower must pay should depend inversely on the strength of the borrower's financial position, measured in terms of factors such as net worth, liquidity, and current and future expected cash flows. Fundamentally, a financially strong borrower has more "skin in the game," so to speak, and consequently has greater incentives to make well-informed investment choices and to take the actions needed to ensure good financial outcomes. Because of the good incentives that flow from the borrower's having a significant stake in the enterprise and the associated reduction in the need for intensive evaluation and monitoring by the lender, borrowers in good financial condition generally pay a lower premium for external finance.1 The inverse relationship of the external finance premium and the financial condition of borrowers creates a channel through which otherwise short-lived economic shocks may have long-lasting effects. In the hypothetical case that Gertler and I analyzed, an increase in productivity that improves the cash flows and balance sheet positions of firms leads in turn to lower external finance premiums in subsequent periods, which extends the expansion as firms are induced to continue investing even after the initial productivity shock has dissipated. This "financial accelerator" effect applies in principle to any shock that affects borrower balance sheets or cash flows. The concept is useful in that it can help to explain the persistence and amplitude of cyclical fluctuations in a modern economy. Although the financial accelerator seems intuitive--certainly financial and credit conditions tend to be procyclical--nailing down this mechanism empirically has not proven entirely straightforward. For example, empirical studies of business investment in structures, equipment, and inventories have often found that a firm's cash flow significantly determines its level of investment and that the link between cash flow and investment tends to be stronger for firms (such as relatively small firms) that have more limited access to capital markets.2In a "frictionless" capital market in which borrowers do not face an external finance premium, a firm's cash position would be irrelevant to its decision to invest because efficient capital markets would supply any necessary funding for investment projects expected to yield a positive net return. Thus, findings of a positive association between cash flow and investment tend to support the financial accelerator theory. These findings also raise issues and questions, however. I will mention two. First, as a number of researchers have pointed out, the apparent empirical link between cash flow and investment may arise because cash flow proxies for difficult-to-measure factors like the prospective return on investment, which would be relevant to the investment decision even without capital-market frictions. This identification problem is a difficult one. However, some work that has attempted to correct for this possible misspecification has still found a role for cash flow (see, for example, Gilchrist and Himmelberg, 1999). Second, if only the smallest firms have significant external finance premiums, as implied by some research, then the macroeconomic significance of the financial accelerator may be questioned. One response to this point, pursued by several researchers, has been to dispute the claim that small firms do not play a significant role in business-cycle fluctuations. For example, small firms apparently account for a significant portion of cyclical changes in employment and inventory stocks. Another response has been to argue that even large firms with relatively good access to capital markets may face nontrivial external finance premiums. For instance, using a sample that included large public companies, researchers at the Board have estimated external finance premiums of economically significant magnitudes, and they showed that these premiums rose sharply during the 2001 recession, as predicted by the financial accelerator theory (Levin, Natalucci, and Zakrajsek, 2004; Levin and Natalucci, 2005). Financial accelerator effects need not be confined to firms and capital spending but may operate through household spending decisions as well.3Household borrowers, like firms, presumably face an external finance premium, which is lower the stronger their financial position. For households, home equity is often a significant part of net worth. Certainly, households with low mortgage loan-to-value ratios can borrow on relatively favorable terms through home-equity lines of credit, with the equity in their home effectively serving as collateral. If the financial accelerator hypothesis is correct, changes in home values may affect household borrowing and spending by somewhat more than suggested by the conventional wealth effect because changes in homeowners' net worth also affect their external finance premiums and thus their costs of credit. If true, this hypothesis has various interesting implications. For example, unlike the standard view based on the wealth effect, this approach would suggest that the distribution of housing wealth across the population matters because the effect on aggregate consumption of a given decline in house prices is greater, the greater the fraction of consumers who begin with relatively low home equity. Another possible implication is that the structure of mortgage contracts may matter for consumption behavior. In countries like the United Kingdom, for example, where most mortgages have adjustable rates, changes in short-term interest rates (whether induced by monetary policy or some other factor) have an almost immediate effect on household cash flows. If household cash flows affect access to credit, then consumer spending may react relatively quickly. In an economy where most mortgages carry fixed rates, such as the United States, that channel of effect may be more muted. I do not think we know at this point whether, in the case of households, these effects are quantitatively significant in the aggregate. Certainly, these issues seem worthy of further study. Monetary Policy and the Credit ChannelThe ideas I have been discussing today have also been useful in understanding the nature of the monetary policy transmission process. Some evidence suggests that the influence of monetary policy on real variables is greater than can be explained by the traditional "cost-of-capital" channel, which holds that monetary policy affects borrowing, investment, and spending decisions solely through its effect on the level of market interest rates. This finding has led researchers to look for supplementary channels through which monetary policy may affect the economy. One such supplementary channel, the so-called credit channel, holds that monetary policy has additional effects because interest-rate decisions affect the cost and availability of credit by more than would be implied by the associated movement in risk-free interest rates, such as Treasury rates. The credit channel, in turn, has traditionally been broken down into two components or channels of policy influence: the balance-sheet channel and the bank-lending channel (Bernanke and Gertler, 1995). The balance-sheet channel of monetary policy is closely related to the idea of the financial accelerator that I have already discussed. That theory builds from the premise that changes in interest rates engineered by the central bank affect the values of the assets and the cash flows of potential borrowers and thus their creditworthiness, which in turn affects the external finance premium that borrowers face. For example, according to this view, a tightening of monetary policy that reduces the net worth and liquidity of borrowers would increase the effective cost of credit by more than the change in risk-free rates and thus would intensify the effect of the policy action. In the interest of time I will confine the remainder of my remarks to the bank-lending channel. The theory of the bank-lending channel holds that monetary policy works in part by affecting the supply of loans offered by depository institutions. This concept is a cousin of the idea I proposed in my paper on the Great Depression, that the failures of banks during the 1930s destroyed "information capital" and thus reduced the effective supply of credit to borrowers. Alan Blinder and I adapted this general idea to show how, by affecting banks' loanable funds, monetary policy could influence the supply of intermediated credit (Bernanke and Blinder, 1988). Historically, monetary policy did appear to affect the supply of bank loans (at any given level of interest rates). In the 1960s and 1970s, when reserve requirements were higher and more comprehensive than they are today, Federal Reserve open market operations that drained reserves from the banking system tended to force a contraction in deposits. Regulation Q, which capped interest rates payable on deposits, prevented banks from offsetting the decline in deposits by offering higher interest rates. Moreover, banks had limited alternatives to deposits as a funding source. Thus, monetary tightening typically resulted in a shrinking of banks' balance sheets and a diversion of funds away from the banking system, a phenomenon known as disintermediation. The extension of credit to bank-dependent borrowers, which included many firms as well as households, was consequently reduced, with implications for spending and economic activity. Of course, much has changed in U.S. banking and financial markets since the 1960s and 1970s. Reserve requirements are lower and apply to a smaller share of deposits than in the past. Regulation Q is gone. And the capital markets have become deep, liquid, and easily accessible, either directly or indirectly, to almost all depository institutions. Although the traditional bank-lending channel may still be operative in economies that remain relatively more bank-dependent, as recent research has found for some European countries (Ehrmann and others, 2003), in the United States today it seems unlikely to be quantitatively important. This is not to say, however, that financial intermediation no longer matters for monetary policy and the transmission of economic shocks. For example, although banks and other intermediaries no longer depend exclusively on insured deposits for funding, nondeposit sources of funding are likely to be relatively more expensive than deposits, reflecting the credit risks associated with uninsured lending (Stein, 1998). Moreover, the cost and availability of nondeposit funds for any given bank will depend on the perceived creditworthiness of the institution. Thus, the concerns of holders of uninsured bank liabilities about bank credit quality generate an external finance premium for banks that is similar to that faced by other borrowers. The external finance premium paid by banks is presumably reflected in turn in the cost and availability of funds to bank-dependent borrowers. Importantly, this way of casting the bank-lending channel unifies the financial accelerator and credit channel concepts, as the central mechanism of both is seen to be the external finance premium and its relationship to borrowers' balance sheets. The only difference is that the financial accelerator focuses on the ultimate borrowers--firms and households--whereas financial intermediaries are the relevant borrowers in the theory of the credit channel. By the way, the existence of loan sales and the originate-to-distribute model of bank lending does not fundamentally change this picture. Loan sales and similar activities are, in essence, another form of nondeposit financing, and the effective cost of this form of funding to the bank will generally depend on its perceived financial strength and resources (which may affect recourse and reinsurance arrangements with the loan purchasers, for example). Recently, researchers have pursued a number of approaches in search of evidence of a distinct banking channel. For example, some researchers have focused on smaller banks, which may have fewer funding alternatives to deposits and whose customer base may consist disproportionately of bank-dependent borrowers (Kashyap and Stein, 2000). Of course, these days, even the smallest of banks has ready access to sources of funds other than retail deposits. Thus, even for the smallest banks, the source of any bank-lending channel remains the existence of a finance premium on marginal sources of (uninsured) nondeposit funding, rather than an absolute constraint on the quantity of available funding. Moreover, for the bank channel to affect economic activity, borrowers accustomed to relying on banks must be unable to turn to other lenders, at least not without some cost. For some business borrowers, particularly small business borrowers that rely on banking relationships, this scenario is plausible.4But financial innovation and deregulation imply that borrowers in the market for a mortgage or consumer credit have numerous nonbank financing alternatives, blunting any direct impact of changes in bank lending. I will return to nonbank lending and its implications in a moment. If relationship borrowing is the key, then--as pointed out in the paper at this conference by Black, Hancock, and Passmore--a bank with many such borrowers might defensively invest in deposit capacity, say, by increasing the number of branches. By actively seeking to finance a high share of loans with insured deposits, such a bank could shield its borrowers from the effects of increases in the nondeposit finance premium, whether the result of monetary policy or some other factor. Consistent with this idea, these authors find that banks that make a large share of their loans to small businesses also tend to have a high ratio of deposits to loans. The recognition that, fundamentally, the bank-lending channel is based on changes in the quality of bank balance sheets naturally turns our attention to bank capital and its determinants (Van den Heuvel, 2002). Raising new capital on the open market can be difficult and costly for many banks, implying that, in the short run, capital is determined by earnings and changes in asset values. Changes in the value of capital, particularly when a bank's capital is not much higher than the level demanded by regulators or the market, potentially affect the bank's cost of funds. In conformity with this hypothesis, various studies have found evidence that loans provided by banks that are more capital-constrained seem more sensitive to changes in market interest rates than loans provided by highly capitalized banks.5Moreover, changes in the financial condition of banks may play a role in cyclical developments. I have already mentioned the cases of Japan's "lost decade." Closer to home, some believe that the U.S. economy's recovery from the 1990-91 recession was delayed by "financial headwinds," which arose from regional shortages of bank capital (Bernanke and Lown, 1991). One might view the idea that banks are somehow "special" in their ability to gather information and to screen and monitor borrowers as rather dated. Banks do continue to play a central role in credit markets; in particular, because of the burgeoning market for loan sales, banks originate considerably more loans than they keep on their books. Nevertheless, nonbank lenders have become increasingly important in many credit markets, and relatively few borrowers are restricted to banks as sources of credit. Of course, nonbank lenders do not have access to insured deposits. However, they can fund loans by borrowing on capital markets or by selling loans to securitizers. Does the rise of nonbank lenders make the bank-lending channel irrelevant? I am not so sure that it does. Like banks, nonbank lenders have to raise funds in order to lend, and the cost at which they raise those funds will depend on their financial condition--their net worth, their leverage, and their liquidity, for example. Thus, nonbank lenders also face an external finance premium that presumably can be influenced by economic developments or monetary policy. The level of the premium they pay will in turn affect the rates that they can offer borrowers. Thus, the ideas underlying the bank-lending channel might reasonably extend to all private providers of credit. Further investigation of this possibility would be quite worthwhile. ConclusionI have taken you on a whirlwind tour of several decades of research on how variations in the financial condition of borrowers, whether arising from changes in monetary policy or from other forces, can affect short-term economic dynamics. The critical idea is that the cost of funds to borrowers depends inversely on their creditworthiness, as measured by indicators such as net worth and liquidity. Endogenous changes in creditworthiness may increase the persistence and amplitude of business cycles (the financial accelerator) and strengthen the influence of monetary policy (the credit channel). As I have noted today, what has been called the bank-lending channel--the idea that banks play a special role in the transmission of monetary policy--can be integrated into this same broad logical framework, if we focus on the link between the bank's financial condition and its cost of capital. Nonbank lenders may well be subject to the same forces. Let me conclude by offering you best wishes for a stimulating and enjoyable last day of the conference. Policymakers and scholars both will benefit from your efforts. References Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, and Crocker H. Liu (2006)."The Financial Accelerator: Evidence from International Housing Markets,"Review of Finance, vol. 10 (September), pp. 1-32. Aoki, Kosuki, James Proudman, and Gertjan Vlieghe (2002)."Houses as Collateral: Has the Link between House Prices and Consumption in the U.K. Changed?" (188 KB PDF)Economic Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May, pp. 163-77 -----------------------------------------------(2004)."House Prices, Consumption, and Monetary Policy: A Financial Accelerator Approach,"Journal of Financial Intermediation, vol. 13 (October), pp. 414-35. Avery, Robert B., and Katherine A. Samolyk (2004). "Bank Consolidation and the Provision of Banking Services: Small Commercial Loans,"Journal of Financial Services Research, vol. 25 (April), pp. 291-325. Bernanke, Ben S. (1983)."Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great Depression,"American Economic Review, vol. 73 (June), pp. 257-76. Bernanke, Ben S., and Alan S. Blinder (1988)."Credit, Money, and Aggregate Demand,"American Economic Review, vol. 78, Papers and Proceedings of the 100th Annual Meeting of the American Economics Association, May, pp. 435-39. Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler (1989)."Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,"American Economic Review, vol. 79 (March), pp. 14-31. --------------------------------------(1995)."Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy Transmission,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 9 (Fall), pp. 27-48. Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999)."The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,"inHandbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1C, Handbooks in Economics, vol. 15. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 1341-93. Bernanke, Ben S., and Cara S. Lown (1991). "The Credit Crunch,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1991:2, pp. 205-39. Black, Lamont, Diana Hancock, and Wayne Passmore (2007). "Bank Core Deposits and the Mitigation of Monetary Policy," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Calomiris, Charles W., Charles P. Himmelberg, and Paul Wachtel (1995). "Commercial Paper, Corporate Finance and the Business Cycle: A Microeconomic Perspective,"Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy, vol. 42 (June), pp. 203-50. Carlstrom, CharlesT., and Timothy S. Fuerst (2001)."Monetary Policy in a World without Perfect Capital Markets,"Working Paper 0115, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. Carpenter, Robert E., Steven M. Fazzari, and Bruce C. Petersen (1998)."Financing Constraints and Inventory Investment: A Comparative Study with High-Frequency Panel Data," (265 KB PDF)Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 80 (December), pp. 513-19. Ehrmann, Michael, Leonardo Gambacorta, Jorge Martinez-Pages, Patrick Sevestre, and Andreas Worms (2003). "Financial Systems and the Role of Banks in Monetary Policy Transmission in the Euro Area," in Ignazio Angeloni, Anil K Kashyap, and Benoit Mojon, eds.,Monetary Policy Transmission in the Euro area: A Study by the Eurosystem Monetary Transmission Network,. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Fisher, Irving (1933). "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,"Econometrica, vol. 1 (October), pp. 337-57. Gambacorta, Leonardo (2005)."Inside the Bank Lending Channel,"European Economic Review, vol. 49 (October), pp. 1737-59. Gilchrist, Simon, and Charles Himmelberg (1999). "Investment, Fundamentals and Finance," in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, eds.NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1998.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Iacoviello, Matteo (2005)."House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in the Business Cycle,"American Economic Review, vol. 95 (June), pp. 739-64. Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling (1976)."Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 3 (October), pp. 305-60. Kashyap, Anil K, and Jeremy C. Stein (2000)."What Do a Million Observations on Banks Say about the Transmission of Monetary Policy?"American Economic Review, vol. 90 (June), pp. 407-28. Kishan, Ruby P., and Timothy Opiela (2000)."Bank Size, Bank Capital, and the Bank Lending Channel,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 32 (February), pp. 121-41. ------------------------------- (2006)."Bank Capital and Loan Asymmetry in the Transmission of Monetary Policy,"Journal of Banking and Finance, vol. 30 (January), pp. 259-85. Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore (1997)."Credit Cycles,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 105 (April), pp. 211-48. Levin, Andrew T., and Fabio M. Natalucci (2005). "The Magnitude and Cyclical Behavior of Financial Market Frictions," 2005 Meeting Papers 443, Society for Economic Dynamics. Levin, Andrew T., Fabio M. Natalucci, and Egon Zakrajsek (2004)."The Magnitude and Cyclical Behavior of Financial Market Frictions,"Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2004-70, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December. Stein, Jeremy C. (1998)."An Adverse-Selection Model of Bank Asset and Liability Management with Implications for the Transmission of Monetary Policy,"RAND Journal of Economics, vol. 29 (Autumn), pp. 466-86. Van den Heuvel, Skander (2002)."Does Bank Capital Matter for Monetary Transmission?" (100 KB PDF)Economic Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York (May), pp. 1-7. Footnotes 1.Over the past two decades, an extensive theoretical literature has exploited the idea that borrowers' financial positions affect their external finance premiums and thus their overall cost of credit. See, for example, Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999), Carlstrom and Fuerst (2001), Aoki, Proudman and Vlieghe (2004), and Iacoviello (2005).Return to text 2.Calomiris, Himmelberg and Wachtel,(1995), Carpenter, Fazzari and Petersen (1998), and Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1999).Return to text 3.See Aoki, Proudman and Vlieghe (2002, 2004), Iacoviello (2005), and Almeida, Campello and Liu (2006).Return to text 4.In recent years, community banks appear to have become increasingly important in lending to small businesses (Avery and Samolyk, 2004).Return to text 5.Kishan and Opiela, (2000), Kishan and Opiela, (2006), and Gambacorta (2005).Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke To the 2007 International Monetary Conference, Cape Town, South Africa (via satellite) Over the past four quarters, the U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) has increased at an average rate of about 2 percent. Growth during the first quarter of this year was held down by some factors--notably, significant declines in inventory accumulation, net exports, and federal defense spending--that seem likely to be at least partially reversed in the near term. Of course, the adjustment in the housing sector is still ongoing, and the slowdown in residential construction now appears likely to remain a drag on economic growth for somewhat longer than previously expected. Thus far, however, we have not seen major spillovers from housing onto other sectors of the economy. On average, over coming quarters, we expect the economy to advance at a moderate pace, close to or slightly below the economy’s trend rate of expansion. As expected, we have also seen a gradual ebbing of core inflation, although its level remains somewhat elevated. Despite recent increases in the prices of crude oil and gasoline, energy prices overall are below last year’s peak; the rate of increase in shelter costs seems likely to slow, although the timing remains uncertain; and long-run inflation expectations, as derived from both surveys and market-based measures of inflation compensation, have remained contained. However, although core inflation seems likely to moderate gradually over time, the risks to this forecast remain to the upside. In particular, the continuing high rate of resource utilization suggests that the level of final demand may still be high relative to the underlying productive capacity of the economy. In my brief remarks today I will focus on some recent developments in housing, including the emergence of some serious stresses in subprime mortgage markets. I will also discuss some initiatives taken or planned by the Federal Reserve to respond to the problems in subprime mortgage lending. Developments in the Housing MarketAs you know, the downturn in the housing market has been sharp. From their peaks in mid-2005, sales of existing homes have declined more than 10 percent, and sales of new homes have fallen by 30 percent. A leveling-off of sales late last year hinted at a possible stabilization of housing demand; however, once one smoothes through the monthly volatility of the data, more-recent readings indicate that demand weakened further, on net, over the first four months of this year. House prices decelerated sharply last year, following annual gains averaging 9 percent from 2000 to 2005. Prices have continued to be quite soft so far in 2007, although for the most part outright price declines have been concentrated in markets that showed especially large increases in earlier years. Homebuilders have responded to weak sales by curtailing construction. Single-family housing starts have declined by a third since early 2006, sufficient to subtract about 1 percentage point from real GDP growth over the past four quarters. Despite the drop in homebuilding, the inventory of unsold new homes has risen to more than seven months of sales, a level well above the average observed over the past decade. Accordingly, and as reflected in the continued downward trend in permits to build single-family homes, residential construction will likely remain subdued for a time, until further progress can be made in working down the backlog of unsold new homes. Recent developments in the subprime mortgage market add somewhat to the usual uncertainty in forecasting housing demand. Subprime mortgage borrowing nearly tripled during the housing boom years of 2004 and 2005. But decelerating house prices, higher interest rates, and slower economic growth have contributed to an increased rate of delinquency among subprime borrowers. This increase has occurred almost entirely among borrowers with adjustable-rate mortgages; delinquency rates for fixed-rate subprime mortgages have remained generally stable. Some of the increased difficulties now being experienced by subprime borrowers are likely the result of an earlier loosening of underwriting standards, as evidenced by the pronounced rise in 2006 in “early payment defaults”--defaults occurring within a few months of mortgage origination. All told, the rate of serious delinquencies for subprime mortgages with adjustable interest rates--corresponding to mortgages in the foreclosure process or with payments ninety or more days overdue--has risen to about 12 percent, roughly double the recent low seen in mid-2005.1The rate of serious delinquencies has also risen somewhat among some types of near-prime mortgages, although the delinquency rates in those categories remain much lower than the rate in the subprime market. As a consequence of these developments, investors are now scrutinizing nonprime loans more carefully, and lenders in turn have tightened up their underwriting. Risk premiums on indexes of credit default swaps for subprime mortgage-backed securities (MBS) began to widen sharply late last year, especially for those on pools of mortgages originated in 2006. Credit spreads on new subprime MBS have also risen. Respondents to the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey in April indicated a substantial net tightening of standards for subprime mortgages. Tighter lending standards in the subprime mortgage market--together with the possibility that the well-publicized problems in this market may dissuade potentially eligible borrowers from applying--will serve to restrain housing demand, although the magnitude of these effects is difficult to quantify. Subprime and near-prime mortgage originations rose sharply in 2004 and 2005 and likely accounted for a large share of the increase in the number of home sales over that period. However, originations of nonprime mortgages to purchase homes appear to have peaked in late 2005 and declined substantially since then, and by more (even in absolute terms) than prime mortgage originations. Thus, some part of the effect on housing demand of the retrenchment in the subprime market has likely already been felt. Moreover, indicators such as the gross issuance of new subprime and near-prime MBS suggest that the supply of nonprime mortgage credit, though reduced, has by no means evaporated.2That said, the tightening of terms and standards now in train may well lead to some further contraction in nonprime originations in the period ahead. We are also likely to see further increases in delinquencies and foreclosures this year and next as many subprime adjustable-rate loans face interest-rate resets. We will follow developments in the subprime market closely. However, fundamental factors--including solid growth in incomes and relatively low mortgage rates--should ultimately support the demand for housing, and at this point, the troubles in the subprime sector seem unlikely to seriously spill over to the broader economy or the financial system. Federal Reserve Initiatives and Possible Regulatory ActionsWhatever their effects on the broader economy, the problems in the subprime sector are causing real distress for many homeowners. To help mitigate the situation, the Federal Reserve and other federal supervisory agencies are encouraging the banks and thrift institutions that we supervise towork with borrowerswho may be having trouble meeting their mortgage obligations, including identifying and contacting borrowers before they enter delinquency or foreclosure. Federal Reserve Banks around the country are cooperating with community and industry groups that work with borrowers and affected communities. We also continue to work with organizations that provide counseling about mortgage products to current and potential homeowners. Studies suggest that counseling can be effective in helping borrowers make better financial decisions.3In addition, we at the Federal Reserve, other regulators, and the Congress are evaluating what actions may be needed to prevent a recurrence of these problems. In deciding, we must walk a fine line: We have an obligation to prevent fraud and abusive lending; at the same time, we must tread carefully so as not to suppress responsible lending or eliminate refinancing opportunities for subprime borrowers. Broadly speaking, financial regulators have four types of tools to protect consumers and to promote safe and sound underwriting practices: required disclosures by lenders, rules to prohibit abusive or deceptive practices, principles-based guidance with supervisory oversight, and less-formal efforts to work with industry participants to promote best practices. The Federal Reserve currently is conducting a thorough review of its policies with respect to each of these instruments. Effective disclosures are the first line of defense against improper lending. If consumers are well informed, they are in a much better position to make decisions in their own best interest. To fulfill its responsibilities under the Truth-in-Lending Act (TILA), the Board has undertaken a full review of consumer disclosures for mortgage lending. For example, we are considering whether to require lenders to provide certain disclosures more quickly and are evaluating existing requirements concerning the advertising of mortgage products. As we did for our recently releasedproposed rulemaking on credit-card disclosures, we will be doing extensive consumer testing to evaluate the effectiveness of current and proposed disclosures required of all mortgage lenders. Of course, the information provided by even the best-designed disclosures can be useful only when it is well understood. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve produces a range of consumer education materials, including information to help potential borrowers understand adjustable-rate and other alternative mortgages, and we actively promote financial education by partnering with outside organizations. However, combating bad lending practices, including deliberate fraud or abuse, may require additional measures. Under the Home Ownership Equity Protection Act (HOEPA), the Board has the responsibility to prohibit mortgage lending practices that it finds to be unfair and deceptive. In 2001, the Board banned several practices for high-cost loans, such as loan flipping--a practice characterized by frequent and repeated refinancing to generate fees for lenders. We will consider whether other specific lending practices are unfair or deceptive and should thus be prohibited under HOEPA. Next week we areholding a public hearingto gather input about potential abuses in mortgage lending. We will also continue to seek input from consumer and industry groups, the Federal Reserve’s Consumer Advisory Council, our fellow regulators, and others who may have useful insights about mortgage lending practices. We have also used, and will continue to use, supervisory guidance to help mitigate problems in nonprime lending. Last year, together with other federal banking regulators, weissued guidanceconcerning so-called nontraditional mortgages. We have also issueddraft supervisory guidanceconcerning underwriting standards and disclosures for subprime mortgages. The agencies are now reviewing the many responses to the draft proposal. The patchwork nature of enforcement authority in subprime lending poses a special challenge. For example, rules issued by the Board under HOEPA apply to all lenders but are enforced--depending on the lender--by the Federal Trade Commission, state regulators, or one of the five federal regulators of depository institutions. To achieve uniform and effective enforcement, cooperation and coordination are essential. We are committed to working closely with other federal and state regulators to ensure that the laws that protect consumers are enforced. Together with other regulators and the Congress, we have much to do and many issues to consider. We undertake that effort with utmost seriousness because our collective success will have significant implications for the financial well-being, access to credit, and opportunities for homeownership of many of our fellow citizens. Footnotes1.Estimates of delinquencies are based on data from First American LoanPerformance.Return to text 2.Issuance data are fromInside Mortgage Finance.Return to text 3.See, for example, Abdighani Hirad and Peter M. Zorn (2001), “A Little Knowledge Is a Good Thing: Empirical Evidence of the Effectiveness of Pre-Purchase Homeownership Counseling,” and Gregory Elliehausen, E. Christopher Lundquist, and Michael E. Staten (2003), "The Impact of Credit Counseling on Subsequent Borrower Credit Usage and Payment Behavior," papers presented at“Seeds of Growth--Sustainable Community Development: What Works, What Doesn’t and Why?,”a Federal Reserve System Community Affairs Research Conference held in Washington, D.C., March 27-28, 2003.Return to text
Governor Randall S. Kroszner Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear today to discuss the Federal Reserve Board's role in protecting consumers in financial services transactions. IntroductionAn important part of the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate is promoting the availability of credit throughout the banking system. In the case of consumer credit, equally important with promoting its availability is the Federal Reserve's responsibility for implementing the laws designed to protect consumers in financial services transactions. Many of these laws are based on ensuring that consumers receive adequate information in the form of disclosures about the features and risks of a particular product. Information is critical to the effective functioning of markets. A core principle of economics is that markets are more competitive, and therefore more efficient, when accurate information is available to both consumers and suppliers. When information on alternatives is readily available, product offerings have to meet customers' demands and offering prices have to reflect those of market competitors. If consumers are well informed, they are in a better position to make decisions that are in their best interest. Information helps and empowers individual consumers by improving their ability to compare products and to choose those that will help them meet their personal goals. With the aid of technological advances, financial institutions have been able to offer innovative products that are increasingly diverse but also increasingly complex. While this has expanded consumers' access to credit and their options, it also presents a challenge in ensuring that consumer disclosures about these more complex products are effective. To be effective, disclosures must give consumers information at a time when it is relevant, and in language they can easily understand. The information must also be in a format that allows consumers to identify and use the information that is most important to them. In a nutshell, because effective disclosure gives consumers information they notice, understand, and can use, it empowers consumers and enhances competition. The Board is committed to developing more effective disclosures, but even well-designed disclosures can only be useful if they can be understood by consumers who have the necessary financial knowledge. Accordingly, we must promote financial education, and having been an educator for many years, I am very pleased that the Board is actively involved in this area. The Board is keenly aware, however, that disclosures and financial education may not always be sufficient to combat abusive practices. Indeed, the consumer financial services laws implemented by the Board contain a number of substantive protections, reflecting carefully considered legislative judgments that certain practices should be restricted or prohibited. The Board also has the responsibility to prohibit other practices by issuing rules, for example, if the Board finds they meet the legal standard for "unfair or deceptive" practices under the Federal Trade Commission Act (FTC Act) or the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA). We must be mindful, however, of unintended consequences. Crafting effective rules under the "unfair or deceptive" standard presents significant challenges. Whether a practice is unfair or deceptive depends heavily on the particular facts and circumstances. To be effective, rules must have broad enough coverage to encompass a wide variety of circumstances so they are not easily circumvented. At the same time, rules with broad prohibitions could limit consumers' financing options in legitimate cases that do not meet the required legal standard. This has led the Federal Reserve to focus primarily on addressing potentially unfair or deceptive practices by using its supervisory powers on a case-by-case basis rather than through rulemaking. The FTC, which has authority to prohibit unfair or deceptive practices for financial services firms that are not depository institutions, has taken a similar approach. Because the prohibition on unfair or deceptive acts or practices applies to all depository institutions as a matter of law, the banking and thrift agencies can and do enforce this prohibition using their supervisory enforcement powers. The Board also addresses concerns about some practices under other statutes, such as the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) or Truth in Savings Act (TISA). For example, the Board used its HOEPA authority to address the "flipping" of high-cost mortgage loans. Under TILA, we recently proposed a rule prohibiting credit card issuers' from describing their rates as "fixed" unless they specify a period where the rate is not subject to change for any reason. The Board also revised its TISA rules to address concerns about overdraft protection programs. The Board is committed to addressing abusive practices and will consider how it might use its authority to prohibit specific practices consistent with the legal standards in appropriate cases, such as when there are widespread abuses that cannot be effectively addressed through case-by-case determinations in the supervisory process. The Board's Role in Protecting ConsumersIn carrying out its mandate related to consumer protection in financial services, the Federal Reserve has several roles that are carried out through four complementary processes. First, there is the Board's role as rulewriter, in which we issue regulations, either alone or jointly with other federal agencies, to implement the consumer financial services and fair lending laws. Second, there is the Federal Reserve's role in examining the financial institutions that we supervise for safety and soundness, as well as for compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. This includes taking supervisory action for the institutions under our jurisdiction, as appropriate, to enforce the laws and resolve any consumer complaints. Third, the Federal Reserve actively promotes consumer education through its publications and through a variety of partnerships with other organizations. Finally, the Federal Reserve's Community Affairs Program supports the Board's objective of promoting community development and fair and impartial access to credit by conducting outreach activities in lower-income communities and traditionally underserved markets. Today, I would like to discuss each of these four roles and some significant actions that the Board has taken in these areas. I will also highlight how the Board is coordinating its efforts with the other federal and state supervisory agencies. The Board's Rulewriting ResponsibilitiesThe Board has sole responsibility for issuing rules to implement a number of consumer financial services and fair lending laws, including TILA, TISA, the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA), Consumer Leasing Act, Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA), and Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). In conducting these rulemakings, the Board reviews public comment letters and solicits the views of other federal and state regulators who have valuable insights based on their own experience and expertise in supervising financial institutions and protecting consumers. We often obtain the views of other agencies on Board rulemakings through informal outreach efforts, but sometimes we receive written comment letters, as was the case with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency's (OCC) recent recommendations for revised credit card disclosures. We receive the views of state agencies through such organizations as the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS), the American Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators (AARMR), and the National Association of Attorneys General (NAAG), as well as from individual state regulatory agencies. In addition to the statutes for which the Board has exclusive rulewriting responsibility, the Board shares rulewriting responsibility with other agencies under certain laws, such as the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) and the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). Moreover, the Board and other federal financial regulators sometimes play a consulting role in the development of consumer regulations issued by other agencies such as the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the FTC. For example, most recently, the Board has consulted with the Department of Defense (DOD), as Congress directed with respect to DOD's development of regulations governing loans to members of the armed services and their families. In addition to its rulemakings to implement statutory changes, the Board updates its regulations in response to the changing marketplace and emerging issues. As markets change and products evolve, questions arise about how existing rules apply in new circumstances. We often address these matters with amendments that specifically target a particular issue, or by updating the interpretations published in the commentaries to our regulations. That was the case with the Board's recent revisions to the rules governing electronic fund transfers, which addressed electronic check conversions and payroll card accounts. It was also the case with our recent amendments to the TISA rules addressing overdraft protection programs. As a matter of policy, the Board periodically conducts a comprehensive review of each regulation. For the consumer financial services laws, one goal of our regulatory reviews is to develop more effective consumer disclosures. Writing regulations always involves the challenge of crafting rules that are, on the one hand, clear and specific enough to facilitate compliance and promote consistency among financial institutions but, on the other hand, flexible enough to accommodate market developments as products and pricing continue to change. We also consider ways to eliminate unnecessary burdens consistent with consumer protection. By balancing these interests we seek to avoid imposing undue regulatory burdens that could hinder innovation and raise costs without producing offsetting benefits in consumer protection. Over the last several years, the Board has completed several regulatory reviews. The Board reviewed the regulations implementing HOEPA and issued revised rules in 2001. The Board's review of the rules implementing HMDA was completed in 2002, resulting in expanded data collection and reporting requirements, and the Board completed a review of the rules implementing ECOA in 2003. Most recently, the Board initiated a review of the TILA rules, which are implemented in the Board's Regulation Z. The initial phase of the Board's review of Regulation Z focused on credit cards and other revolving credit accounts. Last month, the Board issued aproposal for public commentthat would substantially revise the rules governing credit cards and improve credit card disclosures. Our review of the Regulation Z rules for mortgage transactions is now under way as well. The Board's Efforts to Improve the Effectiveness of Credit DisclosuresThe Board has recently undertaken an innovative approach to improve the effectiveness of credit disclosures--namely, using consumer surveys and testing to assess consumers' needs and develop our regulatory proposal. Having taught at the University of Chicago's business school for many years, I am well aware of the types of consumer testing that firms have long employed: surveys, focus groups, and so-called "mall intercepts" in which shoppers are interviewed at random. However, it is relatively novel to systematically use such techniques to develop regulatory proposals to improve the effectiveness of disclosures requirements. Consumer testing can help the Federal Reserve address the considerable challenge of making disclosures more effective by providing insight into consumers' understanding of financial products and their decision-making process. Given the complexity of certain products, such as credit card products with multiple features and nontraditional mortgages, we have to be mindful of the pitfalls of information overload. We must seek to carry out the responsibilities Congress has given us to design disclosures that are not only accurate, but also clear and simple enough that they are meaningful and useful to consumers. Pages of fine print that provide comprehensive descriptions might satisfy lawyers, but the legalese needs to be translated into something consumers can use. This requires the Board to make judgments about which credit terms are most important to highlight and which could be eliminated. We plan to make these judgments with the benefit of surveys of actual consumers and extensive consumer testing. We recently completedseveral rounds of consumer testing (7.7 MB PDF)for credit card disclosures, and that testing was critical to our effort to redesign and, I believe, dramatically improve those disclosures in the proposed regulations recently published for comment. The substantial investment we have made in developing and testing revised credit card disclosures has given us insights that will contribute to our ability to make mortgage disclosures more effective. We are finding that it is tremendously beneficial to listen to consumers so that we can learn more about how they use information and how we can simplify disclosures and enhance consumers' understanding. Through our testing, we learned firsthand what information consumers find useful when making credit decisions and what information they ignore. Second, we learned what information consumers comprehend and what information they do not. Third, we saw the impact that different formats and presentation can have on consumers' ability to notice and use the information. The Board's proposal for credit card accounts would revise the format and content of various credit card disclosures to make them more meaningful and easier to read, and to highlight the various costs. The disclosure table accompanying credit card applications and solicitations would highlight fees and the reasons penalty rates might be applied, such as for paying late. Creditors would be required to use the same type of disclosure table to summarize key terms at account opening and when the account terms change. In addition, format changes to periodic statements--such as grouping fees, interest charges, and transactions together--would make them more understandable. As I noted earlier, card issuers would be prohibited from describing their rates as "fixed" unless they specify a time period where the rate cannot be changed for any reason, or if the rate is fixed for the life of the program. The proposal to revise the credit card rules would also expand the circumstances under which consumers receive advance notice of changes in their account terms, including advance notice before a penalty rate is applied. Creditors would be required to send notice of a rate increase or other change in terms forty-five days before the change becomes effective, instead of the current fifteen days. The proposal would also revise the rules governing the advertising of open-end credit to help consumers better understand the credit terms being offered. As I mentioned earlier, the Board plans to conduct extensive consumer testing as part of its review of mortgage disclosures. Like credit cards, mortgage products have become more diverse and more complex. In some cases, creditors are using pricing strategies similar to those used for credit cards, for example, offering customers discounted introductory rates that will be replaced in a short time by a much higher rate, often a variable rate. Of course, there is an inherent difficulty in adjustable rate mortgage (ARM) disclosures because future interest rate changes are not known. Consumer testing is needed to determine whether, for example, consumers would find disclosure of the "worst-case" payment useful given that such a payment might never occur or might not occur for several years or more, by which time the consumer's own financial circumstances may have changed. The wider marketing of payment-option mortgages presents another challenge. Consumers have the choice of making low minimum monthly payments that increase the overall cost of the credit and ultimately lead to higher payments. Just as with credit cards, however, disclosing a consumer's repayment obligation and the cost of the credit is more complex when there are unknowns--such as the future rate if it may vary based on an index, the amount of the consumer's monthly payment, and the possibility of negative amortization. When the Board reviews mortgage disclosures, it will consider these developments and conduct extensive consumer testing to determine how the features and risks of today's mortgage products can be communicated effectively. The Board has already taken some initial steps in its review of mortgage disclosures. Last summer, the Board held a series offour public hearingson home-equity lending, where we gathered views on the impact of federal and state predatory lending laws and on the adequacy of mortgage disclosures, particularly those concerning nontraditional mortgage products. Following those hearings, the Board revised theconsumer handbookthat creditors are required to provide with applications for all ARMs. The revised handbook gives consumers a better explanation of the features and risks of nontraditional ARMs, especially "payment shock" and the risk of increasing loan balances, also known as "negative amortization." The recent problems in the subprime mortgage market have prompted the Board to hold afifth hearing, which I will chair tomorrow, here in Washington, D.C. The purpose of the hearing is to gather information to evaluate how the Federal Reserve might use its rulemaking authority to curb abusive lending practices in the subprime mortgage market in a way that also preserves incentives for responsible lenders. Specifically, hearing participants will discuss concerns about prepayment penalties, escrows for taxes and insurance, "stated-income" loans, and lenders' standards for determining that consumers can afford to make the scheduled payments. Some of these concerns may call for more effective disclosures. However, we will also seriously consider whether there are mortgage lending practices that should be prohibited under HOEPA. We must be careful, however, not to curtail responsible subprime lending or beneficial financing options for consumers. A robust and responsible subprime mortgage market benefits consumers by allowing borrowers with non-prime or limited credit histories to become homeowners, access the equity in their homes, or have the flexibility to refinance their loans as needed. Under HOEPA, lenders are subject not only to regulatory enforcement actions but also to private lawsuits to redress violations. Thus, any rules should be drawn sharply with bright lines to avoid creating legal and regulatory uncertainty, which could have the unintended effect of substantially reducing consumers access to legitimate credit options. Supervisory ActivitiesExamination and EnforcementThe Board has responsibility for enforcing compliance by state-member banks and certain foreign banking organizations with consumer financial services laws, the fair lending laws, and the CRA. Because of the complexity of consumer regulatory requirements, the Board has had a specialized consumer examination program since the late 1970s. The Federal Reserve System has a trained cadre of examiners dedicated solely to this function. The scope of the consumer compliance examination program has evolved and grown significantly over the years. In 1977, the program covered just nine federal consumer protection laws and regulations. Today the program covers compliance with more than twenty federal laws related to deposits, credit, and the privacy of consumers' financial information. Consumer compliance examinations assess the bank's compliance with ECOA, HMDA, TILA, TISA, RESPA, the EFTA, FCRA, and CRA, section 5 of the FTC Act, and other federal consumer protection laws. Examinations and other supervisory activities conducted as part of the Board's consumer compliance program follow a risk-focused approach and are tailored to fit the risk profile of the bank. This approach ensures that supervisory resources are directed to the products, services, and areas of the bank's operations that pose the greatest risk to consumers. In addition to assessing an institution's compliance with particular laws and its performance under the CRA, examinations evaluate a bank's processes for identifying, measuring, monitoring, and controlling its risk exposure. Examiners routinely analyze consumer complaints submitted to the Federal Reserve regarding the bank being examined, looking for any trends, issues, or areas of possible risk. The examiners also analyze any consumer complaints received directly by the bank. The results of this analysis are factored into examiners' decisions regarding the scope of the compliance examination. We view this analysis of consumer complaint activity as an integral component of the examination scoping process. Moreover, consumer complaints can serve as an early warning signal about emerging or potential compliance problems or new industry practices. The frequency of examinations is a function of an institution's size and prior supervisory ratings. Institutions with less than satisfactory compliance or CRA ratings, regardless of their size, are typically examined every twelve months. Institutions with assets greater than $250 million and satisfactory or better ratings are examined every twenty-four months. Small banks (those with assets of less than $250 million) with satisfactory or better ratings are typically examined every forty-eight to sixty months. The Federal Reserve Banks also monitor institutions between examinations looking for indicators that could have implications for their compliance efforts and bear on the need for more frequent supervisory intervention. For example, we analyze consumer complaints and consider any changes in supervisory ratings, financial condition, corporate structure, or the institutions' management. Where Federal Reserve examiners observe weaknesses or compliance failures by supervised institutions, examiners document them in a report to bank management. The required corrective actions are stated in the examination report. We find that in the overwhelming majority of cases, management voluntarily addresses any violations or weaknesses that we have identified without the need for formal enforcement actions. In those rare instances where the bank is not willing to address the problem, we have a full range of enforcement tools at our disposal and use them to compel appropriate corrective action. We also recognize that cooperation and coordination among the financial institution supervisory agencies are essential to ensuring consistent and effective supervision. Financial institution regulators share information and coordinate activities, such as the development of uniform examination procedures and policies, through the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) and other channels. Recently, the CSBS joined the FFIEC, but we have, for many years, coordinated supervisory efforts through the CSBS State and Federal Working Group. Enforcing the Prohibition Against Unfair or Deceptive PracticesThis Committee has specifically asked the agencies to discuss their ability to pursue unfair or deceptive practices by depository institutions. The prohibition on unfair or deceptive acts or practices in section 5 of the FTC Act applies to all banks, thrifts, and credit unions as a matter of law, and may be enforced by each of the federal banking agencies using their supervisory powers under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act. This authority is independent from, and in addition to, the banking agencies' authority to enforce any specific regulations the Board may promulgate.1The Board, the OCC, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) have all issued written guidance confirming this view of the agencies' broad authority to enforce the FTC Act. In fact, the Board, OCC, and FDIC have each exercised their supervisory authority in recent years to address the activities of particular banks that the agencies deemed unfair or deceptive. The lack of rules under the FTC Act does not appear to be an impediment to the agencies' enforcement efforts because a finding of unfairness or deception depends heavily on the facts and circumstances, and must be determined on a case-by-case basis. Rules seeking to define all the circumstances when a particular practice is unacceptable can be too narrow or too broad and, as a result, they may be ineffective or have unintended consequences. In our view, enforcement of the FTC Act on a case-by-case basis, reinforced by agency guidance that establishes standards and recommended practices, is a more effective way to address these concerns. The Board will, however, continue to assess whether there are unfair or deceptive practices that are appropriately addressed by adopting rules of general applicability under the FTC Act or other consumer protection laws. We will continue to consult with the OCC and FDIC on these matters. We encourage our fellow bank regulators to bring to our attention particular practices that they believe are unfair or deceptive that can best be addressed by rules of general applicability rather than through the supervisory process. Supervisory GuidanceThe Federal Reserve and other financial institution regulators also use more informal means to protect consumers and promote safe and sound practices by financial institutions. This includes issuing principles-based guidance, which sometimes includes "best practices" that institutions should adopt in following the recommendations contained in the guidance. Principles-based guidance can often be a more flexible tool than rules for accomplishing regulators' goals. This flexibility allows supervisory agencies to adapt the guidance to different situations. Principles-based guidance is particularly useful when dealing with practices that may be inappropriate in some circumstances but appropriate in others. An example of this is theguidance concerning unfair and deceptive acts or practices("UDAPs") issued jointly by the Board and FDIC in 2004. The UDAP guidance outlines the legal standards the Board and FDIC use in carrying out their responsibilities for enforcing the FTC Act's prohibition of unfair or deceptive acts or practices. These standards are consistent with those articulated by the OCC and with long-established standards articulated by the FTC in enforcing the FTC Act for non-bank entities. The UDAP guidance outlines strategies for banks to use to avoid engaging in unfair or deceptive acts or practices, to minimize their own risks and to protect consumers. The guidance also lists "best practices" to address some matters seen as having the greatest potential for unfair or deceptive acts or practices: advertising and solicitations; servicing and collections; and the management and monitoring of employees and third-party service providers. Through the issuance of principles-based guidance, backed-up with regular examinations, the federal depository institution regulators are able to have a significant impact on institutions' practices. Although the supervisory guidance issued by the banking and thrift agencies only applies to depository institutions and their affiliates, state regulators can and sometimes do adopt the federal regulators' guidance for independent nonbank providers of financial services. This was the case with theinteragency guidance on nontraditional mortgage productsthat was issued in 2006. We expect similar action by state regulators for the interagency guidance on subprime mortgage lending that was proposed in March 2007. The agencies are finishing their review of the comment letters received and will work expeditiously to take final action on the proposed statement, including coordinating with the CSBS. Consumer ComplaintsIn 1976, the Federal Reserve established a system-wide program for receiving and handling consumer complaints. Through this program, the Board addresses complaints about the banks under its supervision (state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System and certain foreign banking organizations) and refers complaints regarding other financial services firms to the appropriate federal or state agency, including the FTC. The Board has established uniform policies and procedures for investigating and responding to consumer complaints, which are implemented by staff of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks who have been specially trained for that purpose. In each of the last two years, the Board has received about 1,900 complaints concerning state-member banks, which number about 900. The Board maintains a database that enables us to track the complaints filed for each institution and how they are resolved. The Federal Reserve has consistently and promptly referred the consumer complaints we receive to the appropriate state or federal regulator when they do not involve a bank under our supervision. We also immediately notify consumers of the agency to which their complaint has been referred. Since January 2002, the Federal Reserve System has received over 25,000 consumer complaints. Of these, about 12,000 involved entities other than banks under our supervision and were referred to other agencies. In virtually all of these cases (about 99 percent), the Federal Reserve referred the complaints to the proper agencies and notified the complainants in an average of two business days. Similarly, virtually all of the consumer complaints we received against state member banks and their subsidiaries were promptly acknowledged. We understand that consumers may face challenges in sorting out where to go for help with questions about financial transactions and in determining where to send complaints. As indicated, we facilitate the process for consumers by ensuring that the complaints we receive are routed quickly and accurately to the right agency for handling. To further enhance our consumer complaint handling process, we recently launched a newonline consumer complaint systemthat creates a single Internet web site for submitting complaints and inquiries to the Federal Reserve. Complaints submitted through the web site are routed automatically to the appropriate Reserve Bank or other supervisory agency. One feature of the new online system that we plan to activate in the near future is a customer satisfaction questionnaire that will provide us with feedback about consumers' experiences with the Federal Reserve's processing of their complaints. This questionnaire will be an improved version of the one we used for many years. The Board is also establishing a central location for the administrative handling of complaints, which will establish a single mailing address and toll-free telephone number that the public can use. These enhancements underscore our commitment to ensuring the public has an effective and efficient means for resolving complaints. Our goal is to make a consumer's submission of a complaint as easy and seamless as possible regardless of the entity involved. To enhance interagency cooperation and coordination in processing consumer complaints, the federal banking agencies held a conference in April 2006 to share information about complaint trends and issues, and learn about best practices in investigating and analyzing complaints. The agency staffs also discussed ways to improve customer service and the potential ways complaint data might be used to aid in the development of consumer education materials. Another interagency conference is scheduled for later this year. In addition to these conferences, the agencies' staffs meet periodically to share complaint data and to discuss emerging issues identified through the complaint process. Consumer Education and ResearchThe Federal Reserve is actively engaged in educating consumers about financial transactions so they can better understand their options when shopping for various products. The education materials we produce are based on surveys, consumer testing, and other research about consumer behavior. For example, the Board has published brochures to assist consumers when they are shopping for credit cards, mortgages or leasing a vehicle. We have also issued brochures to help consumers understand their checking accounts and overdraft protection programs, and to educate consumers about the effects of having their payments processed electronically. These publications are also available on theBoard's web site. Recently the Board has focused on helping consumers understand nontraditional mortgage products and ARMs. For example, the Board recently published a consumer education brochure (Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Payment--Option ARMs - Are They for You?) on interest-only mortgages and payment-option ARMs. This brochure describes the loan terms and risks inherent in such products and alerts borrowers to possible future payment increases. The Board's revised Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages, which creditors must provide with every ARM application, also seeks to educate consumers about the features and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. The Federal Reserve's Community Affairs ProgramThe Federal Reserve's Community Affairs Program supports the Board's objective of promoting community development and fair and impartial access to credit by focusing on low- and moderate-income consumers. We develop programs and build partnerships with organizations to help bring consumers into the financial and economic mainstream. The Community Affairs function within the Board and the Reserve Banks complements other regulatory and compliance activities with programs that educate and equip low- and moderate-income consumers with the tools they need to make better choices in establishing credit and building assets. The Reserve Banks' Community Affairs programs are specifically focused on improving understanding about low- and moderate-income consumers' needs for and access to financial services. Toward this end, the Reserve Banks engage in research that explores issues relating to consumers' use of financial services products and services. In addition, the Community Affairs Offices convene a research conference every two years dedicated to generating and presenting research that explores current trends in financial services and the implications for lower-income consumers. For example, themost recent conferenceheld this past March in Washington, D.C., offered research on predatory lending and payday lending. The Federal Reserve Banks also collaborate with local and regional partners to explore opportunities to create awareness of and solutions to address concerns about financial services issues as they relate to lower-income consumers and communities. Several Reserve Banks have spearheaded initiatives to respond to concerns about rising mortgage defaults and delinquencies, with the San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank holding forums in six cities to discuss community responses. Others Federal Reserve Banks have worked with nonprofit organizations and local governments to develop strategies to improve lower-income consumers' wealth-building opportunities, such as initiatives promoting savings and accessing tax credits. All twelve Community Affairs Offices have initiatives to promote and support consumer financial education. The Federal Reserve Banks have partnered with financial institutions, nonprofit organizations, local governments, and community institutions to help improve consumers' access to financial education materials and programs. Currently, the Board and the Philadelphia Reserve Bank are conducting long-term research projects to better understand what makes particular consumer counseling and education programs successful. ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is committed to being proactive in addressing issues that affect consumers in their financial services transactions. We seek to promote the availability of consumer credit while ensuring that consumers receive the information they need to understand their options. Consumers who do not have accurate information and an understanding of what that information means will have difficulty choosing among competing products. Because information is critical to more competitive, and thus more efficient markets, more effective disclosure also has the capacity to weed out some abuses. By using consumer testing systematically, the Federal Reserve is taking an innovative approach to revising its regulations and improving the effectiveness of disclosures. At the same time, we will continue our cooperation with educational and community organizations around the country to help inform and support consumer education efforts. We recognize, however, that disclosures and financial education may not always be sufficient to combat abusive practices. Because some bad lending practices may require additional measures, the Federal Reserve will seriously consider how we might use our rulemaking authority to address abusive practices without restricting consumers' access to beneficial financing options and responsible subprime credit. We will, along with the other supervisory agencies, also continue to actively use our other tools--such as supervisory guidance, the examination process, and our enforcement powers--to address specific practices that are abusive or otherwise inappropriate. Footnotes 1.Section 18 of the FTC Act authorizes the Federal Reserve Board to issue regulations prohibiting specific practices by banks that it finds to be unfair or deceptive. The Office of Thrift Supervision and the National Credit Union Adminstration have the same authority for thrifts and credit unions respectively.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Mid America Bank and Trust Company, Dixon Missouri, the Missouri Division of Finance and the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.