The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies on Thursday announced that they will seek public comment on three proposed supervisory guidance documents related to the September 2006 notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) on new risk-based capital requirements in the United States for large, internationally active banking organizations. The September 2006 NPR detailed the agencies' proposal for implementing the new capital framework issued by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision in 2004 (Basel II). The proposed U.S. Basel II capital framework would be mandatory for large, internationally active U.S. banking organizations and optional for other institutions. The Basel II NPR includes requirements that banking organizations would need to satisfy to calculate their risk-based capital under the proposed new capital framework. The proposed supervisory guidance provides information to assist bankers, as well as supervisors, in addressing the Basel II qualification requirements. Two of the proposed documents issued Thursday relate to the Basel II advanced approaches for calculating risk-based capital requirements: the advanced internal ratings-based (IRB) approach for credit risk and the advanced measurement approaches (AMA) for operational risk. These guidance documents have been updated since they were previously issued for public comment in 2003 and 2004. The third document proposes guidance on the Basel II supervisory review process for assessing capital adequacy and is being issued for the first time. The proposed supervisory guidance documents are being issued by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision. The documents are attached and will be published shortly in theFederal Register. Related staff materials|Attachment (1.5 MB PDF)
Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the Global Association of Risk Professionals Basel II Summit, New York, New York Thank you very much for the invitation to speak today. As most of you know, we are in the middle of a particularly busy time with respect to Basel II implementation in the United States. Therefore, I plan to offer some thoughts on recent events relating to U.S. work on Basel II. I will also provide some additional information and context to help people as they think about how to comment on the U.S. proposals that are currently outstanding. But before I begin discussing recent events, I would like to reiterate briefly the Federal Reserve's reasons for why Basel II is important in the United States. Reasons for Basel IIBanking is a business in which banks take and manage risks. Bankers implicitly accept risk when providing financial services to customers and also take explicit risk positions that offer profitable returns relative to their risk appetites. One of the most important jobs of bank supervisors is to ensure that banks maintain an adequate capital cushion against losses, especially during times of financial instability or stress. Minimum regulatory capital requirements are an integral part of ensuring that banks have an adequate cushion. When developing minimum capital requirements, supervisors should continue to promote approaches that both minimize the negative consequences of risk taking by financial institutions and encourage improved risk-management practices, particularly at those institutions that could affect global financial stability. The Federal Reserve's main reason for pursuing Basel II is the growing inadequacy of current Basel I regulatory capital rules for the large, internationally active banks that are offering ever more complex and sophisticated products and services. We need a more risk-sensitive capital framework for these particular banks, and we believe Basel II is such a framework. In addition, Basel II would promote risk-measurement and risk-management enhancements and improve market discipline, while giving supervisors a more conceptually consistent and more transparent framework for evaluating systemic risk, particularly through credit cycles. Basel II should establish a more coherent relationship between regulatory measures of capital adequacy and the day-to-day risk-focused supervision of banks, enabling examiners to better evaluate whether banks are holding prudent levels of capital given their risk profiles. For similar reasons, U.S. supervisors support the 2005 Basel/International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) revisions to the 1996 Market Risk Amendment (MRA). Since adoption of the MRA, banks' trading activities have become more sophisticated and have given rise to a wider range of risks that are not easily captured in the existing value-at-risk (VaR) models used in many banks. For example, banks are now including more products related to credit risk, such as credit-default swaps and tranches of collateralized debt obligations, in their trading books. These products can create default risks that are not captured well by the methodologies required under the current MRA rule--which specifies a ten-day holding period and a 99 percent confidence interval--thereby creating potential arbitrage opportunities between the banking book and the trading book. Recent Events Relating to U.S. Basel II ImplementationAs most of you know, there have been two important recent events related to Basel II implementation in the United States, both of which occurred on February 15. The first was the release of a report by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) on U.S. implementation of Basel II. The second was issuance of proposed Basel II supervisory guidance by the U.S. banking agencies. GAO StudyThe Federal Reserve welcomes the recent GAO report on Basel II implementation in the United States. We believe this report will help move the U.S. Basel II process forward. While I do not intend to summarize the GAO report here, I would like to offer a few thoughts on the report's conclusions. The Federal Reserve concurs with the report's finding that the Basel I capital rule is particularly inadequate for large banking organizations; the report states that the agencies should continue their efforts to finalize the U.S. Basel II capital rule and proceed with the parallel run and transition period to Basel II. We agree with the report's conclusion that finalizing the U.S. Basel II rule would generate crucial information to enable the agencies to make future assessments of the strengths and weaknesses of the Basel II rule for the U.S. banking system. We also agree with the GAO's finding that establishing Basel-II transitional floors will prevent a bank's regulatory capital requirements from declining precipitously during the transition period. And finally, we agree with the GAO that any further delay in the U.S. implementation of Basel II creates potential competitive disadvantages for U.S. banks when they are compared with foreign banks. The GAO report also raised issues about transparency and ambiguity in the U.S. Basel II process. While the agencies are striving to be as transparent as possible in the Basel II implementation process--in some cases going well beyond our obligations under the Administrative Procedure Act--we recognize that some aspects of the Basel II proposals are ambiguous, as noted by the GAO report. The agencies expect to address this ambiguity substantially as we work to finalize the Basel II rule. Moreover, the experience we gain implementing the new regulatory capital framework during the transition period will help us address remaining uncertainties. Of course, we hope that comments on all aspects of our proposals will also help us identify and resolve potential areas of ambiguity. To meet the timetable for US implementation, it is important that the agencies move forward in considering the comments as promptly as possible. Therefore, I particularly encourage you in your comments to go beyond criticism of what has been proposed and specify your preferred solution, including alternative technical methodologies, language, and frameworks. U.S. Basel II Supervisory GuidanceWe are very pleased that on February 15 the U.S. agencies released proposed supervisory guidance to accompany the Basel II notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) issued last September. While documents that make up the proposed guidance have not yet been published in theFederal Register, they are available on the agencies' public websites. I would like to take a moment to thank the Federal Reserve staff and staff from the other banking agencies who worked very hard to produce the proposed guidance. Once again, I do not plan to summarize the guidance here. But I do believe a few points are worth highlighting. As most of you know, the Basel II NPR outlines qualification requirements for institutions calculating regulatory risk-based capital requirements (Pillar 1) using the advanced internal ratings-based approach (IRB) for credit risk and the advanced measurement approaches (AMA) for operational risk--together known as the advanced approaches. The qualification requirements for the advanced approaches are written broadly to accommodate the many ways a bank may design and implement robust credit and operational risk measurement and management systems, and to permit industry practice to evolve. The supervisory guidance relating to requirements for calculating risk-based regulatory capital under the advanced approaches updates and expands on proposed supervisory guidance issued in 2003 and 2004; both of those documents were companion pieces to the 2003 Basel II advance notice of proposed rulemaking. Likewise, the full set of guidance documents issued on February 15 is intended to provide additional information to help banks understand the qualification requirements laid out in the Basel II NPR. In most areas of risk management, it is our intention to have institutions retain their ability to choose which specific methods they employ. In other words, the guidance identifies an acceptable range of practice for banks. Within this range, a bank could use several types of approaches and methodologies. The proposed guidance offers some concrete examples of different approaches that might be considered acceptable practices. In addition to supervisory guidance on requirements for institutions using regulatory risk-based capital requirements (Pillar 1), the agencies issued proposed guidance relating to supervisory review of capital adequacy (Pillar 2). Although this is the first guidance on Pillar 2 issued by the U.S. agencies, the supervisory review process described in the guidance is a continuation of the agencies' long-standing approach to bank supervision. However, some aspects of existing supervisory practices are being augmented or more clearly defined to support the proposed Basel II framework. Probably the most noteworthy change is a specific requirement, outlined in the NPR, for banks to develop an internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP). The proposed guidance offers additional detail about the ICAAP, but in short, the ICAAP should identify and measure material risks, set capital goals that relate to risks, and provide governance and controls to ensure that internal capital assessments are subject to proper oversight. The ICAAP requirement is intended to underscore the agencies' existing view that the primary responsibility for assessing capital adequacy lies with banks. Supervisors are responsible for evaluating bank assessments of capital adequacy and for ensuring that the processes for developing those assessments are robust and satisfactory. Notably, the proposed ICAAP requirement is consistent with existing Federal Reserve supervisory guidance as reflected in Supervision and Regulation Letter 99-18. The agencies believe that the proposed supervisory guidance documents are a necessary supplement to the Basel II NPR. The guidance includes standards to promote safety and soundness and to encourage the comparability of regulatory capital measures across banks. During the qualification process, a bank's primary federal supervisor will review the bank's risk-measurement and -management framework relative to the qualification requirements in order to determine whether the bank may apply the advanced approaches to calculate minimum regulatory capital. The proposed supervisory guidance documents are companion guidance to the Basel II NPR; therefore, they do not address any public comments received since the NPR was issued. The guidance provides additional information that should help banks satisfy the NPR's qualification requirements. Importantly, the publication of these guidance documents for comment does not imply that the final outcome of the NPR has already been determined. As part of the rulemaking process, the proposed guidance documents are subject to change on the basis of, among other things, public comments and the agencies' decisions regarding any final rule. As they did with other proposed Basel II documents, the U.S. agencies are requesting feedback on all the outstanding proposed supervisory guidance. It would be particularly helpful if reviewers looked at the NPR--whose comment period ends March 26--and the proposed supervisory guidance together in order to decide whether the documents provide them with enough information to determine whether they meet the U.S. Basel II qualification requirements. We welcome any and all comments, ranging from broader opinions about the proposed framework to feedback on the more technical aspects of the proposals. We think institutions will find information in the proposed guidance helpful as they progress towards implementing risk-measurement and risk-management systems that are consistent with any final U.S. Basel II rule. However, since the proposed guidance is subject to change, we understand that lack of certainty about rules and guidance can be confusing and frustrating. We recognize that many institutions have been diligently preparing for Basel II implementation and we understand our obligation, as regulators, to support institutions wanting to adopt Basel II at the first available date. One of the reasons for providing proposed guidance at several stages in the Basel II implementation process is to help guide U.S. institutions that wish to adopt Basel II as soon as possible. We suggest that those institutions continue to move forward with their implementation, including the identification of gaps in their own preparation, while remembering that proposals could change. The agencies remain open to considering the full set of possibilities for Basel II. We continue to seek comment on whether some form of the Basel II standardized approach should be adopted in the United States. When deciding whether our large, internationally active banks should have access to a standardized approach, the agencies will need to consider a number of important issues: whether such an approach would accommodate the risks those banks take, now and in the future; whether it would provide adequate risk sensitivity; whether taking the time needed to develop an appropriate U.S. version of the standardized approach would unduly delay the Basel II implementation process; whether the standardized approach would be useful on a transition basis in order to give some banks more time to prepare to use the advanced approaches; and, finally, whether the marketplace would find such an option for those banks meaningful and acceptable. We are aware that some institutions have concerns, which they have expressed in formal comment letters, about areas in which the Basel II NPR diverges from the Basel II 2004 Mid-year Text. Some of their specific concerns relate to proposed safeguards in the Basel II NPR that go beyond those in the Mid-year Text, including the effect on risk sensitivity that may result from the proposed limit on declines in aggregate capital. The proposed definition of default and treatment of downturn LGDs (loss given default) are also areas that have received attention from commenters. Additionally, there has been some concern expressed about retention of the existing leverage ratio. The U.S. agencies remain sensitive to these and other issues raised by commenters so far, including the overall burden and costs associated with the current proposals, as well as any potential competitive effects that may arise. Once we have received all comments on the proposals, we intend to review all comments carefully to assess what is the best way forward. The Federal Reserve hopes that everyone who reviews the proposals understands that they are intended to promote the stability of the U.S. financial system by ensuring the safety and soundness of the largest U.S. banks. Thus, as Chairman Bernanke has noted, the ability of Basel II to promote safety and soundness is the first criterion by which these regulatory capital proposals should be judged. Proposed Revisions to the Market-Risk RuleAs you are likely aware, the Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation also have issued an NPR to amend their market-risk capital rules. The proposed amendments would implement changes to the Market Risk Amendment that were adopted by the Basel Committee and IOSCO in 2005. The Office of Thrift Supervision joined in the NPR and, when the rules are finalized, will be implementing a market-risk capital rule for the first time. The comment period on the market-risk NPR recently ended, and the agencies are reviewing the comments received in preparation for interagency discussions on the final rule. The current market-risk rule uses a principles-based approach to market-risk capital regulation. In crafting the market-risk NPR, the agencies strived to continue the existing principles-based approach by avoiding highly prescriptive rule proposals. Some comments received to date indicate that in certain areas we could be even less prescriptive and in other areas the comments ask for more clarity or specifics. We will consider all comments carefully in trying to reach a balance between a principles-based approach and appropriate clarity. Let me briefly review a few of the more important changes introduced in the market-risk NPR and then discuss some of the comments received on these proposed changes. The objectives of the proposed changes are to enhance the rule's risk sensitivity and to reflect changes in the composition of banks' trading books and changes in risk-management practices over the last ten years. One principal change is a new definition of the positions covered by the rule. Positions covered by the current market-risk rule generally include all GAAP trading assets and liabilities. Under the NPR, positions covered would include only those GAAP trading assets and liabilities that either meet the rule's definition of a trading position or are hedges of other positions covered by the rule. Trading positions would be defined as positions held for short-term resale, held with the intent of benefiting from actual or expected price movements, or held to lock in arbitrage profits. While the proposed new definition in the NPR would result in potentially different definitions of a trading position for accounting, risk-management, and regulatory capital paradigms, these differences, while not ideal, are based on the manner in which trading positions are treated in these respective areas. For example, under the market-risk capital rule, capital is calculated on the basis of a ten-day holding period and a 99 percent confidence level--parameters that generally are appropriate only for liquid and actively managed positions. Further, ongoing changes in accounting standards are affecting the mix of assets and liabilities carried in trading books and the banking book. For regulatory capital purposes, the geography of the exposure on the balance sheet should be secondary to the inherent nature of risks that the financial instruments reflect. Recognizing that banks' trading books have evolved over the last ten years to include riskier credit and illiquid positions, the rule would impose a new capital requirement for incremental default risk on any portfolio of covered positions for which a bank models specific risk. Incremental default risk would be defined as the default risk of a covered position that is not reflected in the bank's VaR measure (because, for example, the risk extends beyond the ten-day holding period and the 99 percent confidence level). Incremental default risk would be measured consistent with a one-year time horizon and a one-tailed, 99.9 percent confidence level--which is comparable to the measures under IRB in the Basel II framework. Consistent with a principles-based approach, banks would have the discretion to use one or more models to measure incremental default risk, subject, of course, to supervisory review. The industry continues to actively discuss with the Basel Committee and IOSCO supervisors how best to implement a capital measure for incremental default risk. Accordingly, under the proposed rule, banks would have until January 1, 2010, to develop appropriate methodologies to measure this risk. The U.S. agencies are currently reviewing all comments on the market risk NPR. I will not try to summarize the comments received so far, but I would like to note that we are carefully considering the request that implementation of the market risk proposals be pushed back one year to January 2009. International Aspects of Basel II ImplementationOf course, we continue to recognize that the national discretion allowed under Basel II means various countries will adopt different approaches to Basel II. Further, we recognize that these different approaches may create challenges for banking organizations that operate in multiple jurisdictions. Wherever possible, we are working to minimize these differences and difficulties. But we should remember that, even before Basel II, cross-border banking has always raised specific challenges, which supervisors from various countries have worked hard to address and mitigate. Let me assure all bankers here that the Federal Reserve is aware that the adoption of national versions of Basel II has resulted in heightened concerns about home-host issues. We are committed to working with other international supervisors to resolve these issues. Indeed, the Federal Reserve and other U.S. agencies have, for many years, worked with their international counterparts to limit the difficulties and burdens that have arisen as foreign banks have entered U.S. markets and as U.S. banks have established operations in other jurisdictions. Throughout the Basel II process, we have been engaged in dialogue with our international counterparts through various avenues, such as supervisory working colleges, to share ideas and tackle specific issues as they arise. Some of these issues are very institution- and country-specific and are, therefore, better addressed through individual conversations with an institution and its relevant supervisors. The Federal Reserve continues to be an active participant in supervisory working groups for all large U.S. and foreign banking organizations in the United States. We are encouraged by the level of cooperation and pragmatism coming out of these efforts. For example, supervisory planning efforts for U.S.-based banking organizations for the upcoming year are reviewed with foreign supervisory authorities to ensure that, regardless of Basel II timing issues, information pertaining to ongoing supervisory judgments of risk-management practices is available. We have also been encouraged by the dialogue with our foreign colleagues regarding their desire to provide flexibility in transitional arrangements. I would add that we have benefited from the numerous meetings we have had and from the opportunity to speak at conferences such as this one. These exchanges help us identify critical global concerns to examine further. We will be evaluating all of this input closely as part of our rulemaking process. As always, we encourage bankers who have questions and concerns about home-host issues to communicate promptly with their regulators in all jurisdictions so that the issues can be addressed. Another key point, when talking about differences across countries, relates to findings from the Basel II quantitative impact studies (QIS4 and QIS5) conducted in the last few years. Interestingly, the two exercises identified a number of similar issues, some in areas in which institutions were not able to provide adequate data (especially for downturn scenarios). In the United States, QIS4 was conducted before the release of the Basel II NPR, while in Europe, QIS5 was conducted only after the passage of European Union legislation implementing Basel II. Therefore, much of what U.S. supervisors learned in QIS4 is addressed in the NPR; for example, the NPR includes a proposed supervisory mapping function for downturn estimates of loss given default. European supervisors, on the other hand, did not have the benefit of information from QIS5 when they were drafting their rules. While I cannot speak for my European counterparts, no doubt some of the issues raised in QIS5 will be addressed during Basel II implementation in Europe. It is possible that differences in Basel II implementation may mean that the U.S. version of Basel II is in some aspects more conservative than other countries' versions. In other areas, the U.S. proposals may be less conservative. And we also know that banks manage capital to meet regulatory minimums as well as to support strategic objectives, and for that reason successful banks hold capital well above regulatory minimums. Banks know that customers, counterparties, creditors, and investors consider capital as well as the financial performance and risk exposures of banks when making their decisions. Under today's relatively stable minimum regulatory capital requirements, banks hold excess capital to be able to respond to potential business expansion opportunities and to manage through market and credit risk cycles. It is likely that with a more risk-sensitive approach to capital, banks will have to consider whether their current cushion of actual capital above regulatory minimums is still appropriate. On balance, the Federal Reserve believes that an appropriately conservative approach to capital adequacy serves the United States' interest in maintaining the safety, soundness, and resiliency of our banking system. However, we also recognize the impact that differences among countries can have and that it is worthwhile to minimize them whenever possible. As Chairman Bernanke noted this past fall, we intend to review and consider international differences before issuing a final Basel II rule. ConclusionThis will be my last speech on Basel II as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. I want to thank many of you in the audience for taking the time to meet with me and answer my many questions related to capital and risk management over the years. I encourage all of you to continue to push forward with continuous innovation in risk management and financial instruments.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the proposal by The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, to merge with Mercantile Bankshares Corporation, Baltimore, Maryland, and thereby acquire its subsidiary banks. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board announced today that the Consumer Advisory Council will hold its next meeting on Thursday, March 8. The meeting will take place in Dining Room E, Terrace level, in the Board’s Martin Building. The session will begin at 9:00 a.m. and is open to the public. Anyone planning to attend the meeting should, for security purposes, register no later than Tuesday, March 6, by completing the form found online at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/secure/forms/cacregistration.cfm. Additionally, attendees must present photo identification to enter the building. The Council’s function is to advise the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under various consumer financial services laws and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics: Reports by committees and other matters initiated by the Council members may also be discussed. The Board invites comments from the public on any of these matters. The Board's notice is attached.
Dennis P. Lockhart will become president and chief executive officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta effective March 1, 2007, announced Larkin Martin, chairman of the board of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. Lockhart, 60, succeeds Jack Guynn, who retired from the Atlanta Fed on Oct. 1, 2006. Lockhart is currently a faculty member of Georgetown University’s Walsh School of Foreign Service. In the master’s program there, he chairs concentrations in International Business–Government Relations and Global Commerce and Finance. He also serves as an adjunct professor in the economics department at Johns Hopkins University’s Nitze School of Advanced International Studies, where he teaches a course in international business. “We are very pleased that Dennis Lockhart will be joining the Atlanta Fed as its president and chief executive,” said Martin, who is also managing partner of Martin Farm in Courtland, Ala. “Dennis is a seasoned and versatile leader, bringing with him a wealth of experience in banking, finance and international business. He also has significant experience leading large, diverse organizations as well as experience in academia. All of his background will serve him well as he leads the Bank forward and helps shape important decisions relating to the nation’s economy and financial system.” From 1971 to 1988, Lockhart held a variety of international and domestic positions with Citibank/Citicorp (now Citigroup), including assignments in the Middle East, Latin America, New York and Atlanta. While in Atlanta between 1978 and 1986, he served as Citibank’s senior corporate officer for the Southeast and was active in educational and civic affairs. From 1988 to 2001, he served as president of Heller International Group Inc. Following that service, Lockhart was managing partner at the private equity firm Zephyr Management in New York City. Lockhart currently serves as chairman of the Small Enterprise Assistance Funds, a not-for-profit operator of emerging markets venture capital funds focused on the small and mid-sized company sector. He also serves on three for-profit corporate boards. He will resign from these involvements as he joins the Bank. (See the attached biography for additional information.) Commenting on his selection, Lockhart said, “The Federal Reserve and the Reserve Banks are vital contributors to our nation’s economic and financial success. I’m very excited about the opportunity to return to the Atlanta area and to work with the Bank’s well-respected staff in advancing the excellent reputation this organization has built over many years. In my role as president of the Atlanta Reserve Bank, I also look forward to confronting the challenges the Federal Reserve faces in today’s increasingly global and rapidly changing economy.” Lockhart earned a bachelor’s degree in political science and economics at Stanford University and a master’s degree in international economics and American foreign policy at the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies. He also attended the senior executive program at the Sloan School of Management at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. As president of the Atlanta Fed, Lockhart will lead one of the 12 regional Reserve Banks, which, with the Board of Governors, make up the Federal Reserve System, the nation’s central bank. The Atlanta Fed is responsible for the Sixth Federal Reserve District, which encompasses Alabama, Florida and Georgia and portions of Louisiana, Mississippi and Tennessee. As its key functions, the Atlanta Fed participates in setting national monetary policy, supervises numerous banking organizations, and provides a variety of payment services to financial institutions and the U.S. government. Lockhart will have overall responsibility for these functions and will represent the Sixth Federal Reserve District at meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee, the policymaking body within the Federal Reserve that sets monetary policy for the nation. DENNIS P. LOCKHARTBIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATIONDennis P. Lockhart was born on Feb. 1, 1947, in Bakersfield, Calif. He earned a B.A. in political science and economics from Stanford University in 1968 and an M.A. in international economics and American foreign policy from the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies in 1971. He also served as a lieutenant in the U.S. Marine Corps Reserve from 1968 to 1974. Since 2003 Lockhart has served on the faculty of Georgetown University’s Walsh School of Foreign Service, teaching in the master’s program. In this role, he chairs the program’s concentrations in International Business–Government Relations and Global Commerce and Finance and teaches courses in International Investment, Global Business Strategy and other subjects. He also has been an adjunct professor at Johns Hopkins University’s Nitze School of Advanced International Studies since 2001. He is a member of the board of directors of several companies, including CapitalSource Inc., a REIT/finance company; Tri-Valley Corp., an independent oil, gas and mining exploration firm; and Greenfield Holdings Credit Ltd., a joint venture agribusiness finance subsidiary of DuPont Corp. and Bunge Corp. in Brazil. In addition, Lockhart is currently chairman of the Small Enterprise Assistance Funds, a not-for-profit operator of emerging markets venture capital funds focused on the small and mid-sized company sector. From 2001 to 2003, Lockhart was managing partner at the private equity firm Zephyr Management, L.P., based in New York with activity in Africa and Latin America. In this role, he worked on strategy, new fund development, and investor account management and operations. Prior to joining Zephyr, Lockhart worked for 13 years at Heller Financial, where he served as executive vice president and director of the parent company and as president of Heller International Group, which, through joint ventures or wholly owned operating companies, had activities in commercial banking, finance, and merchant banking in North and South America, Europe and Asia. Lockhart held various positions, both domestic and international, with Citicorp/Citibank (now Citigroup) between 1971 and 1988. Early in his career with Citibank he worked in the Middle East, first in Saudi Arabia as head of infrastructure project financing and then in Greece as training director for credit and managerial staff serving the Middle East. Finally, he served in Iran as chief operating officer of a commercial and consumer banking joint venture between Citibank and an Iranian affiliate. From 1978 to 1986, he served as senior corporate officer of the Southeast office of Citibank, which was part of a regionalization initiative. And from 1987 to 1988 he was head of the firm’s Latin American debt-to-equity swap investment program, designed to restructure sovereign debt. In addition to his professional activities, he is a member of the advisory committee of the Emerging Markets Private Equity Association, a broad-based membership organization founded in 2004 to focus on the emerging private equity markets of Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America, the Middle East and Russia. He has also served on the advisory council of the Export-Import Bank. FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OFATLANTAFACT SHEETThe Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta is one of 12 regional Reserve Banks in the United States that, together with the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., make up the Federal Reserve System—the nation’s central bank. Since its establishment by an act of Congress in 1913, the Federal Reserve System’s primary goal has been to foster a sound financial system and a healthy economy. To advance this goal, the Atlanta Fed works with the other regional Reserve Banks to help formulate monetary policy, supervise and regulate banks and bank holding companies, and provide payment services to financial institutions and the federal government. District Territory:The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta serves the Sixth Federal Reserve District, which covers the states of Alabama, Florida, and Georgia and parts of Louisiana, Mississippi and Tennessee.President:Dennis P. Lockhart will be the 14th president of the Bank (beginning March 1)Board Chairmen:V. Larkin Martin (Chairman)Managing PartnerMartin Farm, Courtland, Ala.D. Scott Davis (Deputy Chairman)Chief Financial Officer and Vice ChairmanUnited Parcel ServiceAtlanta, Ga.Locations:The Bank is headquartered in Atlanta, Ga., with branches in Birmingham, Ala.; Jacksonville, Fla.; Miami, Fla.; Nashville, Tenn.; and New Orleans, La.Employees:Approximately 2,000 total employees, 1,200 employees in AtlantaCorporate Divisions:Financial services, economic research, supervision and regulation, and corporate servicesYear Established:1914 For more information, see theAtlantaFed’s Web site athttp://www.frbatlanta.org/.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday alerted the public to instances of questionable solicitations directed at homeowners. The Federal Reserve has received inquiries and complaints from recipients of direct mail solicitations that suggest there is a "Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) program" that entitles certain homeowners to cash grants or equity disbursements. Some of these solicitations may be read to indicate that the Federal Reserve endorses or supports the offers they contain. These solicitations appear to be a deceptive effort to encourage consumers to apply for a mortgage loan secured by the consumer's home. The Federal Reserve cautions the public about loan solicitations or other offers from lenders or mortgage brokers that offer consumers cash grants or equity disbursements as part of a "CRA Program." No such federal programs exist and these programs are not required by the CRA. The Community Reinvestment Act is a federal law that was enacted in 1977. It encourages depository institutions to help meet the credit needs of their communities, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, in ways that are consistent with safe and sound banking operations. The CRA does not entitle individuals to any grants or loans. The Federal Reserve is also advising consumers that it does not endorse or sponsor mortgage loan programs. Consumers should be very suspicious of conducting business with lenders or mortgage brokers that make deceptive claims. Individuals who are considering taking out a loan using their house as security are urged to shop around. Comparing loan programs offered by a variety of different lenders can help consumers to get a better deal. This online interagency pamphlet,Looking for the Best Mortgage: Shop, Compare, Negotiate, contains useful information about shopping for home loans:http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/mortgage/mortb_1.htm Questions regarding these loan solicitations should be directed to[email protected]or to the CRA Assistance Line at 202-872-7584.
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Exchequer Club Luncheon, Washington, D.C. Thank you for the opportunity to speak here today. The Exchequer Club has enriched policy development in Washington for nearly a half century by providing a forum for the discussion of important national economic and financial policy issues. I am honored to participate in that discussion. I want to talk this afternoon about some aspects of financial stability, a topic that has received increased attention in recent years from central banks and regulators as well as the financial media.1A number of developments have contributed to this trend. Just a few years ago, the terrible events of 9/11 alerted us to the importance of operational resiliency in a dangerous world. But other forces have also led central banks and other financial supervisors around the world to increase their emphasis on financial stability. Perhaps most important, the financial system, once essentially bank-centered, has become more market-centered. Of course, banks continue to be core participants in the financial system and to provide an indispensable window on market activities. But the development of a relatively market-oriented system has been accompanied by a large number of new participants, many with global reach, and a much larger array of financial instruments. This vastly expanded web of participants and instruments has increased the number of potential channels for the creation and transmission of financial shocks. And, some of the new financial instruments and markets have not been tested under extended stressful conditions. In addition, supervisory authority in a number of countries abroad has been consolidated and separated from central banks; these moves have forced the new regulators and their central bank colleagues to learn how to operate not only in a new financial landscape but also in a new regulatory environment. Finally, in today’s global economy, very settled financial market conditions--narrow risk spreads and low expected market volatility--coexist with unprecedented current account imbalances among nations and interest rates that are low by historical standards. In such a world, it would be imprudent to rule out sharp movements in asset prices and a deterioration in market liquidity that would test the resiliency of market infrastructure and financial institutions. While these factors have stimulated interest in both crisis deterrence and crisis management, the development of financial markets has also increased the resiliency of the financial system. Indeed, U.S. financial markets have proved to be notably robust during some significant recent shocks, such as the sharp decline in equity prices beginning in 2000 and the failure of some large firms, including Enron and Amaranth. New computing and telecommunications technologies, along with the removal of legal and regulatory barriers to entry have heightened competition among a wider variety of institutions and made the allocation of funds from savers to investors more efficient. Technology also has helped financial market participants better understand the risks embedded in assets and develop instruments and systems for managing those risks, both individually and on a portfolio basis. Together, these developments have allowed suppliers and demanders of funds and the intermediaries that stand between them to diversify their risk exposures, reduce their vulnerability to sector- or region-specific shocks, and become far less dependent on specific service providers. In short, market developments that have altered the character and transmission of financial shocks have at the same time spread risks more widely among a greater number and broader range of market participants and given them the tools to better manage those risks. The Federal Reserve, in its roles as a central bank, a bank supervisor, and a participant in the payments system, has been working in various ways and with other supervisors to deter financial crises. As the central bank, we strive to foster economic stability. As a bank supervisor, we are working with others to improve risk management and market discipline. And in the payments and settlement area, we have been active in managing our risk and encouraging others to manage theirs. In every step we take to deter or manage financial crises, it is important that we recognize that we impose costs, and that our efforts can be most effective if we both enhance and are supported by market discipline. Institutions and investors must be allowed to take risks and must be prepared to accept the consequences of their actions. For its part, the government should limit its intervention to those circumstances that could lead to placing the system in serious danger and could spill over to the economy. Otherwise, even the most well-intentioned government intervention can actually weaken the system by undermining the incentives for market participants to limit the risks they undertake. Deterring a Financial CrisisThe first line of defense against financial crises is to try to prevent them. A number of our current efforts to encourage sound risk-taking practices and to enhance market discipline are a continuation of the response to the banking and thrift institution crises of the 1980s and early 1990s. In 1989, more than 500 banks and thrifts failed, and it was not until 1993 that the annual number of bank failures dropped well below 100. One of the most important reforms produced in reaction to this crisis was a tightened focus on bank capital. This tightening began with Basel I, the international capital accord of 1988, which emphasized the importance of connecting bank capital and bank supervision to bank risk. Supervisory efforts today to develop a more advanced set of international capital standards, in Basel II, are in large part aimed at strongly reinforcing that connection. Identifying risk and encouraging management responses are also at the heart of our efforts to encourage enterprisewide risk-management practices at financial firms. Essential to those practices is the stress testing of portfolios for extreme, or “tail,” events. Stress testing per se is not new, but it has become much more important. The evolution of financial markets and instruments and the increased importance of market liquidity for managing risks have made risk managers in both the public and private sectors acutely aware of the need to ensure that financial firms’ risk-measurement and management systems are taking sufficient account of stresses that might not have been threatening ten or twenty years ago. A second core reform that emerged from past crises was the need to limit the moral hazard of the safety net extended to insured depository institutions--a safety net that is required to help maintain financial stability. Moral hazard refers to the heightened incentive to take risk that can be created by an insurance system. Private insurance companies attempt to control moral hazard by, for example, charging risk-based premiums and imposing deductibles. In the public sector, things are often more complicated. However, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991, or FDICIA, took major steps toward reducing moral hazard in the banking system and limiting taxpayer losses by reinforcing the importance of strong capital. Among the mechanisms in the act is the requirement that bank supervisors take prompt corrective action when depositories show signs of becoming troubled. This step was reinforced by the least-cost requirements of FDICIA, which generally require the FDIC to resolve a failing institution in the manner least costly to the deposit insurance fund. Importantly, this provision encouraged market discipline by putting uninsured depositors and other uninsured creditors at greater risk. FDICIA allowed for the relaxation of its least-cost mandate in situations posing a true systemic crisis. But the conditions under which least-cost resolution can be relaxed are quite strict. First, a least-cost resolution would have to create “serious adverse effects on economic conditions or financial stability.” Second, any action under the exception must be recommended by at least two-thirds majorities of the boards of both the FDIC and the Federal Reserve and ultimately approved by the Secretary of the Treasury in consultation with the President. The systemic-risk exception has never been invoked, and efforts are currently underway to lower the chances that it ever will be. For example, last December, the FDIC published an important proposal to improve its ability to resolve a troubled large depository institution in a least-cost manner.2The FDIC proposal seeks to ensure that the largest banks and the FDIC have in place data and other management systems that would aid the FDIC in quickly identifying insured deposits and allow the FDIC to regulate the outflow of uninsured deposits while that identification was being completed. This proposal would, among other things, allow the FDIC to continue to protect insured depositors while making clear to uninsured depositors that they could suffer losses in the event of the failure of even a very large bank. Thus, these changes would greatly enhance market discipline and help ensure that no bank is too big to fail. Crisis prevention has also been a focus of attention in the payments area. At the Federal Reserve, we have improved the technological redundancy and security of our payments system and have encouraged other participants to do the same. We have also sought ways to make the clearing and settlement infrastructure keep pace with the rapid growth and evolution of financial markets and instruments. The over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives markets provide a good example. Those markets, especially the newer markets for credit derivatives, have been growing very rapidly. Until 2005, however, the confirmation of trades remained largely decentralized and manual. The result was a huge backlog of unconfirmed trades, which, to the extent it resulted in inaccurate trade records, had the potential to exacerbate market participants’ market and credit risks. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York has taken the lead, working with other domestic and international supervisors, in helping the OTC derivatives market develop a stronger clearing and settlement infrastructure. Those efforts focused initially on credit derivatives. At the urging of supervisors, market participants set goals and implemented policies for reducing the huge backlogs of unconfirmed trades. As a result, confirmation backlogs were reduced 94 percent between September 2005 and November 2006. Market participants also promptly ended the practice of assigning trades without the prior consent of the counterparty and developed cash settlement as an alternative to physical settlement of credit derivatives in the event of a default of a participant that is a reference obligor. Moreover, market participants have now agreed to turn their attention to equity derivatives, for which large backlogs still exist. They are also providing supervisors with data on backlogs of all types of OTC derivatives, which will allow the supervisors to monitor the industry’s progress across the board. Managing a Financial CrisisClearly, when it comes to a financial crisis, as with so many other potential risks, an ounce of prevention is worth many pounds of cure. But experience tells us that, despite our best efforts at deterrence, true financial crises will occur from time to time. Prudently managing these tail events is no easy task. A large part of the difficulty arises from the fact that some policy responses may have important costs that need to be balanced against their possible benefits in reducing or ameliorating the adverse effects of a crisis. In particular, intervening in the market process can increase moral hazard by weakening market discipline if private parties come to believe that policy actions will relieve them of some of the costs of their own poor decisions or even just bad luck. And weaker market discipline can not only distort current resource allocation but also sow the seeds of a future crisis. If, nonetheless, policymakers reach a judgment that action must be taken, the central bank and other authorities have a variety of instruments to use. The degree of potential moral hazard created will depend on the instrument chosen. Policy actions that work through the overall market rather than through individual firms create a lower probability of distorting risk taking. Thus, a first resort in managing a crisis is to use open market operations to make sure aggregate liquidity is adequate. Adequate liquidity has two aspects: First, we must meet any extra demands for liquidity that might arise from a flight to safety; if such demands are not satisfied, financial markets will tighten at exactly the wrong moment. This was, for example, an important consideration after the stock market crash of 1987, when demand for liquid deposits raised the demand for reserves held at the Fed; and again after 9/11, when the loss of life and destruction of infrastructure impeded the flow of credit and liquidity. Second, we must determine whether the stance of monetary policy should be adjusted to counteract the effects on the economy of tighter credit supplies and other knock-on effects of financial instability. As a result, meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), often in conference calls if the situation is developing rapidly, have been an element in almost every crisis response. Those meetings allow us to gather and share information about the extent of financial instability and its effects on markets and the economy as we discuss the appropriate policy response. Other policy instruments that can be used to deal with financial instability--discount window lending, moral suasion aimed at convincing private parties to keep credit flowing, actions to keep open or slowly wind down troubled institutions--are, in my judgment, more likely than open market operations or monetary policy adjustments to have undesirable and distortionary effects. Hence, they should be, and are, used only after a finding that broader instruments, like open market operations, are unlikely to prevent significant economic disruption. And in my view, when relatively targeted policy interventions are employed, their use should be designed to minimize moral hazard. For example, if the central bank concludes that it must lend to individual depository institutions, any such loans should, in most situations, be on terms sufficiently onerous to encourage a quick return to market funding. The central bank will and must be involved in the management and resolution of financial crises. Indeed, a major reason for the founding of the Federal Reserve in 1913 was the need to address periodic banking crises and financial panics, which had plagued the U.S. economy during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. And the need remains today for Federal Reserve involvement in crisis management and resolution. The Federal Reserve’s ability to conduct open market operations, make discount window loans, and provide funds intraday to key payments system participants are unique tools necessary to ensure that the financial system stays liquid. Our monetary policy experience and responsibilities afford us valuable insights into how financial disruptions may be affecting the real economy. Our dual role as both a payments system participant and a payments system supervisor helps us manage problems that arise in this key segment of the financial system. Finally, for a variety of reasons, the Federal Reserve has developed extensive relationships with foreign central banks and bank supervisors. These relationships have proved useful in past crises and will likely be even more valuable in an increasingly global financial and economic system. When managing a crisis, prudent decisionmaking depends on the best possible information acquired in the shortest possible period of time. By information I mean more than just facts; I mean the informed analyses of the facts that help us understand the true financial condition of the distressed firms and markets and the potential for broader effects. For example, if a major financial institution is facing serious problems, we need to know its most important on- and off-balance-sheet activities, its key lines of business, its most important counterparties, its most important market activities, and its net worth as well as how close it is to failure. In addition, we must get a fix on the primary causes of the institution’s problems and on how long the causal factors are likely to last. Once we understand as best we can the situation we face, we need information to help us assess whether the financial disruption has the potential to significantly spill over to the real economy. The extent of spillover depends upon complex patterns of interdependencies between the immediate source of the financial disruption and other parties, and the speed and cost with which affected parties could obtain substitute providers for the financial services that have been disrupted. As you can imagine, getting the needed information is likewise a very complex and uncertain task, especially when timeliness is of the essence. Once such questions are answered, we would have to judge the possible effects of the financial shock on credit flows, payments and settlement systems, and asset prices and, more broadly, on uncertainty and confidence in the financial sector. We would then go on to consider how these effects might influence consumption, investment, and employment. Although information when financial stability may be threatened is crucial, the regular and periodic collection of information in more normal times has limitations and potential costs, especially for sectors that do not have access to the public safety net. For example, if it leads market participants to believe that the government will in some circumstances protect them from loss, the costs of the resulting increase in moral hazard and reduction in market discipline could exceed the benefits the information would provide to policymakers. And such information may be of little value to policymakers in a crisis if private risk managers can change their positions so rapidly that any periodic information collection by supervisors about risk positions would be out-of-date. The Federal Reserve’s activities as a bank supervisor provide us with important and sometimes critical information, expertise, credibility, and powers to both deter and manage financial crises. Thus, I want to take this opportunity to emphasize and reinforce the case for central bank involvement in bank supervision made by Chairman Bernanke in a speech last month. The deterrence and management of financial crises are of vital practical concern. The uncertainties surrounding these tasks are greater than anyone would want, and the costs of failure are much greater than anyone could desire. In my experience, the information, expertise, credibility, and powers that the Federal Reserve derives from its supervisory activities are extraordinarily helpful in our efforts to maintain economic and financial stability. Perhaps we could be successful, as central banks in a number of countries are trying to be, without supervisory authority. But I, for one, would not want to take that risk. ConclusionFinancial stability was the first and perhaps the most important responsibility of the Federal Reserve. To meet that responsibility, we must cooperate closely with colleagues here and abroad to adapt our techniques for preventing and managing situations that could undermine financial and economic stability. As I have tried to emphasize today, that process of adaptation must also recognize that it is ultimately the decisions of private participants, not governments, on which we rely for financial stability. As we interact with the private sector, we must preserve the incentives for innovation, the rewards for success, and penalties for failure that have made our financial markets the engines of rising living standards in a dynamic market economy. Footnotes 1.Scott Alvarez and Myron Kwast, of the Board's staff, contributed to these remarks, which represent my own views and not necessarily those of other members of the Board or its staff.Return to text 2.Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2006), "FDIC Solicits Comments on Improvements to Determining Insured Deposits at Large Banks," press release 111-2006, December 5,http://www.fdic.gov/news/news/press/2006/index.html.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Spratt, Representative Ryan, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here to offer my views on the federal budget and related issues. At the outset, I should underscore that I speak only for myself and not necessarily for my colleagues at the Federal Reserve. My testimony will focus on the long-term budget outlook and will draw on the most recent set of long-term budget projections from the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), issued in December 2005. The CBO constructed its projections based on the assumptions that real gross domestic product (GDP) would rise about 3-1/2 percent per year in 2005 and 2006 and at a rate of 2.9 per cent per annum from 2007 through 2015. The growth projections through 2015 were in turn based on the assumptions that trend labor force growth will average 0.8 percent per year and that trend labor productivity growth in the nonfarm business sector will average 2.4 percent per year. The CBO has since updated those assumptions for the purposes of other analyses, but the revisions were not large enough to materially alter the broad contours of the fiscal outlook.1As for the longer-term outlook, the CBO assumed that the growth rate of real GDP will average about 2 percent per year starting around 2020. While such projections are subject to considerable uncertainty, the CBO's assumptions provide a sensible and useful starting point for assessing the budget situation over the longer run. Before discussing that longer-run outlook, I will comment on recent budget developments. As you know, the deficit in the unified federal budget declined for a second year in fiscal year 2006, falling to $248 billion from $318 billion in fiscal 2005. So far in fiscal 2007, solid growth in receipts, especially in collections of personal and corporate income taxes, has held the deficit somewhat below year-earlier levels. Of course, a good deal of uncertainty still surrounds the budget outcome for the year as a whole. Federal government outlays in fiscal 2006 were 20.3 percent of nominal gross domestic product (GDP), receipts were 18.4 percent of GDP, and the deficit (equal to the difference of the two) was 1.9 percent of GDP. These percentages are close to their averages since 1960. The on-budget deficit, which differs from the unified budget deficit primarily in excluding receipts and payments of the Social Security system, was $434 billion, or 3.3 percent of GDP, in fiscal 2006.2As of the end of fiscal 2006, federal government debt held by the public, which includes holdings by the Federal Reserve but excludes those by the Social Security and other trust funds, amounted to 37 percent of one year's GDP. Official projections suggest that the unified budget deficit may stabilize or moderate further over the next few years. Unfortunately, we are experiencing what seems likely to be the calm before the storm. In particular, spending on entitlement programs will begin to climb quickly during the next decade. In fiscal 2006, federal spending for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid together totaled about 40 percent of federal expenditures, or 8-1/2 percent of GDP.3In the medium-term projections released by the CBO in January, these outlays increase to 10-3/4 percent of GDP by 2017, an increase of about 2 percentage points of GDP in little more than a decade, and they will likely continue to rise sharply relative to GDP in the years after that. As I will discuss, these rising entitlement obligations will put enormous pressure on the federal budget in coming years. The large projected increases in future entitlement spending have two principal sources. First, like many other industrial countries, the United States has entered what is likely to be a long period of demographic transition, the result both of the reduction in fertility that followed the post-World War II baby boom and of ongoing increases in life expectancy. Longer life expectancies are certainly to be welcomed. But they are likely to lead to longer periods of retirement in the future, even as the growth rate of the workforce declines. As a consequence of the demographic trends, the number of people of retirement age will grow relative both to the population as a whole and to the number of potential workers. Currently, people 65 years and older make up about 12 percent of the U.S. population, and there are about five people between the ages of 20 and 64 for each person 65 and older. According to the intermediate projections of the Social Security Trustees, in 2030 Americans 65 and older will constitute about 19 percent of the U.S. population, and the ratio of those between the ages of 20 and 64 to those 65 and older will have fallen to about 3. Although the retirement of the baby boomers will be an important milestone in the demographic transition--the oldest baby boomers will be eligible for Social Security benefits starting next year--the change in the nation's demographic structure is not just a temporary phenomenon related to the large relative size of the baby-boom generation. Rather, if the U.S. fertility rate remains close to current levels and life expectancies continue to rise, as demographers generally expect, the U.S. population will continue to grow older, even after the baby-boom generation has passed from the scene. If current law is maintained, that aging of the U.S. population will lead to sustained increases in federal entitlement spending on programs that benefit older Americans, such as Social Security and Medicare. The second cause of rising entitlement spending is the expected continued increase in medical costs per beneficiary. Projections of future medical costs are fraught with uncertainty, but history suggests that--without significant changes in policy--these costs are likely to continue to rise more quickly than incomes, at least for the foreseeable future. Together with the aging of the population, ongoing increases in medical costs will lead to a rapid expansion of Medicare and Medicaid expenditures. Long-range projections prepared by the CBO vividly portray the potential effects on the budget of an aging population and rapidly rising health care costs. The CBO has developed projections for a variety of alternative scenarios, based on different assumptions about the evolution of spending and taxes. The scenarios produce a wide range of possible budget outcomes, reflecting the substantial uncertainty that attends long-range budget projections.4However, the outcomes that appear most likely, in the absence of policy changes, involve rising budget deficits and increases in the amount of federal debt outstanding to unprecedented levels. For example, one plausible scenario is based on the assumptions that (1) federal retirement and health spending will follow the CBO's intermediate projection; (2) defense spending will drift down over time as a percentage of GDP; (3) other non-interest spending will grow roughly in line with GDP; and (4) federal revenues will remain close to their historical share of GDP--that is, about where they are today.5Under these assumptions, the CBO calculates that, by 2030, the federal budget deficit will approach 9 percent of GDP--more than four times greater as a share of GDP than the deficit in fiscal year 2006. A particularly worrisome aspect of this projection and similar ones is the implied evolution of the national debt and the associated interest payments to government bondholders. Minor details aside, the federal debt held by the public increases each year by the amount of that year's unified deficit. Consequently, scenarios that project large deficits also project rapid growth in the outstanding government debt. The higher levels of debt in turn imply increased expenditures on interest payments to bondholders, which exacerbate the deficit problem still further. Thus, a vicious cycle may develop in which large deficits lead to rapid growth in debt and interest payments, which in turn adds to subsequent deficits. According to the CBO projection that I have been discussing, interest payments on the government's debt will reach 4-1/2 percent of GDP in 2030, nearly three times their current size relative to national output. Under this scenario, the ratio of federal debt held by the public to GDP would climb from 37 percent currently to roughly 100 percent in 2030 and would continue to grow exponentially after that. The only time in U.S. history that the debt-to-GDP ratio has been in the neighborhood of 100 percent was during World War II. People at that time understood the situation to be temporary and expected deficits and the debt-to-GDP ratio to fall rapidly after the war, as in fact they did. In contrast, under the scenario I have been discussing, the debt-to-GDP ratio would rise far into the future at an accelerating rate. Ultimately, this expansion of debt would spark a fiscal crisis, which could be addressed only by very sharp spending cuts or tax increases, or both.6 The CBO projections, by design, ignore the adverse effects that such high deficits would likely have on economic growth. But if government debt and deficits were actually to grow at the pace envisioned by the CBO's scenario, the effects on the U.S. economy would be severe. High rates of government borrowing would drain funds away from private capital formation and thus slow the growth of real incomes and living standards over time. Some fraction of the additional debt would likely be financed abroad, which would lessen the negative influence on domestic investment; however, the necessity of paying interest on the foreign-held debt would leave a smaller portion of our nation's future output available for domestic consumption. Moreover, uncertainty about the ultimate resolution of the fiscal imbalances would reduce the confidence of consumers, businesses, and investors in the U.S. economy, with adverse implications for investment and growth. To some extent, strong economic growth can help to mitigate budgetary pressures, and all else being equal, fiscal policies that are supportive of growth would be beneficial. Unfortunately, economic growth alone is unlikely to solve the nation's impending fiscal problems. Economic growth leads to higher wages and profits and thus increases tax receipts, but higher wages also imply increased Social Security benefits, as those benefits are tied to wages. Higher incomes also tend to increase the demand for medical services so that, indirectly, higher incomes may also increase federal health expenditures. Increased rates of immigration could raise growth by raising the growth rate of the labor force. However, economists who have looked at the issue have found that even a doubling in the rate of immigration to the United States, from about 1 million to 2 million immigrants per year, would not significantly reduce the federal government's fiscal imbalance.7 The prospect of growing fiscal imbalances and their economic consequences also raises essential questions of intergenerational fairness.8As I have noted, because of increasing life expectancy and the decline in fertility, the number of retirees that each worker will have to support in the future--either directly or indirectly through taxes paid to support government programs--will rise significantly. To the extent that federal budgetary policies inhibit capital formation and increase our net liabilities to foreigners, future generations of Americans will bear a growing burden of the debt and experience slower growth in per-capita incomes than would otherwise have been the case. An important element in ensuring that we leave behind a stronger economy than we inherited, as did virtually all previous generations in this country, will be to move over time toward fiscal policies that are sustainable, efficient, and equitable across generations. Policies that promote private as well as public saving would also help us leave a more productive economy to our children and grandchildren. In addition, we should explore ways to make the labor market as accommodating as possible to older people who wish to continue working, as many will as longevity increases and health improves. Addressing the country's fiscal problems will take persistence and a willingness to make difficult choices. In the end, the fundamental decision that the Congress, the Administration, and the American people must confront is how large a share of the nation's economic resources to devote to federal government programs, including transfer programs such as Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. Crucially, whatever size of government is chosen, tax rates must ultimately be set at a level sufficient to achieve an appropriate balance of spending and revenues in the long run. Thus, members of the Congress who put special emphasis on keeping tax rates low must accept that low tax rates can be sustained only if outlays, including those on entitlements, are kept low as well. Likewise, members who favor a more expansive role of the government, including relatively more-generous benefits payments, must recognize the burden imposed by the additional taxes needed to pay for the higher spending, a burden that includes not only the resources transferred from the private sector but also any adverse economic incentives associated with higher tax rates. Achieving fiscal sustainability will require sustained efforts and attention over many years. As an aid in charting the way forward, the Congress may find it useful to set some benchmarks against which to gauge progress toward key budgetary objectives. Because no single statistic fully describes the fiscal situation, the most effective approach would likely involve monitoring a number of fiscal indicators, each of which captures a different aspect of the budget and its economic impact. The unified budget deficit, projected forward a certain number of years, is an important measure that is already included in the congressional budgeting process. However, the unified budget deficit does not fully capture the fiscal situation and its effect on the economy, for at least two reasons. First, the budget deficit by itself does not measure the quantity of resources that the government is taking from the private sector. An economy in which the government budget is balanced but in which government spending equals 20 percent of GDP is very different from one in which the government's budget is balanced but its spending is 40 percent of GDP, as the latter economy has both higher tax rates and a greater role for the government. Monitoring current and prospective levels of total government outlays relative to GDP or a similar indicator would help the Congress ensure that the overall size of the government relative to the economy is consistent with members' views and preferences. Second, the annual budget deficit reflects only near-term financing needs and does not capture long-term fiscal imbalances. As the most difficult long-term budgetary issues are associated with the growth of entitlement spending, a comprehensive approach to budgeting would include close attention to measures of the long-term solvency of entitlement programs, such as long-horizon present values of unfunded liabilities for Social Security and Medicare. To summarize, because of demographic changes and rising medical costs, federal expenditures for entitlement programs are projected to rise sharply over the next few decades. Dealing with the resulting fiscal strains will pose difficult choices for the Congress, the Administration, and the American people. However, if early and meaningful action is not taken, the U.S. economy could be seriously weakened, with future generations bearing much of the cost. The decisions the Congress will face will not be easy or simple, but the benefits of placing the budget on a path that is both sustainable and meets the nation's long-run needs would be substantial. Thank you again for allowing me to comment on these important issues. I would be glad to take your questions. Footnotes 1.According to the latest estimates of the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), real GDP growth was 3.2 percent in 2005 and 3.4 percent in 2006, both figures stated on an annual-average basis. The figure for 2006 is the BEA's "advance" estimate; a revised estimate is scheduled for release today.Return to text 2.Excluding the operations of both Social Security and Medicare Part A, the budget deficit in fiscal year 2006 was $459 billion, or 3.5 percent of GDP. Like Social Security, Medicare Part A pays benefits out of, and receives a dedicated stream of revenues into, a trust fund.Return to text 3.Net of Medicare premiums paid by beneficiaries and amounts paid by states from savings on Medicaid prescription drug costs, these outlays were equal to 8 percent of GDP.Return to text 4.For example, in 2030, five of the six scenarios imply deficits ranging from 1-1/2 percent of GDP to nearly 14 percent of GDP; a sixth scenario is capable of producing a surplus, but it relies on the confluence of a very favorable set of assumptions.Return to text 5.For more information about this scenario, see the description of Scenario 2 in Congressional Budget Office (2005),The Long-Term Budget Outlook, December, pp. 5-13 and 48-49,http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/69xx/doc6982/12-15-LongTermOutlook.pdf. Consistent with the assumptions used by the Medicare trustees, the CBO's intermediate projections for Medicare and Medicaid are based on the assumption that, over the long run, per beneficiary health expenditures will increase at a rate that is 1 percentage point per year greater than the growth rate of per capita GDP. Over the past twenty-five years, however, per beneficiary Medicare spending has actually exceeded per capita GDP growth by about 2-1/2 percentage points per year. Thus, a significant slowing in the growth of medical costs per beneficiary will be needed to keep expenditures close to those projected in this scenario.Return to text 6.To give a sense of the magnitudes involved, suppose--for the sake of illustration only--that the deficit projected for 2030 in the CBO scenario were to be eliminated entirely in that year, half through reductions in discretionary spending and half through increases in non-payroll taxes. (Of course, in reality the fiscal adjustment would likely not occur in one year, but this hypothetical example is useful for showing the magnitude of the problem.) This fiscal adjustment would involve a cut in discretionary spending (including defense) of nearly 80 percent (relative to its baseline level) and a rise in non-payroll taxes of more than 35 percent. The need for such painful measures could be diminished by beginning the process of fiscal adjustment much earlier, thereby avoiding some of the buildup in outstanding debt and the associated interest burden.Return to text 7.CBO (2005),The Long-Term Budget Outlook, p. 3.Return to text 8.I discussed this issue in Ben S. Bernanke (2006), "The Coming Demographic Transition: Will We Treat Future Generations Fairly?", speech delivered before the Washington Economic Club, Washington, October 4,www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20061004a.htm.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meeting on January 29, 2007. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on January 30-31, 2007. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The summary description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's web site atwww.federalreserve.gov/fomc. Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, January 30-31, 2007
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Perry D. Lane, former president, chief executive officer and director of Exchange Bank of Missouri, Fayette, Missouri. Mr. Lane, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order, which was based on his alleged participation in violations of law, unsafe and unsound banking practices, and breaches of fiduciary duty in connection with reports to the bank's management and board of directors of the delinquency status and other information concerning borrower's loans, and other actions related to loan documentation, property appraisals, and loan purpose statements. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Prohibition against Seresa Morgan (“Morgan”), a former employee of Civitas BankGroup, Inc. (“Civitas”), Franklin, Tennessee, a registered bank holding company. On January 5, 2007, the Board issued a Notice of Intent to Prohibit against Morgan, alleging that she participated in violations of law, unsafe and unsound banking practices, and breaches of fiduciary duty related to the embezzlement of over $197,000 from Civitas. The Order of Prohibition against Morgan resolves the proceeding initiated by issuance of the Notice. Morgan, without admitting to any allegations, has consented to the issuance of the Order. A copy of the Order is attached.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Chairman Bernanke presented identical testimony before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on February 15, 2007 Chairman Dodd, Senator Shelby, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the Federal Reserve'sMonetary Policy Report to the Congress. Real activity in the United States expanded at a solid pace in 2006, although the pattern of growth was uneven. After a first-quarter rebound from weakness associated with the effects of the hurricanes that ravaged the Gulf Coast the previous summer, output growth moderated somewhat on average over the remainder of 2006. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is currently estimated to have increased at an annual rate of about 2-3/4 percent in the second half of the year. As we anticipated in our July report, the U.S. economy appears to be making a transition from the rapid rate of expansion experienced over the preceding several years to a more sustainable average pace of growth. The principal source of the ongoing moderation has been a substantial cooling in the housing market, which has led to a marked slowdown in the pace of residential construction. However, the weakness in housing market activity and the slower appreciation of house prices do not seem to have spilled over to any significant extent to other sectors of the economy. Consumer spending has continued to expand at a solid rate, and the demand for labor has remained strong. On average, about 165,000 jobs per month have been added to nonfarm payrolls over the past six months, and the unemployment rate, at 4.6 percent in January, remains low. Inflation pressures appear to have abated somewhat following a run-up during the first half of 2006. Overall inflation has fallen, in large part as a result of declines in the price of crude oil. Readings on core inflation--that is, inflation excluding the prices of food and energy--have improved modestly in recent months. Nevertheless, the core inflation rate remains somewhat elevated. In the five policy meetings since the July report, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has maintained the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 percent. So far, the incoming data have supported the view that the current stance of policy is likely to foster sustainable economic growth and a gradual ebbing of core inflation. However, in the statement accompanying last month's policy decision, the FOMC again indicated that its predominant policy concern is the risk that inflation will fail to ease as expected and that it is prepared to take action to address inflation risks if developments warrant. Let me now discuss the economic outlook in a little more detail, beginning with developments in the real economy and then turning to inflation. I will conclude with some brief comments on monetary policy. Consumer spending continues to be the mainstay of the current economic expansion. Personal consumption expenditures, which account for more than two-thirds of aggregate demand, increased at an annual rate of around 3-1/2 percent in real terms during the second half of last year, broadly matching the brisk pace of the previous three years. Consumer outlays were supported by strong gains in personal income, reflecting both the ongoing increases in payroll employment and a pickup in the growth of real wages. Real hourly compensation--as measured by compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector deflated by the personal consumption expenditures price index--rose at an annual rate of around 3 percent in the latter half of 2006. The resilience of consumer spending is all the more striking given the backdrop of the substantial correction in the housing market that became increasingly evident during the spring and summer of last year. By the middle of 2006, monthly sales of new and existing homes were about 15 percent lower than a year earlier, and the previously rapid rate of house-price appreciation had slowed markedly. The fall in housing demand in turn prompted a sharp slowing in the pace of construction of new homes. Even so, the backlog of unsold homes rose from about four-and-a-half months' supply in 2005 to nearly seven months' supply by the third quarter of last year. Single-family housing starts have dropped more than 30 percent since the beginning of last year, and employment growth in the construction sector has slowed substantially. Some tentative signs of stabilization have recently appeared in the housing market: New and existing home sales have flattened out in recent months, mortgage applications have picked up, and some surveys find that homebuyers' sentiment has improved. However, even if housing demand falls no further, weakness in residential investment is likely to continue to weigh on economic growth over the next few quarters as homebuilders seek to reduce their inventories of unsold homes to more-comfortable levels. Despite the ongoing adjustments in the housing sector, overall economic prospects for households remain good. Household finances appear generally solid, and delinquency rates on most types of consumer loans and residential mortgages remain low. The exception is subprime mortgages with variable interest rates, for which delinquency rates have increased appreciably. The labor market is expected to stay healthy, and real incomes should continue to rise, although the pace of employment gains may be slower than that to which we have become accustomed in recent years. In part, slower average job growth may simply reflect the moderation of economic activity. Also, the impending retirement of the leading edge of the baby-boom generation, and an apparent leveling out of women's participation rate in the workforce, which had risen for several decades, will likely restrain the growth of the labor force in coming years. With fewer jobseekers entering the labor force, the rate of job creation associated with the maintenance of stable conditions in the labor market will decline. All told, consumer expenditures appear likely to expand solidly in coming quarters, albeit a little less rapidly than the growth in personal incomes if, as we expect, households respond to the slow pace of home-equity appreciation by saving more out of current income. The business sector remains in excellent financial condition, with strong growth in profits, liquid balance sheets, and corporate leverage near historical lows. Last year, those factors helped to support continued advances in business capital expenditures. Notably, investment in high-tech equipment rose 9 percent in 2006, and spending on nonresidential structures (such as office buildings, factories, and retail space) increased rapidly through much of the year after several years of weakness. Growth in business spending slowed toward the end of last year, reflecting mainly a deceleration of spending on business structures; a drop in outlays in the transportation sector, where spending is notably volatile; and some weakness in purchases of equipment related to construction and motor vehicle manufacturing. Over the coming year, capital spending is poised to expand at a moderate pace, supported by steady gains in business output and favorable financial conditions. Inventory levels in some sectors--most notably at motor vehicle dealers and in some construction-related manufacturing industries--rose over the course of last year, leading some firms to cut production to better align inventories with sales. Remaining imbalances may continue to impose modest restraint on industrial production during the early part of this year. Outside the United States, economic activity in our major trading partners has continued to grow briskly. The strength of demand abroad helped spur a robust expansion in U.S. real exports, which grew about 9 percent last year. The pattern of real U.S imports was somewhat uneven, partly because of fluctuations in oil imports over the course of the year. On balance, import growth slowed in 2006, to 3 percent. Economic growth abroad should support further steady growth in U.S. exports this year. Despite the improvements in trade performance, the U.S. current account deficit remains large, averaging about 6-1/2 percent of nominal GDP during the first three quarters of 2006 (the latest available data). Overall, the U.S. economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace this year and next, with growth strengthening somewhat as the drag from housing diminishes. Such an outlook is reflected in the projections that the members of the Board of Governors and presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks made around the time of the FOMC meeting late last month. The central tendency of those forecasts--which are based on the information available at that time and on the assumption of appropriate monetary policy--is for real GDP to increase about 2-1/2 to 3 percent in 2007 and about 2-3/4 to 3 percent in 2008. The projection for GDP growth in 2007 is slightly lower than our projection last July. This difference partly reflects an expectation of somewhat greater weakness in residential construction during the first part of this year than we anticipated last summer. The civilian unemployment rate is expected to finish both 2007 and 2008 around 4-1/2 to 4-3/4 percent. The risks to this outlook are significant. To the downside, the ultimate extent of the housing market correction is difficult to forecast and may prove greater than we anticipate. Similarly, spillover effects from developments in the housing market onto consumer spending and employment in housing-related industries may be more pronounced than expected. To the upside, output may expand more quickly than expected if consumer spending continues to increase at the brisk pace seen in the second half of 2006. I turn now to the inflation situation. As I noted earlier, there are some indications that inflation pressures are beginning to diminish. The monthly data are noisy, however, and it will consequently be some time before we can be confident that underlying inflation is moderating as anticipated. Recent declines in overall inflation have primarily reflected lower prices for crude oil, which have fed through to the prices of gasoline, heating oil, and other energy products used by consumers. After moving higher in the first half of 2006, core consumer price inflation has also edged lower recently, reflecting a relatively broad-based deceleration in the prices of core goods. That deceleration is probably also due to some extent to lower energy prices, which have reduced costs of production and thereby lessened one source of pressure on the prices of final goods and services. The ebbing of core inflation has likely been promoted as well by the stability of inflation expectations. A waning of the temporary factors that boosted inflation in recent years will probably help foster a continued edging down of core inflation. In particular, futures quotes imply that oil prices are expected to remain well below last year's peak. If actual prices follow the path currently indicated by futures prices, inflation pressures would be reduced further as the benefits of the decline in oil prices from last year's high levels are passed through to a broader range of core goods and services. Nonfuel import prices may also put less pressure on core inflation, particularly if price increases for some other commodities, such as metals, slow from last year's rapid rates. But as we have been reminded only too well in recent years, the prices of oil and other commodities are notoriously difficult to predict, and they remain a key source of uncertainty to the inflation outlook. The contribution from rents and shelter costs should also fall back, following a step-up last year. The faster pace of rent increases last year may have been attributable in part to the reduced affordability of owner-occupied housing, which led to a greater demand for rental housing. Rents should rise somewhat less quickly this year and next, reflecting recovering demand for owner-occupied housing as well as increases in the supply of rental units, but the extent and pace of that adjustment is not yet clear. Upward pressure on inflation could materialize if final demand were to exceed the underlying productive capacity of the economy for a sustained period. The rate of resource utilization is high, as can be seen in rates of capacity utilization above their long-term average and, most evidently, in the tightness of the labor market. Indeed, anecdotal reports suggest that businesses are having difficulty recruiting well-qualified workers in certain occupations. Measures of labor compensation, though still growing at a moderate pace, have shown some signs of acceleration over the past year, likely in part the result of tight labor market conditions. The implications for inflation of faster growth in nominal labor compensation depend on several factors. Increases in compensation might be offset by higher labor productivity or absorbed by a narrowing of firms' profit margins rather than passed on to consumers in the form of higher prices; in these circumstances, gains in nominal compensation would translate into gains in real compensation as well. Underlying productivity trends appear favorable, and the markup of prices over unit labor costs is high by historical standards, so such an outcome is certainly possible. Moreover, if activity expands over the next year or so at the moderate pace anticipated by the FOMC, pressures in both labor and product markets should ease modestly. That said, the possibility remains that tightness in product markets could allow firms to pass higher labor costs through to prices, adding to inflation and effectively nullifying the purchasing power of at least some portion of the increase in labor compensation. Thus, the high level of resource utilization remains an important upside risk to continued progress on inflation. Another significant factor influencing medium-term trends in inflation is the public's expectations of inflation. These expectations have an important bearing on whether transitory influences on prices, such as those created by changes in energy costs, become embedded in wage and price decisions and so leave a lasting imprint on the rate of inflation. It is encouraging that inflation expectations appear to have remained contained. The projections of the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks are for inflation to continue to ebb over this year and next. In particular, the central tendency of those forecasts is for core inflation--as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy--to be 2 to 2-1/4 percent this year and to edge lower, to 1-3/4 to 2 percent, next year. But as I noted earlier, the FOMC has continued to view the risk that inflation will not moderate as expected as the predominant policy concern. Monetary policy affects spending and inflation with long and variable lags. Consequently, policy decisions must be based on an assessment of medium-term economic prospects. At the same time, because economic forecasting is an uncertain enterprise, policymakers must be prepared to respond flexibly to developments in the economy when those developments lead to a re-assessment of the outlook. The dependence of monetary policy actions on a broad range of incoming information complicates the public's attempts to understand and anticipate policy decisions. Clear communication by the central bank about the economic outlook, the risks to that outlook, and its monetary policy strategy can help the public to understand the rationale behind policy decisions and to anticipate better the central bank's reaction to new information. This understanding should, in turn, enhance the effectiveness of policy and lead to improved economic outcomes. By reducing uncertainty, central bank transparency may also help anchor the public's longer-term expectations of inflation. Much experience has shown that well-anchored inflation expectations tend to help stabilize inflation and promote maximum sustainable economic growth. Good communication by the central bank is also vital for ensuring appropriate accountability for its policy actions, the full effects of which can be observed only after a lengthy period. A transparent policy process improves accountability by clarifying how a central bank expects to attain its policy objectives and by ensuring that policy is conducted in a manner that can be seen to be consistent with achieving those objectives. Over the past decade or so, the Federal Reserve has significantly improved its methods of communication, but further progress is possible. As you know, the FOMC last year established a subcommittee to help the full Committee evaluate the next steps in this continuing process. Our discussions are directed at examining all aspects of our communications and have been deliberate and thorough. These discussions are continuing, and no decisions have been reached. My colleagues and I remain firmly committed to an open and transparent monetary policy process that enhances our ability to achieve our dual objectives of stable prices and maximum sustainable employment. I will keep members of this Committee apprised of developments as our deliberations move forward. I look forward to continuing to work closely with the members of this Committee and your colleagues in the Senate and House on the important issues pertaining to monetary policy and the other responsibilities with which the Congress has charged the Federal Reserve. Thank you. I would be happy to take questions.
Susan Schmidt Bies submitted her resignation Friday as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, effective March 30, 2007. Bies, who has been a member of the Board since December 7, 2001, submitted her resignation to President Bush, and plans to spend more time with her family. She does not plan to attend the March 20-21 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. "Sue’s invaluable contributions to both monetary and regulatory policy at the Federal Reserve have been aided by her unique perspective as both an economist and a banker," said Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. "Her leadership at the Board was most evident in guiding our efforts in banking policy and community affairs. I will miss her counsel and wish her all the best in her new endeavors." Bies, 59, was appointed by President Bush to a full term on the Federal Reserve Board ending January 31, 2012. During her time on the Board, she has served as Chairman of the Committee on Supervisory and Regulatory Affairs; Chairman of the Committee on Consumer and Community Affairs; and as a member of the Committee on Federal Reserve Bank Affairs. In addition, she represented the Federal Reserve in the Financial Stability Forum and led the Federal Reserve’s efforts to modernize the Basel capital accord. Before joining the Board, Bies served in various positions at First Tennessee National Corporation and was a member of the Emerging Issues Task Force of the Financial Accounting Standards Board. Earlier in her career, she taught economics at Rhodes College and at Wayne State University and served as an economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. A copy of her resignation letter is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve’s public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur.Bank of America Corporation, Charlotte, N.C.Written Agreement dated February 9, 2005Terminated February 27, 2007 The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve’s public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur.
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn Before the Special Committee on Aging, U.S. Senate Chairman Kohl, Senator Smith, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to discuss some recent research at the Federal Reserve on the effect that population aging may have on the growth of the labor force.1The research is careful and important, but I would like to emphasize that it is a staff product and so does not necessarily represent the views of the Federal Reserve Board. As we all know, the United States is at the front edge of a massive and important shift in the demographic composition of the population. The onset of the traditional retirement years for the oldest members of the baby-boom generation,2coupled with a trend toward greater life expectancy and relatively low fertility rates, will cause the share of older individuals in the population to rise markedly in the years ahead. How our society responds to the challenges associated with demographic change will have important consequences for the longer-run prospects for economic growth, average living standards, and the distribution of income and consumption across generations. The main demographic story is inexhibit 1, which shows that around 2003, the population of those aged 62 and older began growing as a share of the population aged 16 and older. Age 62 is important as the time at which individuals become eligible for Social Security retirement benefits under current law. According to projections from the Bureau of the Census, shown in the shaded area of exhibit 1, the upward trend in aging will steepen noticeably in the next few years. The share of the adult population that is aged 62 and older, now at about 19 percent, is projected to rise to more than 22 percent by 20153. A subset of the adult population is the labor force--that is, those who are either actively looking for work or have a job. Because the participation of men and women in the labor force declines sharply after age 55, as shown inexhibit 2, the rising share of older individuals has important implications for the nation’s labor supply. In particular, the aging of the population will put significant downward pressure on the total labor force participation rate in coming years, provided the basic pattern of participation over the lifecycle is maintained. Changes in labor force behavior within age groups also have the potential to add to the downward trend in labor force participation.Exhibit 3shows that by the time men born in 1935 reached age 30, about 97 percent of them were in the labor force. In contrast, only about 92 percent of 30-year-old men born in 1976 were in the labor force. Although not shown in the exhibit, a roughly similar pattern exists for men older than 30, and, all else equal, the gradual reduction in labor force participation of men has put downward pressure on the overall participation rate. Exhibit 3 also shows that, until recently, the decline in the labor force participation rate of successive generations of men had been more than offset by a steady increase in the participation rates for each new generation of women. Women born in the 1920s and 1930s had low participation rates at age 30, but three-fourths of 30-year-olds born in 1960 were in the labor force. However, participation rates for more recent generations of 30-year-old women have not risen any further. Economists at the Federal Reserve have developed a model that combines information on the decline in labor force participation at older ages, shown in exhibit 2, with information on the changes in labor force participation across generations, shown in exhibit 3.Exhibit 4shows the actual participation rate, the model’s estimate of the underlying trend in the total participation rate between 1995 and 2006, and--under a specific set of assumptions--a projection of the trend out to 2015. The fluctuations in the actual participation rate around the trend largely reflect cyclical influences. For example, the strong demand for labor in the late 1990s caused participation to rise above its longer-run trend, whereas the 2001 recession and subsequent weak labor market caused participation to fall below the trend. Currently, actual participation is again above the estimate of the long-run trend, according to this model, largely because of the current strength of the labor market. A point more relevant to today’s hearing is that the estimated trend has been declining since about 2002 and is projected by the model to fall substantially further, from about 65-1/2 percent today to about 62-1/2 percent by 2015. That decline in the overall participation rate, coupled with the slowing in the growth of the working-age population projected by the Census Bureau, would be consistent with a slowing in the annual growth of the labor force from the roughly 1-1/4 percent average pace seen in recent years to only 1/4 percent by 2015. By its very nature, the model can only illustrate what will happen if workers, employers, and policymakers behave in the future in line with the assumptions embodied in the projections. Specifically, the forecast proceeds under the assumption that (1) participation rates among the elderly will rise gradually, (2) the average participation rate for men aged 25-61 will continue to edge down, and (3) participation rates for women in the same age group will not increase further. Of course, these assumptions may not be borne out. As outlined inexhibit 5, several factors may work toward raising the labor force participation rate. In particular, increasing longevity and improvements in health may induce many more individuals to remain in the workforce well past age 65. For their part, employers, upon facing slower growth in the labor force, may look for ways to attract workers into the labor market. Paying higher wages is one obvious approach. But they could also create flexible work schedules, increase the availability of part-time work, encourage telecommuting, increase training for older workers, and provide additional health care coverage as a way to retain and attract older workers. Such changes might also boost the labor force participation of other age groups. Government policies can also influence the attractiveness of remaining in the workforce. For example, to raise participation rates among older individuals, policymakers could seek ways to preserve or enhance the incentives to work beyond traditional retirement ages. Government policies could also be designed to make work more attractive to other demographic groups. Finally, to a limited extent, immigration has the potential to alter the future pace of labor force growth. Most directly, if future immigration rates exceed those assumed by the Census Bureau, the population, and hence the labor force, would grow faster than the Census Bureau currently projects. In addition, because new immigrants tend to be younger and are more likely to participate in the labor force than are native-born individuals, higher immigration would also lead to a higher overall participation rate. Some of the influences described above may already be boosting the participation rate relative to the model’s prediction. As shown inexhibit 6, the labor force participation rate of individuals aged 62 and older had been trending down since the late 1970s but has been rising markedly since 1995. To some extent, this increase simply reflects the aging of a generation of women who were more likely to be in the labor force throughout their lifetimes than were earlier generations of women. However, the magnitude of the rise is greater than can be explained by this factor alone. Because the factors just discussed have the potential to offset some of the effects of population aging, and given the considerable uncertainty that surrounds any long-term economic projection, economists hold a range of views about the pace of future labor force growth. A projection from the Congressional Budget Office is shown in exhibit 7. The CBO foresees the pace of trend labor force growth slowing to 1/2 percent per year by 2015, a smaller deceleration than projected by the model developed by Board staff but still a significant slowing. As I indicated at the outset, the aging of the population has important implications for the living standards of current and future generations. Because total output is equal to output per worker times the number of workers, a slowdown in the rate of labor force growth will, all else equal, tend to slow the growth of output--as shown in the right-most column ofexhibit 7. Moreover, if the growth in the labor force is lower than population growth, output per person will, all else equal, rise even more slowly than output per worker. Indeed, as indicated in the exhibit, both the Federal Reserve staff projection and the CBO projection for the growth of the labor force through 2015 are lower than the growth of the population expected in that period by the Census Bureau. Consequently, on these projections, the level of output per person will be lower than it would have been without population aging. Increasing labor force participation would help reduce these effects, but is unlikely to completely offset them. Thus, without an offsetting increase in productivity growth, the aging of the population likely means that output per person will have to be lower than it would have been in the absence of population aging. Accordingly, a critical question is how that burden will be distributed across generations. If we do nothing, it will, by default, fall entirely on future generations. However, by forgoing some consumption to increase national saving, we can take on some of that burden today and thereby raise the living standards of future generations.4A rise in saving can achieve that shift because the extra savings would be used to increase the nation’s stock of capital and increase our net holdings of foreign assets. Increasing the amount of productive assets owned by Americans increases the amount of consumption that future generations will be able to enjoy. Determining the best way to distribute the burden associated with the aging of the population should be high on society’s list of priorities. Footnotes 1.Stephanie Aaronson, Bruce Fallick, Andrew Figura, Jonathan Pingle, and William Wascher (2006), “The Recent Decline in the Labor Force Participation Rate and Its Implications for Potential Labor Supply,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2006:1, pp. 69-154.Return to text 2.The baby boom is generally taken to be children born from 1946 through 1964. The Census Bureau estimates that roughly 78 million American baby boomers were alive as of July 1, 2005, and that approximately 2.9 million Americans turned 60 in 2006. U.S. Census Bureau (2006), “Facts for Features: Special Edition, Oldest Baby Boomers Turn 60,” press release CB06-FFSE.01-2, January 3,www.census.gov/Press-Release/www/releases/.Return to text 3.This projection combines the latest estimates of population from the Bureau of the Census for 2006 (http://www.census.gov/popest/estimates.php) with the Census Bureau’s projections of population growth by age through 2015 (http://www.census.gov/ipc/www/usinterimproj).Return to text 4.The relationship between population aging and living standards is explored in more detail in Louise Sheiner, Daniel Sichel, and Lawrence Slifman (2007), “A Primer of the Macroeconomics of Population Aging,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-01 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January).Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce, Omaha, Nebraska A bedrock American principle is the idea that all individuals should have the opportunity to succeed on the basis of their own effort, skill, and ingenuity. Equality of economic opportunity appeals to our sense of fairness, certainly, but it also strengthens our economy. If each person is free to develop and apply his or her talents to the greatest extent possible, then both the individual and the economy benefit. Although we Americans strive to provide equality of economic opportunity, we do not guarantee equality of economic outcomes, nor should we. Indeed, without the possibility of unequal outcomes tied to differences in effort and skill, the economic incentive for productive behavior would be eliminated, and our market-based economy--which encourages productive activity primarily through the promise of financial reward--would function far less effectively. That said, we also believe that no one should be allowed to slip too far down the economic ladder, especially for reasons beyond his or her control. Like equality of opportunity, this general principle is grounded in economic practicality as well as our sense of fairness. To a significant extent, American economic success has resulted from the flexibility and adaptability of our dynamic market economy. Indeed, the ability of our labor and capital markets to accommodate and adapt to economic change has helped make possible the strong productivity performance of the U.S. economy over the post-World War II era, including the past decade. But this very dynamism sometimes creates painful dislocations, as when a shift in consumer demand, the advent of new technology, or new competition leads to the closing of a factory or causes a worker's skills to become obsolete. If we did not place some limits on the downside risks to individuals affected by economic change, the public at large might become less willing to accept the dynamism that is so essential to economic progress. Thus, these three principles seem to be broadly accepted in our society: that economicopportunityshould be as widely distributed and as equal as possible; that economicoutcomesneed not be equal but should be linked to the contributions each person makes to the economy; and that people should receive someinsuranceagainst the most adverse economic outcomes, especially those arising from events largely outside the person's control. Even when we accept these principles, however, important questions remain. For example, what is meant in practice by equality of economic opportunity? Some might limit the concept to the absence of overt discrimination against particular individuals or groups, while others might extend the term to encompass universal access to adequate housing, education, and health care. Another difficult question is how to balance the need for maintaining strong market-based incentives, which support economic growth and efficiency but may be associated with greater inequality of results, against the goal of insuring individuals against the most adverse outcomes, which may reduce inequality but also tends to diminish the strength of incentives. No objective means of answering these questions exists. One can only try to understand the various issues and tradeoffs involved and then come to a normative judgment based on that understanding. I raise these questions of ethics and values because they are inextricably linked with the topic of my talk today, which is the level and distribution of economic well-being in the United States. As I will discuss, the average standard of living in this country has improved considerably over time. However, by many measures, inequality in economic outcomes has increased over time as well, albeit at varying rates. In the remainder of my remarks I will review these trends. I will discuss what economic research has to say about the sources of rising inequality and briefly consider some implications for economic policy. I will not draw any firm conclusions about the extent to which policy should attempt to offset inequality in economic outcomes; that determination inherently depends on values and social tradeoffs and is thus properly left to the political process. Trends in the Level and Distribution of Economic Well-BeingOn average, and by almost any measure, Americans have gained ground economically over time. For example, since 1947, the real (that is, inflation adjusted) hourly compensation of workers in the U.S. nonfarm business sector (a measure that includes both earnings and benefits) has increased more than 200 percent. In other words, the real reward for an hour of work has more than tripled over the past sixty years.1Over the same period, real disposable income per capita has increased almost 270 percent, real consumption per capita has increased almost 280 percent, and real wealth per capita has risen 310 percent. We have also seen significant gains in other indicators of living standards, such as health and educational attainment. Thus, in absolute terms, the well-being of most Americans compares quite favorably with that of earlier generations and, indeed, with the well-being of most people in the world today. Although average economic well-being has increased considerably over time, the degree of inequality in economic outcomes has increased as well. Importantly, rising inequality is not a recent development but has been evident for at least three decades, if not longer.2The data on the real weekly earnings of full-time wage and salary workers illustrate this pattern. In real terms, the earnings at the 50thpercentile of the distribution (which I will refer to as the median wage) rose about 11-1/2 percent between 1979 and 2006. Over the same period, the wage at the 10thpercentile, near the bottom of the wage distribution, rose just 4 percent, while the wage at the 90thpercentile, close to the top of the distribution, rose 34 percent.3In 1979, a full-time worker at the 90thpercentile of the wage distribution earned about 3.7 times as much as a full-time worker at the 10thpercentile. Reflecting the relatively faster growth of wages of higher-paid workers, that ratio is 4.7 today. The gap between the 90thand 10thpercentiles of the wage distribution rose particularly rapidly through most of the 1980s; since then, it has continued to trend up, albeit at a slower pace and with occasional reversals. The long-term trend toward greater inequality seen in real wages is also evident in broader measures of financial well-being, such as real household income.4For example, the share of income received by households in the top fifth of the income distribution, after taxes have been paid and government transfers have been received, rose from 42 percent in 1979 to 50 percent in 2004, while the share of income received by those in the bottom fifth of the distribution declined from 7 percent to 5 percent. The share of after-tax income garnered by the households in the top 1 percent of the income distribution increased from 8 percent in 1979 to 14 percent in 2004 (Congressional Budget Office, 2006).5Even within the top 1 percent, the distribution of income has widened during recent decades.6 The measures of inequality I have cited reflect "snapshots" of a single time period, usually a year. Consequently, they may not tell a complete story about the extent of inequality or its trend. For example, the fact that an older, more-experienced worker earns more than a newly hired employee will appear as wage inequality when measured at a given time; but as long as the new employee can expect to gain experience and someday earn a higher wage, inequality arising for this reason should not particularly concern us. Studies that track individuals' positions in the earnings distribution over time suggest that, in a given five-year period, almost half the population moves from one quintile of the distribution to another, and the percentage moving between quintiles increases over longer periods (McMurrer and Sawhill, 1996). However, economists disagree about whether income mobility has changed significantly over time (Lee and Solon, 2006). If it has not, then factors related to mobility cannot go far in helping to explain the upward trend in measures of short-term inequality.7 The Sources of Changes in the Level and Dispersion of Economic Well-BeingWhat are the underlying sources of these long-term trends in wages, incomes, and other measures of economic well-being? Economists have established that, over longer periods, increases in average living standards are closely linked to the growth rate of productivity--the quantity of goods and services that can be produced per worker or per hour of work. Since 1947, hourly labor productivity in the U.S. nonfarm business sector has increased a robust 2-1/4 percent per year, and productivity growth has been close to or above that figure in most of the past ten years. This sustained productivity growth has resulted in large and broad-based improvements in the standard of living. When discussing inequality, we should not lose sight of the fact that the great majority of Americans today enjoy a level of material abundance--including the benefits of many technological advances, from air conditioning to computers to advanced medical treatments--that earlier generations would envy. That being said, understanding the sources of the long-term tendency toward greater inequality remains a major challenge for economists and policymakers. A key observation is that, over the past few decades, the real wages of workers with more years of formal education have increased more quickly than those of workers with fewer years of formal education. For example, in 1979, median weekly earnings for workers with a bachelor's (or higher) degree were 38 percent more than those of high-school graduates with no college experience; last year, that differential was 75 percent. Similarly, over the same period, the gap in median earnings between those completing high school and those with less than a high-school education increased from 19 percent to 42 percent. To a significant extent, to explain increasing inequality we must explain why the economic return to education and to the development of skills more generally has continued to rise. Economists have hypothesized that technological advances, such as improvements in information and communications technologies, have raised the productivity of high-skilled workers much more than that of low-skilled workers. High-skilled workers may have enjoyed this advantage because, for example, they may have been better able to make more effective use of computer applications, to operate sophisticated machinery, or to adapt to changes in workplace organization driven by new technologies. If new technologies tend to increase the productivity of highly skilled workers relatively more than that of less-skilled workers--a phenomenon that economists have dubbed "skill-biased technical change"--then market forces will tend to cause the real wages of skilled workers to increase relatively faster. Considerable evidence supports the view that worker skills and advanced technology are complementary. For example, economists have found that industries and firms that spend more on research and development or invest more in information technologies hire relatively more high-skilled workers and spend a relatively larger share of their payrolls on them (Autor, Katz, and Krueger, 1998; Bartel and Sicherman, 1999; Berndt and Morrison, 1995; Berman, Bound, and Griliches, 1994). Although skill-biased technical change appears to be an important cause of the rise in earnings inequality, it does not provide a complete explanation for that trend. The hypothesis cannot explain, for example, why the sharp rise in investment in information technology in the 1990s was not accompanied by a higher rate of increase in wage inequality. Nor can it explain why the wages of workers in the middle of the distribution have grown more slowly in recent years than those of workers at the lower end of the distribution, even though, of the two groups, workers in the middle of the distribution are typically the better educated (Autor, Katz, and Kearney, 2006; Autor, Levy, and Murnane, 2003). Another challenge for the hypothesis of skill-biased technical change, at least in its basic formulation, is to explain the especially large wage gains seen at the top of the distribution. A possible link between technological change and the substantial increases in the wages of the best-paid workers is that some advances, such as those that have swept the communications industry, may have contributed to the rise of so-called "superstars"--a small number of the most-gifted individuals in each field who are now better able to apply their talents in what has increasingly become a global marketplace (Frank and Cook, 1995; Hausman and Leonard, 1997; Krueger, 2005; Manasse and Turrini, 2001; and Rosen, 1981). For example, two decades ago, the highest-paid player for the Boston Red Sox baseball team (and in the American League), Jim Rice, earned (in inflation-adjusted terms) just over $3 million. In 2004, the highest-paid player on the Red Sox (and in all of major-league baseball) was Manny Ramirez, who received $22.5 million for the season. The number of fans who can fit into Fenway Park has not increased much since Jim Rice's day. But presumably the Red Sox owners believed that Ramirez's higher salary was justified by the increases in broadcast and merchandising revenues he might generate as a result of the confluence of new distribution channels (such as Internet-based broadcasts of games) and a larger and wealthier potential global audience.8The earnings potentials of superstar entertainers, investment bankers, lawyers, and various other professionals have likewise risen sharply as technological innovations and globalization have helped them leverage their talents over a wider sphere. The compensation of chief executive officers of corporations is often singled out for particular scrutiny. Some economists have argued that the observed increases in CEO pay packages can largely be justified by economic factors, such as changes in the relationship between the CEO and the firm that have led to shorter and less-secure tenures for CEOs (Kaplan and Minton, 2006) and to a greater tendency to hire CEOs from outside the company (Murphy and Zabojnik, 2004). Others note that substantial increases in the size and scope of the largest corporations have raised the economic value of skilled corporate leadership (Gabaix and Landier, 2006). However, critics have responded that increases in CEO pay may have been amplified by poor corporate governance, including the substantial influence that some CEOs appear to have had over their own pay (Bebchuk and Fried, 2003). This debate will no doubt continue. Beyond the effects of technological change, the variety of economic forces grouped under the heading of "globalization" may also have been a factor in the rise in inequality, even as these forces have provided a major stimulus to economic growth and to living standards overall. Immigration--the flow of people across borders--is one aspect of the increased economic integration of the world economy. In recent decades, most immigrants to the United States have arrived with relatively low levels of skills. By itself, this pattern of immigration increases measured inequality because it leads to an increase in the relative size of the low-wage work force (Lerman, 1999). Standard economic reasoning also suggests that the immigration of such workers should reduce the relative wages of less-skilled domestic workers. Empirical analyses of individual cities or regions have found some evidence that corroborates this hypothesis, although in most cases the effect appears to have been small. A typical finding is that an increase of 10 percent in the share of immigrants in a city reduces the wages of lower-skilled natives 1 percent or less. This somewhat muted effect of low-skilled immigration on local markets may reflect the adaptability of U.S. labor and product markets, which has allowed native workers and firms to adjust with relatively little displacement (Card, 2005; Card and Lewis, 2005; and Lewis, 2004, 2005). However, studies that examine national data tend to find somewhat larger effects, with a 10 percent increase in the share of immigrants in the total population reducing the wages of low-skilled natives 3 percent to 5 percent (Borjas, 2006). International trade, another aspect of globalization, may also have differential effects on the economic well-being of U.S. workers even as it tends to raise real wages and incomes on average. For example, some empirical research suggests that, in the 1980s and 1990s, increased international trade reduced the profitability and hence the demand for labor in a number of industries that employed relatively more low-skilled workers (Borjas, Freeman, and Katz, 1997; Sachs and Shatz, 1994). Of course, trade has increased the potential markets for other domestic industries, leading to higher demand and thus higher real wages for workers in those industries. A related development has been the outsourcing abroad of some types of services and production activities. Because labor markets are adaptable, outsourcing abroad does not ultimately affect aggregate employment, but it may affect the distribution of wages, depending on the skill content of the outsourced work. At least until recently, most such activity appears to have involved goods and services that use relatively more low-skilled labor, which (all else being equal) would tend through the workings of supply and demand to slow the growth of wages of domestic low-skilled workers relative to those with greater skills (Feenstra and Hanson, 1996).9 Unfortunately, much of the available empirical research on the influence of trade on earnings inequality dates from the 1980s and 1990s and thus does not address later developments. Whether studies of the more-recent period will reveal effects of trade on the distribution of earnings that differ from those observed earlier is to some degree an open question. Overall, I read the available evidence as favoring the view that the influence of globalization on inequality has been moderate and almost surely less important than the effects of skill-biased technological change. Finally, changes in the institutions that have shaped the labor market over the past few decades may also have been associated with some increase in wage inequality. For example, unions tend to compress the dispersion of pay for jobs in the middle of the skill distribution. Thus, the decline in private-sector union membership over the post-World War II period--particularly the sharp drop in the 1980s--has been associated with an increased dispersion of pay among workers with intermediate levels of skill (Freeman, 2005). The sources of the decline in union membership are much debated, and certainly long-run structural changes in the economy, such as the decline in manufacturing employment, have played a role. Whatever the precise mechanism through which lower rates of unionization affected the wage structure, the available research suggests that it can explain between 10 percent and 20 percent of the rise in wage inequality among men during the 1970s and 1980s (Card, 2001; DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux, 1996; Freeman, 1993). Declines in the real value of the minimum wage, brought about by the combination of inflation and the fact that minimum wages are usually set in dollar terms, also affect the labor market. Some research suggests that this factor contributed to the relative decline in the wages of the least-skilled workers during the 1980s. Economists have also pointed out that, although higher minimum wages increase the wages of those who remain employed, they may also lead to reduced employment of low-skilled workers. Thus, the net influence of the minimum wage on earnings and income inequality, as opposed to the inequality of observed hourly wages, is ambiguous (Neumark, Schweitzer, and Wascher, 2005). In any case, the real value of the minimum wage, adjusted to include state minimum wages that are above the federal level, has been fairly flat in recent years, and so has the proportion of the labor force that is unionized. This suggests that these institutional factors have been less important sources of increasing wage inequality recently than they were in the 1970s and 1980s. Some Policy ImplicationsWhat, if anything, should policymakers do about the trend of increasing economic inequality? As I noted at the beginning of my remarks, answering this question inevitably involves some difficult value judgments that are beyond the realm of objective economic analysis--judgments, for example, about the right tradeoff between allowing strong market-based incentives and providing social insurance against economic risks. Such tradeoffs are, of course, at the heart of decisions about tax and transfer policies that affect the distribution of income as well as countless other policy debates. Policy approaches that wouldnotbe helpful, in my view, are those that would inhibit the dynamism and flexibility of our labor and capital markets or erect barriers to international trade and investment. To be sure, the advent of new technologies and increased international trade can lead to painful dislocations as some workers lose their jobs or see the demand for their particular skills decline.10But hindering the adoption of new technologies or inhibiting trade flows would do far more harm than good, as technology and trade are critical sources of overall economic growth and of increases in the standard of living. A better approach for policy is to allow growth-enhancing forces to work but to try to cushion the effects of any resulting dislocations. For example, policies to facilitate retraining and job search by displaced workers, if well designed, could assist the adjustment process. Policies that reduce the costs to workers of changing jobs--for example, by improving the portability of health and pension benefits between employers--would also help to maintain economic flexibility and reduce the costs that individuals and families bear as a result of economic change. Of course, devising policies that accomplish these goals in the most effective way is not straightforward, nor can such policies deal with all of the negative effects of trade and technology on affected individuals. Displaced older workers present a particularly difficult problem, as these workers have greater difficulty than others in finding new jobs and experience a greater decline in earnings than other workers if they are re-employed (Munnell and others, 2006). Considerable debate and analysis of policy alternatives lie ahead, but these discussions will be well worth the effort. As the larger return to education and skill is likely the single greatest source of the long-term increase in inequality, policies that boost our national investment in education and training can help reduce inequality while expanding economic opportunity. A substantial body of research demonstrates that investments in education and training pay high rates of return both to individuals and to the society at large (Acemoglu and Angrist, 2001; Becker, 1964; Card, 1999; Topel, 2004). That research also suggests that workers with more education are better positioned to adapt to changing demands in the workplace. In assessing the potential of education and training to moderate inequality, one should keep in mind that the economically relevant concept of education is much broader than the traditional course of schooling from kindergarten through high school and into college. Indeed, substantial economic benefits may result from any form of training that helps individuals acquire economically and socially useful skills, including not only K-12 education, college, and graduate work but also on-the-job training, coursework at community colleges and vocational schools, extension courses, online education, and training in financial literacy. The market incentives for individuals to invest in their own skills are strong, and the expanding array of educational offerings available today allows such investment to be as occupationally focused as desired and to take place at any point in an individual's life. Although education and the acquisition of skills is a lifelong process, starting early in life is crucial. Recent research--some sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis in collaboration with the University of Minnesota--has documented the high returns that early childhood programs can pay in terms of subsequent educational attainment and in lower rates of social problems, such as teenage pregnancy and welfare dependency.11The most successful early childhood programs appear to be those that cultivate both cognitive and noncognitive skills and that engage families in stimulating learning at home (Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006). To return to the themes I raised at the beginning, the challenge for policy is not to eliminate inequalityper sebut rather to spread economic opportunity as widely as possible. Policies that focus on education, job training, and skills and that facilitate job search and job mobility seem to me to be a promising means for moving toward that goal. By increasing opportunity and capability, we help individuals and families while strengthening the nation's economy as well. References Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Angrist (2001). "How Large Are Human Capital Externalities? Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws," in Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 9–59. Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane (2003). "The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 118 (November), pp. 1279–333. Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney (2006). "The Polarization of the Labor Market,"American Economic Review, vol. 96 (May), pp. 189–94. Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger (1998). "Computing Inequality: Have Computers Changed the Labor Market?"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 113 (November), pp. 1169–213. Bartel, Ann P., and Nachum Sicherman (1999). "Technological Change and Wages: An Interindustry Analysis,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 107 (April), pp. 285–325. Bebchuk, Lucien A., and Jesse M. Fried (2003). "Executive Compensation as an Agency Problem,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 17 (Summer), pp. 71–92. Becker, Gary S. (1964).Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special Reference to Education. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research. Berman, Eli, John Bound, and Zvi Griliches (1994). "Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor within U.S. Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 109 (May), pp. 367–97. Berndt, Ernst R., and Catherine J. Morrison (1995). "High-Tech Capital Formation and Economic Performance in U.S. Manufacturing Industries: An Exploratory Analysis,"Journal of Econometrics,vol. 65 (January), pp. 9–43. Borjas, George J. (2006). "Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of Immigration,"Journal of Human Resources, vol. 41(Spring), pp. 221–58. Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F. Katz (1997). "How Much Do Immigrants and Trade Affect Labor Market Outcomes?"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,1:1997, pp. 1–67. Card, David (1999). "The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings" in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds.,Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3A. New York: Elsevier, pp. 1801-63. ___________ (2001). "The Effect of Unions on Wage Inequality in the U.S. Labor Market,"Industrial and Labor Relations Review, vol. 54 (January), pp. 296–315. ___________ (2005). "Is the New Immigration Really So Bad?"Economic Journal, vol. 115 (November), pp. F300–23. Card, David, and Ethan G. Lewis (2005). "The Diffusion of Mexican Immigrants during the 1990s: Explanations and Impacts," NBER Working Paper Series 11552. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. Congressional Budget Office (2006). "Historical Effective Federal Tax Rates: 1979-2004,"www.cbo.gov/ftpdoc.cfm?index=7718&type=1. DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux (1996). "Labor Market Institutions and the Distribution of Wages, 1973–1992: A Semiparametric Approach,"Econometrica, vol. 64 (September), pp. 1001–44. Farber, Henry S. (2005). "What Do We Know About Job Loss in the United States? Evidence from the Displaced Workers Survey, 1984-2004," Federal Reserve Bank of ChicagoEconomic Perspectives, vol. 29(Q2), pp. 13–28. Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson (1996). "Foreign Investment, Outsourcing, and Relative Wages," in Robert C. Feenstra, Gene M. Grossman, and Douglas A. Irwin, eds.,The Political Economy of Trade Policy: Papers in Honor of Jagdish Bhagwati.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 89–127. Frank, Robert H., and Philip J. Cook (1995).The Winner-Take-All Society: How More and More Americans Compete for Ever Fewer and Bigger Prizes, Encouraging Economic Waste, Income Inequality, and an Impoverished Cultural Life. New York: Penguin Books. Freeman, Richard B. (1993). "How Much Has De-unionization Contributed to the Rise in Male Earnings Inequality?" in Sheldon Danziger and Peter Gottschalk, eds.,Uneven Tides: Rising Inequality in America. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 133–63. _________________(2005). "What Do Unions Do? The 2004 M-Brane Stringtwister Edition," NBER Working Paper Series 11410. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. Gabaix, Xavier, and Augustin Landier (2006). "Why Has CEO Pay Increased So Much?" NBER Working Paper Series 12365. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July. Goldin, Claudia, and Robert A. Margo (1992). "The Great Compression: The U.S. Wage Structure at Mid-Century,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 107 (February), pp. 1-34. Grossman, Gene M., and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2006). "The Rise of Offshoring: It's Not Wine for Cloth Anymore," inThe New Economic Geography: Effects and Policy Implications, paper prepared for a symposium in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 24–26. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, http://www.kansascityfed.org/publications/research/escp/archive.cfm. Hausman, Jerry A., and Gregory K. Leonard (1997). "Superstars in the National Basketball Association: Economic Value and Policy,"Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 15 (October), pp. 586–624. Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua (2006). "The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior,"Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 24 (July), pp. 411–82. Kaplan, Steven N., and Bernadette Minton (2006). "How Has CEO Turnover Changed? Increasingly Performance Sensitive Boards and Increasingly Uneasy CEOs," NBER Working Paper Series 12465. Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. Kennickell, Arthur B. (2006). "Currents and Undercurrents: Changes in the Distribution of Wealth, 1989–2004," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2006-13. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Krueger, Alan B. (2005). "The Economics of Real Superstars: The Market for Rock Concerts in the Material World,"Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 23 (January), pp. 1–30. Krueger, Dirk, and Fabrizio Perri (2006). "Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality? Evidence and Theory,"Review of Economic Studies, vol. 73 (January), pp. 163–193. Lee, Chul-In, and Gary Solon (2006). "Trends in Intergenerational Income Mobility," NBER Working Paper Series 12007. Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of Economic Research, January. Lerman, Robert I. (1999). "U.S. Wage-Inequality Trends and Recent Immigration,"American Economic Review, vol. 89 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 23–28. Lewis, Ethan (2004). "How Did the Miami Labor Market Absorb the Mariel Immigrants?" Working Paper Series 04-3. Philadelphia: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, January. ____________(2005). "Immigration, Skill Mix, and the Choice of Technique," Working Paper Series 05-8. Philadelphia: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, May. Manasse, Paolo, and Allessandro Turrini (2001). "Trade, Wages, and ‘Superstars,'"Journal of International Economics, vol. 54 (June), pp. 97–117. McMurrer, Daniel P., and Isabel Sawhill (1996). "Economic Mobility in the United States," Urban Institute, www.urban.org/publications/406722.html (accessed January 16, 2007). Moffitt, Robert A., and Peter Gottschalk (2002). "Trends in the Transitory Variance of Earnings in the United States,"Economic Journal, vol. 112 (March), pp. C68–73. Munnell, Alicia H., Steven A. Sass, Mauricio Soto, and Natalia A. Zhivan (2006). "Has the Displacement of Older Workers Increased?" paper prepared for the Eighth Annual Joint Conference of the Retirement Research Consortium, Washington, D.C., August 10–11. Murphy, Kevin J., and Jan Zabojnik (2004). "CEO Pay and Appointments: A Market-Based Explanation for Recent Trends,"American Economic Review, vol. 94 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 192–96. Neumark, David, ed. (2000).On the Job: Is Long-Term Employment a Thing of the Past?New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Neumark, David, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher (2005). "The Effects of Minimum Wages on the Distribution of Family Incomes: A Nonparametric Analysis,"Journal of Human Resources, vol. 40(Fall), pp. 867–94. Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez (2003)."Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 118 (February), pp. 1–39L. Reed, Keith (2006). "Japanese May Follow Matsuzaka to Boston,"Boston Globe, December 15. Rosen, Sherwin (1981). "The Economics of Superstars,"American Economic Review, vol. 71 (December), pp. 845–58. Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Howard J. Shatz (1994). "Trade and Jobs in U.S. Manufacturing,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,1:1994, pp. 1–69. Topel, Robert (2004). "The Private and Social Values of Education," inEducation and Economic Development, proceedings of a conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, November 18-19, 2004, pp. 47–57,www.clevelandfed.org/research/conferences/2004/November/cbook.pdf. Weinberg, Daniel H. (1996). "A Brief Look at Postwar U.S. Income Inequality,"Current Population Reports, P60–191 (June). Washington: Census Bureau,www.census.gov/hhes/www/img/p60-191.pdf. Footnotes 1.This result is calculated using the data on compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, deflated by the price index for personal consumption expenditures from the national income and product accounts.Return to text 2.Goldin and Margo (1992) find that wage inequality has been increasing at varying rates since 1950. Piketty and Saez (2003) obtain a similar result for wage income since the mid-1950s; using a measure of total income excluding capital gains, they find that inequality was more or less constant from the early 1950s until the early 1970s and rose thereafter. By contrast, Weinberg (1996) found that family income inequality, as measured by the Gini index, had diminished somewhat between 1947 and 1968, but had increased between 1968 and the early 1990s, when his sample period ended.Return to text 3.The data are weekly earnings of full-time wage and salary workers aged twenty-five and older and are derived from the Current Population Survey, published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The data are deflated by the price index for personal consumption expenditures.Return to text 4.Other important measures of economic well-being include consumption and wealth. Some economists view consumption as a better measure of economic well-being than labor compensation or income because consumption is a more direct indicator of the standard of living and because, on the assumption that households consume according to the income they expect to receive over the longer term, it may also be a better measure of a household's long-term economic prospects. As with other measures of economic well-being, consumption has become increasingly unequal over time, although at any point in time it is less unequally distributed than wages or income (Krueger and Perri, 2006). Wealth--the difference between a household's assets (both physical and financial) and its liabilities--shows a slightly different pattern. As we know from the Federal Reserve's triennial Survey of Consumer Finances, wealth is distributed far more unequally than income, with about 33 percent of aggregate household net worth being held by the top 1 percent of families and with just 2-1/4 percent of wealth being held by the bottom half (Kennickell, 2006). However, the relative shares of wealth held by the richest and poorest have changed very little over the past decade or so, in contrast to the further widening in the distributions of wages, incomes, and consumption.Return to text 5.In general, measures of economic well-being (such as disposable income) that take account of taxes paid and transfer payments received from the government show lower levels of inequality at any point in time than measures that exclude such payments; the difference reflects the progressive nature of our system of taxes and transfers. However, analysis of these broader measures indicates that, over time, tax and transfer policies have not materially altered the general tendency toward greater inequality.Return to text 6.Data on the distribution of income in the top 1 percent comes from an update of Piketty and Saez (2003), available athttp://elsa.berkeley.edu/~saez/TabFig2004prel.xls.Return to text 7.Another respect in which snapshots of inequality may be misleading is that they are influenced by fluctuations in income that are transitory and that hence have a smaller effect on long-term economic well-being. One study suggests that, for men, about one-third of the rise in point-in-time earnings inequality during the 1970s and 1980s resulted from an increase in the transitory variation in wages (Moffitt and Gottschalk, 2002). The proper interpretation of these short-lived changes in earnings is not clear. To the degree that they are associated with factors such as job changes, moves, or entry into or exit from schooling, temporary variations in individual incomes could signify a healthy labor market. On the other hand, such variations would be of greater concern if they reflected a higher incidence of factors such as short periods of unemployment or loss of income due to health problems.Return to text 8.Recently, the Red Sox paid $51 million simply for the right to negotiate with the Japanese pitcher Daisuke Matsuzaka; they later signed Matsuzaka for an additional $52 million over six years. Illustrating some of the effects of globalization on baseball economics, the city of Boston anticipates that increased interest by Japanese tourists will bring in some $75 million, aside from what the Red Sox will earn from signing Matsuzaka (Reed, 2006).Return to text 9.For an opposing view, see Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2006).Return to text 10.Surveys of workers displaced from jobs because their plant closed or moved show that rates of such job loss fluctuated only a little, on balance, from 1983 to 2003 despite the decline in unemployment over that period (Farber, 2005). A range of studies have yielded conflicting answers to the question of whether job stability and job insecurity have changed over time, although the editor of a set of papers presented at a conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York concluded that the relationship of employees and firms weakened some in the 1990s (Neumark, 2000).Return to text 11.More information on the Early Childhood Research Collaborative and copies of its research papers can be obtained from the website of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,http://www.earlychildhoodrc.org/.Return to text