The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies today requested public comment on a series of new and revised interagency questions and answers pertaining to the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). TheInteragency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestmentwere first published in 1996 under the auspices of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC). They have been revised by the agencies periodically since then to help financial institutions and the public better understand CRA regulations. The agencies are proposing new questions and answers as well as substantive and technical revisions to the existing material. Some of the proposed revisions are intended to encourage institutions to work with homeowners who are unable to make mortgage payments by highlighting that they can receive CRA consideration for foreclosure prevention programs for low- and moderate-income homeowners, consistent with the April 2007 interagencyStatement on Working with Mortgage Borrowers.In addition, the revisions propose to clarify that institutions of all sizes should receive favorable consideration for providing credit in a manner that is responsive to the needs of their communities. Such activities include, for example, offering affordable small loan programs. The majority of the proposed revisions clarify existing questions and answers, improve readability, or adopt current terminology. Many of the proposed revisions update existing guidance to reflect terminology changes made by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget and the U.S. Census Bureau or to reflect recent changes in the agencies' CRA regulations. In addition to the new interagency questions and answers, the Office of Thrift Supervision is proposing several new and revised questions and answers that are virtually identical to those adopted by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Reserve Board, and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The agencies invite comment on the proposed changes to the interagency questions and answers and, more generally, on other issues raised by the CRA. Comments are due September 10, 2007. TheFederal Registernotice is attached. Federal Register Notice286 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the applications of East West Bank, Pasadena, to merge with Desert Community Bank, Victorville, both of California, and to establish and operate branches at Desert Community Bank's main office and branch locations. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
WASHINGTON, D.C. -- The Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation reached an agreement today regarding the implementation of Basel II in the United States. The agreement resolves major outstanding issues and will now lead to finalization of a rule implementing the advanced approaches for computing large banks' risk-based capital requirements. The agencies have agreed that rules implementing the advanced approach should be finalized expeditiously, and should be technically consistent in most respects with international approaches. The agreement retains the NPR's transitional floor periods. After the parallel run in 2008, those transitional floors provide for maximum cumulative reductions of 5 percent during the first year of implementation, 10 percent in the second year, and 15 percent in the third year. After the end of the second transition year period, the agencies will publish a study that evaluates the new framework to determine if there are any material deficiencies. If the study finds there are such material deficiencies that cannot be addressed by existing tools, banks will not be permitted to exit the third transitional period unless the deficiencies are first addressed by changes to the regulation. However, if a primary supervisor disagrees with a finding of material deficiency, it may authorize banks it supervises to exit the third transitional period, but only if it first provides a public report explaining its reasoning. The agencies also have agreed to eliminate language in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPR) concerning a 10 percent limitation on aggregate reductions in risk-based capital requirements. The agencies believe the annual review process by which they will assess the performance of the new rules is consistent with recommendations of the U.S. Government Accountability Office and provides a structured and prudent framework for managing the implementation of Basel II in the United States. The agencies also agreed to proceed promptly to issue a proposed rule that would provide all non-core banks with the option to adopt a standardized approach under the Basel II Accord. This would replace the earlier proposed rule to adopt the "Basel IA" option. The agencies intend that the proposed standardized option would be finalized before the core banks begin the first transition period year under the advanced approaches of Basel II. The agencies re-affirm our commitment to strive to achieve consensus throughout implementation. Statement by Chairman Bernanke Statement by Governor Kroszner
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the New York Bankers Association Annual Washington Visit, Washington, D.C. Good morning. Thank you very much for the invitation to speak today. I hope that your visit here to Washington, D.C. provides you with useful information about regulatory and policy matters that affect your institutions. My remarks today address the latest developments on Basel II implementation in the United States.As most of you know, the process for developing a revised international capital accord, known as Basel II, has been a long--and some might say painful--trek for both bankers and supervisors. Many countries around the world are already tailoring and implementing Basel II in their jurisdictions, while the U.S. banking agencies are in the process of finalizing their rules for implementation. The agencies have been considering the comments received on the Basel II proposals that were issued over the past year, and real progress has been made toward developing a workable rule. The substantial work to date by both the banking industry and supervisors has laid the foundation for moving the implementation process along, and I am optimistic about the current forward momentum in the United States to develop and implement a final rule for Basel II.Implementation of Basel II in the United States is necessary in order to ensure the safe and sound operation of our banking industry and the stability of our financial system. Basel II would promote continued improvements in bank risk management practices and would maintain capital levels in the U.S. banking system that are appropriate and risk-sensitive. As I will discuss in more detail, the existing Basel I capital regime has very limited risk sensitivity and is widely known to be outdated for large, complex banking organizations. If we retain Basel I for these institutions, we will be leaving in place a regulatory capital regime that could undermine the safety and soundness of our largest banking organizations by widening the gap between these banks' regulatory capital requirements and their actual risk profiles.The Federal Reserve's role as the nation's central bank reinforces our belief in the importance of maintaining prudent and risk-sensitive capital requirements for financial institutions. Beyond its supervisory authority over individual banking organizations, the Federal Reserve is responsible for maintaining stable financial markets and ensuring a strong financial system. In this regard, the Federal Reserve has long required banking organizations to operate in a safe and sound manner, and to hold sufficient capital to protect against potential losses. Financial stability is enhanced when banks' regulatory capital measures adequately reflect risk, as well as when banks continually improve their risk-management practices. Since the Basel II regime is far superior to the current Basel I regime in aligning regulatory capital measures with risk and fostering continual improvements in risk management for our largest and most complex banking organizations, I believe it will contribute to a more resilient financial system.Reasons for Basel IIThe Federal Reserve believes very strongly that prudent and risk-sensitive regulatory capital requirements are integral to ensuring that individual banks and the financial system have an adequate cushion against losses, particularly during times of financial or economic stress. This strong belief is what motivated the Federal Reserve in the late 1980s to play a leading role in both negotiating the first international capital accord--Basel I--and supporting implementation of the accord in the United States. In light of our role in developing Basel I, let me explain why the Federal Reserve now supports moving to Basel II.First, although Basel I was a major step forward in capital risk sensitivity at the time, rapid and extensive evolution in the financial marketplace has substantially reduced the effectiveness of the Basel Irules for some U.S. banking organizations. The current Basel I regulatory capital rules are increasingly inadequate for large, internationally active banks that offer ever more complex and sophisticated products and services in an extremely competitive environment.The flaws of the existing Basel I rule for large, complex U.S. banks are fairly well-known. The simple risk-bucketing approach in the existing Basel I rule, for example, creates perverse incentives for risk-taking. This approach--in which (1) the same amount of regulatory capital is assessed against all unsecured corporate loans and bonds regardless of actual risk, (2) all unsecured consumer credit card exposures are treated equivalently, and (3) almost all first-lien residential mortgage exposures are deemed equally risky--provides incentives for banking organizations to shed relatively low-risk exposures and acquire relatively high-risk exposures within each of these asset classes. The existing Basel I rule also ignores important elements of credit-risk mitigation--such as most forms of collateral, many guarantees and credit derivatives, and the maturity and seniority of an exposure--and thus blunts bank incentives to reduce or otherwise manage risk.Moreover, Basel I is particularly inadequate for dealing with capital-markets transactions, such as repurchase agreements, securities borrowing and lending, margin loans, and over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives. For example, the existing Basel I rule only imposes capital requirements on one side of a repurchase agreement, even though counterparty credit risk is present on both sides. For these reasons, a large and complex bank operating under Basel I can easily and significantly increase its credit risk, without increasing its regulatory capital.This brings me to my second point: the advanced approaches of Basel II are designed to substantially reduce the perverse incentive effects and opportunities for regulatory capital arbitrage present in Basel I. In short, Basel II significantly increases the risk sensitivity of the capital rule. Under the advanced approaches, capital requirements for an exposure will vary on the basis of a bank's actual risk experience. If a bank increases the credit risk of its portfolio, its regulatory capital requirements will also increase, and vice versa. The enhanced risk sensitivity of Basel II will thus ensure that banks have positive incentives for lending to more creditworthy counterparties, for lending on a collateralized basis, for increasing loan seniorities, and for holding a larger capital cushion for higher-risk exposures. Basel II also includes sophisticated methods to address capital-markets transactions.Third, the Basel II regulatory capital framework has three pillars--minimum capital requirements, supervisory review of capital adequacy, and market discipline through disclosure--that build on the economic capital and other risk-management approaches of sophisticated banks and competing institutions. As a result, Basel II will be better able than the current system to adapt over time to innovations in banking and financial markets. The new framework should also establish a more coherent relationship between regulatory measures of capital adequacy and the day-to-day risk management conducted by banks.Finally, I would argue that one of the key benefits of the Basel II process is that it has prompted banks to make substantial progress in developing much more sophisticated risk-measurement and -management processes. For example, most international banks have adopted detailed rating systems for credit risk that assess both borrower and facility characteristics. That is, the banks assign one rating that reflects a borrower's overall creditworthiness, and another for each individual exposure that takes into account collateral, seniority, and other factors that affect how much a bank is likely to lose on that specific exposure if the borrower defaults. In addition, large banks are increasingly using common credit-risk measurement concepts, such as probability of default (PD), loss given default (LGD), and exposure at default (EAD). Together, these concepts help banks take a more granular approach to assessing the various drivers of credit risk, which in turn helps them to make more informed decisions about extending credit, mitigating risk, and determining capital needs. Another example of industry progress is in the measurement and management of operational risk. Under Basel II, banks are expected to weigh both quantitative and qualitative factors in order to assess potential future operational losses. As a result, Basel II has already helped the industry improve its methods for identifying and measuring risks--and for estimating the capital needed to support those risks.We applaud these industry efforts, and we expect the Basel II framework to provide incentives for banks to continue improving their risk measurement and management on an ongoing basis. These developments not only benefit individual banks, but contribute to the resilience of the financial system as a whole. From a safety-and-soundness perspective, I believe it is critical that the industry not lose momentum in this area and that we ensure that Basel II promotes the continued improvement of risk-management processes at the largest U.S. banks.U.S. Basel II and Basel IA ProposalsI would now like to turn to the Basel II proposal and the proposed set of revisions to the Basel I framework in the United States--the so-called Basel IA proposal--which I will also discuss very briefly.A fundamental part of the implementation process involves consideration of the comments on the Basel proposal. I have been deeply impressed with the thoughtful analysis reflected in those comments, and would like to thank all parties who took the time and effort to submit comments. Reviewing and considering comments takes time and extends the U.S. rulemaking process; nevertheless, we believe the comment process is essential. Quite simply, feedback from the industry and others leads to better rules. For something as important and far-reaching as Basel II, we understand the need to engage in a frank dialogue with the banking industry, Congress, and other relevant parties. Indeed, the Federal Reserve has been committed to an open interchange of ideas about the U.S. proposals since the start of the Basel II process. And we have found comments on our proposals to be invaluable in moving forward.A key theme voiced by the industry and many others is the need to have the Basel II process move forward expeditiously, and I heartily agree. Commenters also requested greater clarity on how the qualification for U.S. banks for Basel II would proceed and how much flexibility supervisors would apply when assessing compliance with the rules and related supervisory guidance, and I believe that such clarification is important.One major concern raised in the comments is that the proposals differ markedly in certain respects from the Basel Committee's revised accord, first issued in June 2004 and updated in 2005, and now commonly known as the "Mid-year Text." Although the U.S. proposals do diverge in a number of ways from the versions of Basel II being adopted in Europe and other industrialized countries, many of these divergences are in fact consistent with the national discretion built into the framework and used in most other countries. The U.S. proposals also included other divergences to adapt the international framework to the unique aspects of the U.S. banking system, to address issues raised through the earlier public comment process, and to ensure a safe and sound transition to Basel II. But many emphasized the need for less variance in Basel II across countries. Concerns about having to meet multiple versions of Basel II across countries are certainly reasonable ones, and I take these concerns quite seriously.I believe Basel II implementation in the United States should proceed in a manner that enhances consistency with implementation in other countries; Basel II is intended, after all, to be an international framework for internationally active banks. At the same time, the framework needs to accommodate robust U.S. supervisory practices and the unique aspects of our financial markets. I also believe that we have an obligation to retain only those divergences for which we are convinced the regulatory benefits exceed the implementation burden and costs.Some commenters also raised concerns about the complexity of the Basel II proposal. Yes, the Basel II advanced approaches are complex, but this reflects how complex our largest financial institutions have become. To be effective, risk-management practices have evolved in order to support the increasingly sophisticated services, business practices, and organizational structures of large, internationally active financial institutions. Hence, these banks already employ sophisticated risk-management practices and internal economic capital models. I fully support our proposal to review carefully these practices and models, among other factors, before granting the required supervisory approval for individual banks to use the advanced approaches of Basel II.Determining the right level of complexity for U.S. Basel II rules remains an issue. While many bankers support the issuance of so-called principles-based regulations, some bankers have expressed a desire for more detail on certain aspects of the Basel II proposals in order to reduce uncertainty about what will be acceptable practice and what will not. My view is that these are not necessarily contradictory approaches. That is, we should take a principles-based approach that is sufficiently clear about our expectations but that is not so detailed that supervisors become de facto managers of the bank.Taking a more principles-based approach means that we must allow bankers some flexibility in meeting the requirements and permit a reasonable amount of diversity of practices across banking organizations. Such flexibility will allow banks to use and easily improve their existing risk-measurement and -management practices. More to the point, we should actively encourage such improvements. While the improvements in risk measurement and management envisioned under Basel II will require banks to bear the cost of investing in systems and human capital, we believe these institutions would have made these investments in any event, as they seek ways to effectively manage their own increasingly complex risks.Another important issue to consider is the impact of potential distortions or unintended consequences created by the new framework. For example, if we see unreasonable declines in capital requirements at individual institutions that do not appear to be supported by either the bank's own internal capital adequacy assessments or by our supervisory view of the institution's risks and how well these risks are managed, we may seek to mitigate the impact of these declines through supervisory review and direct discussions with banks under Pillar 2--which could result in discretionary changes to capital at individual institutions.We must also remain mindful of areas of the proposals that could unfairly tilt either the domestic or international competitive playing field if some banks have higher or lower capital requirements for certain activities or in the aggregate. One particular concern is that inconsistency in Basel II implementation across countries could put internationally active U.S. banks at a disadvantage and create advantages for U.S. investment banks and foreign banks. Achieving broad international consistency will be a challenge, but we should all remember that this problem is not really new.The Federal Reserve and the other U.S. banking agencies have, for many years, worked with their international counterparts to limit the difficulties and burdens that have arisen as foreign banks have entered U.S. markets and as U.S. banks have established operations in other jurisdictions. We have continued this productive work with our colleagues overseas during the development and implementation of Basel II, but to most effectively tackle some of the issues that have come to our attention, we need to take the important next step of actually implementing Basel II for U.S. banking organizations. Once we do so, I believe that we can effectively manage the issues that arise, given our past experience with cross-border supervision.In addition, some concerns have been voiced that adoption of a new capital framework for the largest and most complex U.S. banking organizations could disadvantage other U.S. banking organizations, particularly the smaller banks. In this regard, the Basel IA proposal was designed to modernize the existing Basel I framework in the United States and improve its risk sensitivity, without making it overly burdensome or complex for banks that are comparatively smaller and less complex. Moreover, Basel IA would not be required; smaller banks that wish to stay on the current Basel I framework would be allowed to do so. We are keenly aware of the need for capital requirements to make sense from the standpoint of both safety and soundness and competitiveness; we recognize that a one-size-fits-all approach is probably not feasible in this country, in light of our wide range of institutions. We remain sensitive to the principle that if we have multiple regulatory capital frameworks, they must work together to improve the safety and soundness of our entire banking system without artificially creating competitive inequalities.I want to emphasize that, amidst all of the detailed discussions and comments surrounding Basel II, the Federal Reserve continues to believe that strong capital serves the United States' interest in maintaining the safety, soundness, and resiliency of our banking system. We also know that banks maintain capital above these regulatory minimums in order to capture their full risk profiles, since minimum capital requirements do not necessarily cover all risks to which a given bank may be exposed. Banks also hold capital above regulatory minimums to support their strategic objectives. They know that customers, counterparties, creditors, and investors take into account overall bank capital adequacy when making investment or other business decisions. In addition, banks hold excess capital to be able to respond to potential business-expansion opportunities and to be able to manage the ups and downs of market- and credit-risk cycles. These market-based incentives should not change under Basel II. Indeed, I believe that greater transparency under Pillar 3 will enhance the role of market incentives in ensuring that banks hold sufficient capital.By helping banks absorb unexpected losses, strong capital reduces the moral hazard associated with the federal safety net. A key lesson of the banking and thrift crises of the late 1980s and early 1990s is that prudent and explicit minimum regulatory capital requirements are needed to ensure that banks maintain adequate capital and to anchor an effective supervisory system. The Federal Reserve is strongly committed to the prompt-corrective-action (PCA) framework, which I have long supported,1including the leverage ratio that will continue to bolster capital and complement risk-based measures. The PCA framework is important not only for the strong backstop it provides against declines in capital but also for the incentives it provides for banks to be considered well-capitalized, such as allowing holding companies to maintain their financial holding company status and, perhaps more importantly, meeting market expectations that banks will remain well-capitalized.To ensure that banks maintain strong capital ratios, the U.S. banking agencies will continue to monitor the impact of Basel II during every step of its implementation. We will conduct extensive analysis of regulatory capital requirements produced by the new framework, as well as analyze the inputs behind the requirements. In addition, under the proposals, the agencies would determine whether any adjustments to the Basel II framework would be appropriate before removing the temporary floors that will be in place for a three-year transitional period. The use of these floors and other transitional safeguards during the first years that Basel II is in use will help ensure that there are no sudden drops in capital levels.The Federal Reserve agrees with the Government Accountability Office (GAO) that (1)finalizing the U.S. Basel II rule will generate crucial information to enable the agencies to make future assessments of the strengths and weaknesses of the Basel II rule for the U.S. banking system and (2) the agencies should continue to evaluate during the transition period whether the advanced approaches of Basel II provide an appropriate regulatory capital framework for U.S. banking organizations.2Moreover, we believe that this review should be as robust and transparent as possible, including active and meaningful dialogue among the agencies, the industry, market participants, Congress, and other interested parties. We seek to have strong risk-based capital ratios for large, complex banking organizations under Basel II that are substantially more meaningful, more representative of risk profiles, and more sensitive to changes in those risk profiles than they are today. If analysis shows that any part of this goal is not being met, we will consider ways to improve the framework.ConclusionThe three pillars of Basel II provide a broad and coherent framework for linking regulatory capital to risk, for improving internal risk measurement and management, and for enhancing supervisory and market discipline at large, complex, and internationally active banks. Indeed, we have already seen significant progress in risk measurement and management at many banks in the United States and elsewhere as a result of the Basel II development process. It is also important to modernize the Basel I framework to improve the risk sensitivity of capital requirements at smaller and less complex banks, without artificially creating competitive inequalities.The Federal Reserve continues to support efforts to implement the Basel II framework in the United States, and we expect more progress on implementation soon. It is critical to move forward expeditiously with Basel II implementation so that our largest and internationally active banking organizations maintain their safety and soundness and remain competitive, our supervisors bolster their assessment capabilities, and the market gains greater access to information about risk.Footnotes1.See, for example, Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan (1996),"Regulatory Incentives and the Thrift Crisis: Dividends, Mutual-to-Stock Conversions, and Financial Distress (765 KB PDF),"The Journal of Finance, vol. LI (September), pp. 1285-1319.Return to text2."Risk-Based Capital: Bank Regulators Need to Improve Transparency and Overcome Impediments to Finalizing the Proposed Basel II Framework (1.6 MB PDF),"Government Accountability Office, February 2007.Return to text As most of you know, the process for developing a revised international capital accord, known as Basel II, has been a long--and some might say painful--trek for both bankers and supervisors. Many countries around the world are already tailoring and implementing Basel II in their jurisdictions, while the U.S. banking agencies are in the process of finalizing their rules for implementation. The agencies have been considering the comments received on the Basel II proposals that were issued over the past year, and real progress has been made toward developing a workable rule. The substantial work to date by both the banking industry and supervisors has laid the foundation for moving the implementation process along, and I am optimistic about the current forward momentum in the United States to develop and implement a final rule for Basel II. Implementation of Basel II in the United States is necessary in order to ensure the safe and sound operation of our banking industry and the stability of our financial system. Basel II would promote continued improvements in bank risk management practices and would maintain capital levels in the U.S. banking system that are appropriate and risk-sensitive. As I will discuss in more detail, the existing Basel I capital regime has very limited risk sensitivity and is widely known to be outdated for large, complex banking organizations. If we retain Basel I for these institutions, we will be leaving in place a regulatory capital regime that could undermine the safety and soundness of our largest banking organizations by widening the gap between these banks' regulatory capital requirements and their actual risk profiles. The Federal Reserve's role as the nation's central bank reinforces our belief in the importance of maintaining prudent and risk-sensitive capital requirements for financial institutions. Beyond its supervisory authority over individual banking organizations, the Federal Reserve is responsible for maintaining stable financial markets and ensuring a strong financial system. In this regard, the Federal Reserve has long required banking organizations to operate in a safe and sound manner, and to hold sufficient capital to protect against potential losses. Financial stability is enhanced when banks' regulatory capital measures adequately reflect risk, as well as when banks continually improve their risk-management practices. Since the Basel II regime is far superior to the current Basel I regime in aligning regulatory capital measures with risk and fostering continual improvements in risk management for our largest and most complex banking organizations, I believe it will contribute to a more resilient financial system. Reasons for Basel IIThe Federal Reserve believes very strongly that prudent and risk-sensitive regulatory capital requirements are integral to ensuring that individual banks and the financial system have an adequate cushion against losses, particularly during times of financial or economic stress. This strong belief is what motivated the Federal Reserve in the late 1980s to play a leading role in both negotiating the first international capital accord--Basel I--and supporting implementation of the accord in the United States. In light of our role in developing Basel I, let me explain why the Federal Reserve now supports moving to Basel II. First, although Basel I was a major step forward in capital risk sensitivity at the time, rapid and extensive evolution in the financial marketplace has substantially reduced the effectiveness of the Basel Irules for some U.S. banking organizations. The current Basel I regulatory capital rules are increasingly inadequate for large, internationally active banks that offer ever more complex and sophisticated products and services in an extremely competitive environment. The flaws of the existing Basel I rule for large, complex U.S. banks are fairly well-known. The simple risk-bucketing approach in the existing Basel I rule, for example, creates perverse incentives for risk-taking. This approach--in which (1) the same amount of regulatory capital is assessed against all unsecured corporate loans and bonds regardless of actual risk, (2) all unsecured consumer credit card exposures are treated equivalently, and (3) almost all first-lien residential mortgage exposures are deemed equally risky--provides incentives for banking organizations to shed relatively low-risk exposures and acquire relatively high-risk exposures within each of these asset classes. The existing Basel I rule also ignores important elements of credit-risk mitigation--such as most forms of collateral, many guarantees and credit derivatives, and the maturity and seniority of an exposure--and thus blunts bank incentives to reduce or otherwise manage risk. Moreover, Basel I is particularly inadequate for dealing with capital-markets transactions, such as repurchase agreements, securities borrowing and lending, margin loans, and over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives. For example, the existing Basel I rule only imposes capital requirements on one side of a repurchase agreement, even though counterparty credit risk is present on both sides. For these reasons, a large and complex bank operating under Basel I can easily and significantly increase its credit risk, without increasing its regulatory capital. This brings me to my second point: the advanced approaches of Basel II are designed to substantially reduce the perverse incentive effects and opportunities for regulatory capital arbitrage present in Basel I. In short, Basel II significantly increases the risk sensitivity of the capital rule. Under the advanced approaches, capital requirements for an exposure will vary on the basis of a bank's actual risk experience. If a bank increases the credit risk of its portfolio, its regulatory capital requirements will also increase, and vice versa. The enhanced risk sensitivity of Basel II will thus ensure that banks have positive incentives for lending to more creditworthy counterparties, for lending on a collateralized basis, for increasing loan seniorities, and for holding a larger capital cushion for higher-risk exposures. Basel II also includes sophisticated methods to address capital-markets transactions. Third, the Basel II regulatory capital framework has three pillars--minimum capital requirements, supervisory review of capital adequacy, and market discipline through disclosure--that build on the economic capital and other risk-management approaches of sophisticated banks and competing institutions. As a result, Basel II will be better able than the current system to adapt over time to innovations in banking and financial markets. The new framework should also establish a more coherent relationship between regulatory measures of capital adequacy and the day-to-day risk management conducted by banks. Finally, I would argue that one of the key benefits of the Basel II process is that it has prompted banks to make substantial progress in developing much more sophisticated risk-measurement and -management processes. For example, most international banks have adopted detailed rating systems for credit risk that assess both borrower and facility characteristics. That is, the banks assign one rating that reflects a borrower's overall creditworthiness, and another for each individual exposure that takes into account collateral, seniority, and other factors that affect how much a bank is likely to lose on that specific exposure if the borrower defaults. In addition, large banks are increasingly using common credit-risk measurement concepts, such as probability of default (PD), loss given default (LGD), and exposure at default (EAD). Together, these concepts help banks take a more granular approach to assessing the various drivers of credit risk, which in turn helps them to make more informed decisions about extending credit, mitigating risk, and determining capital needs. Another example of industry progress is in the measurement and management of operational risk. Under Basel II, banks are expected to weigh both quantitative and qualitative factors in order to assess potential future operational losses. As a result, Basel II has already helped the industry improve its methods for identifying and measuring risks--and for estimating the capital needed to support those risks. We applaud these industry efforts, and we expect the Basel II framework to provide incentives for banks to continue improving their risk measurement and management on an ongoing basis. These developments not only benefit individual banks, but contribute to the resilience of the financial system as a whole. From a safety-and-soundness perspective, I believe it is critical that the industry not lose momentum in this area and that we ensure that Basel II promotes the continued improvement of risk-management processes at the largest U.S. banks. U.S. Basel II and Basel IA ProposalsI would now like to turn to the Basel II proposal and the proposed set of revisions to the Basel I framework in the United States--the so-called Basel IA proposal--which I will also discuss very briefly. A fundamental part of the implementation process involves consideration of the comments on the Basel proposal. I have been deeply impressed with the thoughtful analysis reflected in those comments, and would like to thank all parties who took the time and effort to submit comments. Reviewing and considering comments takes time and extends the U.S. rulemaking process; nevertheless, we believe the comment process is essential. Quite simply, feedback from the industry and others leads to better rules. For something as important and far-reaching as Basel II, we understand the need to engage in a frank dialogue with the banking industry, Congress, and other relevant parties. Indeed, the Federal Reserve has been committed to an open interchange of ideas about the U.S. proposals since the start of the Basel II process. And we have found comments on our proposals to be invaluable in moving forward. A key theme voiced by the industry and many others is the need to have the Basel II process move forward expeditiously, and I heartily agree. Commenters also requested greater clarity on how the qualification for U.S. banks for Basel II would proceed and how much flexibility supervisors would apply when assessing compliance with the rules and related supervisory guidance, and I believe that such clarification is important. One major concern raised in the comments is that the proposals differ markedly in certain respects from the Basel Committee's revised accord, first issued in June 2004 and updated in 2005, and now commonly known as the "Mid-year Text." Although the U.S. proposals do diverge in a number of ways from the versions of Basel II being adopted in Europe and other industrialized countries, many of these divergences are in fact consistent with the national discretion built into the framework and used in most other countries. The U.S. proposals also included other divergences to adapt the international framework to the unique aspects of the U.S. banking system, to address issues raised through the earlier public comment process, and to ensure a safe and sound transition to Basel II. But many emphasized the need for less variance in Basel II across countries. Concerns about having to meet multiple versions of Basel II across countries are certainly reasonable ones, and I take these concerns quite seriously. I believe Basel II implementation in the United States should proceed in a manner that enhances consistency with implementation in other countries; Basel II is intended, after all, to be an international framework for internationally active banks. At the same time, the framework needs to accommodate robust U.S. supervisory practices and the unique aspects of our financial markets. I also believe that we have an obligation to retain only those divergences for which we are convinced the regulatory benefits exceed the implementation burden and costs. Some commenters also raised concerns about the complexity of the Basel II proposal. Yes, the Basel II advanced approaches are complex, but this reflects how complex our largest financial institutions have become. To be effective, risk-management practices have evolved in order to support the increasingly sophisticated services, business practices, and organizational structures of large, internationally active financial institutions. Hence, these banks already employ sophisticated risk-management practices and internal economic capital models. I fully support our proposal to review carefully these practices and models, among other factors, before granting the required supervisory approval for individual banks to use the advanced approaches of Basel II. Determining the right level of complexity for U.S. Basel II rules remains an issue. While many bankers support the issuance of so-called principles-based regulations, some bankers have expressed a desire for more detail on certain aspects of the Basel II proposals in order to reduce uncertainty about what will be acceptable practice and what will not. My view is that these are not necessarily contradictory approaches. That is, we should take a principles-based approach that is sufficiently clear about our expectations but that is not so detailed that supervisors become de facto managers of the bank. Taking a more principles-based approach means that we must allow bankers some flexibility in meeting the requirements and permit a reasonable amount of diversity of practices across banking organizations. Such flexibility will allow banks to use and easily improve their existing risk-measurement and -management practices. More to the point, we should actively encourage such improvements. While the improvements in risk measurement and management envisioned under Basel II will require banks to bear the cost of investing in systems and human capital, we believe these institutions would have made these investments in any event, as they seek ways to effectively manage their own increasingly complex risks. Another important issue to consider is the impact of potential distortions or unintended consequences created by the new framework. For example, if we see unreasonable declines in capital requirements at individual institutions that do not appear to be supported by either the bank's own internal capital adequacy assessments or by our supervisory view of the institution's risks and how well these risks are managed, we may seek to mitigate the impact of these declines through supervisory review and direct discussions with banks under Pillar 2--which could result in discretionary changes to capital at individual institutions. We must also remain mindful of areas of the proposals that could unfairly tilt either the domestic or international competitive playing field if some banks have higher or lower capital requirements for certain activities or in the aggregate. One particular concern is that inconsistency in Basel II implementation across countries could put internationally active U.S. banks at a disadvantage and create advantages for U.S. investment banks and foreign banks. Achieving broad international consistency will be a challenge, but we should all remember that this problem is not really new. The Federal Reserve and the other U.S. banking agencies have, for many years, worked with their international counterparts to limit the difficulties and burdens that have arisen as foreign banks have entered U.S. markets and as U.S. banks have established operations in other jurisdictions. We have continued this productive work with our colleagues overseas during the development and implementation of Basel II, but to most effectively tackle some of the issues that have come to our attention, we need to take the important next step of actually implementing Basel II for U.S. banking organizations. Once we do so, I believe that we can effectively manage the issues that arise, given our past experience with cross-border supervision. In addition, some concerns have been voiced that adoption of a new capital framework for the largest and most complex U.S. banking organizations could disadvantage other U.S. banking organizations, particularly the smaller banks. In this regard, the Basel IA proposal was designed to modernize the existing Basel I framework in the United States and improve its risk sensitivity, without making it overly burdensome or complex for banks that are comparatively smaller and less complex. Moreover, Basel IA would not be required; smaller banks that wish to stay on the current Basel I framework would be allowed to do so. We are keenly aware of the need for capital requirements to make sense from the standpoint of both safety and soundness and competitiveness; we recognize that a one-size-fits-all approach is probably not feasible in this country, in light of our wide range of institutions. We remain sensitive to the principle that if we have multiple regulatory capital frameworks, they must work together to improve the safety and soundness of our entire banking system without artificially creating competitive inequalities. I want to emphasize that, amidst all of the detailed discussions and comments surrounding Basel II, the Federal Reserve continues to believe that strong capital serves the United States' interest in maintaining the safety, soundness, and resiliency of our banking system. We also know that banks maintain capital above these regulatory minimums in order to capture their full risk profiles, since minimum capital requirements do not necessarily cover all risks to which a given bank may be exposed. Banks also hold capital above regulatory minimums to support their strategic objectives. They know that customers, counterparties, creditors, and investors take into account overall bank capital adequacy when making investment or other business decisions. In addition, banks hold excess capital to be able to respond to potential business-expansion opportunities and to be able to manage the ups and downs of market- and credit-risk cycles. These market-based incentives should not change under Basel II. Indeed, I believe that greater transparency under Pillar 3 will enhance the role of market incentives in ensuring that banks hold sufficient capital. By helping banks absorb unexpected losses, strong capital reduces the moral hazard associated with the federal safety net. A key lesson of the banking and thrift crises of the late 1980s and early 1990s is that prudent and explicit minimum regulatory capital requirements are needed to ensure that banks maintain adequate capital and to anchor an effective supervisory system. The Federal Reserve is strongly committed to the prompt-corrective-action (PCA) framework, which I have long supported,1including the leverage ratio that will continue to bolster capital and complement risk-based measures. The PCA framework is important not only for the strong backstop it provides against declines in capital but also for the incentives it provides for banks to be considered well-capitalized, such as allowing holding companies to maintain their financial holding company status and, perhaps more importantly, meeting market expectations that banks will remain well-capitalized. To ensure that banks maintain strong capital ratios, the U.S. banking agencies will continue to monitor the impact of Basel II during every step of its implementation. We will conduct extensive analysis of regulatory capital requirements produced by the new framework, as well as analyze the inputs behind the requirements. In addition, under the proposals, the agencies would determine whether any adjustments to the Basel II framework would be appropriate before removing the temporary floors that will be in place for a three-year transitional period. The use of these floors and other transitional safeguards during the first years that Basel II is in use will help ensure that there are no sudden drops in capital levels. The Federal Reserve agrees with the Government Accountability Office (GAO) that (1)finalizing the U.S. Basel II rule will generate crucial information to enable the agencies to make future assessments of the strengths and weaknesses of the Basel II rule for the U.S. banking system and (2) the agencies should continue to evaluate during the transition period whether the advanced approaches of Basel II provide an appropriate regulatory capital framework for U.S. banking organizations.2Moreover, we believe that this review should be as robust and transparent as possible, including active and meaningful dialogue among the agencies, the industry, market participants, Congress, and other interested parties. We seek to have strong risk-based capital ratios for large, complex banking organizations under Basel II that are substantially more meaningful, more representative of risk profiles, and more sensitive to changes in those risk profiles than they are today. If analysis shows that any part of this goal is not being met, we will consider ways to improve the framework. ConclusionThe three pillars of Basel II provide a broad and coherent framework for linking regulatory capital to risk, for improving internal risk measurement and management, and for enhancing supervisory and market discipline at large, complex, and internationally active banks. Indeed, we have already seen significant progress in risk measurement and management at many banks in the United States and elsewhere as a result of the Basel II development process. It is also important to modernize the Basel I framework to improve the risk sensitivity of capital requirements at smaller and less complex banks, without artificially creating competitive inequalities. The Federal Reserve continues to support efforts to implement the Basel II framework in the United States, and we expect more progress on implementation soon. It is critical to move forward expeditiously with Basel II implementation so that our largest and internationally active banking organizations maintain their safety and soundness and remain competitive, our supervisors bolster their assessment capabilities, and the market gains greater access to information about risk. Footnotes 1.See, for example, Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan (1996),"Regulatory Incentives and the Thrift Crisis: Dividends, Mutual-to-Stock Conversions, and Financial Distress (765 KB PDF),"The Journal of Finance, vol. LI (September), pp. 1285-1319.Return to text 2."Risk-Based Capital: Bank Regulators Need to Improve Transparency and Overcome Impediments to Finalizing the Proposed Basel II Framework (1.6 MB PDF),"Government Accountability Office, February 2007.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the appointment of Brian F. Madigan as director of the Division of Monetary Affairs, effective July 23, 2007. The division supports the Board and the Federal Open Market Committee in the conduct of domestic monetary policy by providing information and analysis pertaining to open market operations, discount window administration, and reserve requirements. Madigan began his career at the Board in 1979 as an economist. He was appointed to the Board's official staff in 1987, promoted to associate director of the Division of Monetary Affairs in 1993, and to deputy director in 2001. Madigan succeeds Vincent Reinhart, who has been named senior adviser to the Board. In January, Reinhart announced that he will retire from the Board later this year to join the American Enterprise Institute. Madigan holds an A.B. from St. Joseph's College and a PhD in economics from Pennsylvania State University.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Prohibition and Order to Cease and Desist againstRickW.Bouse, the former president and director of Progress Bank ofMissouri,Sullivan,Missouri, and a former institution-affiliated party of Progress Bancshares, Inc.Mr. Bouse, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order, which was based on his alleged participation in unsafe and unsound practices and alleged breaches of fiduciary duty to the bank and its holding company involving the banks granting of loans to allegedly unqualified and nominee borrowers, and the alleged use of bank assets for purposes unrelated to the banks business.A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago today announced that Charles L. Evans will become the bank's ninth president and CEO effective September 1, 2007. Evans, 49, will replace Michael H. Moskow, who will retire August 31 after 13 years as president. The announcement was made by Miles D. White, CEO of Abbott Laboratories and chairman of the bank's board of directors. White chaired the board's search committee responsible for the selection of the new president.Evans is currently senior vice president and director of research at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. He also oversees the bank's Office of Consumer and Community Affairs and its Office of Public Affairs. He joined the Chicago Fed in 1991 and has been director of research since 2003. In that capacity he coordinates all monetary policy support for the president and the board of directors, with responsibility for research into the conduct of monetary policy and the structure of the macroeconomy.Evans is well respected for his research on inflation, financial market prices and measuring the effects of monetary policy on U.S. economic activity. His research has been published in theJournal of Political Economy, American Economic Review, Journal of Monetary Economics, Quarterly Journal of Economics, and theHandbook of Macroeconomics."After a comprehensive search in which we interviewed several excellent candidates, we decided that Charlie is best qualified to lead the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago," White said. "He has excellent leadership skills, knows the Federal Reserve System well, and has participated at the highest level of the monetary policy-making process."In addition, White expressed gratitude for Moskow's service to the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago."Michaels stewardship of the bank has been exemplary during a period of significant change in both the economic environment and the financial services industry," he said. "He has provided the Chicago Fed with excellent leadership and has served the public well in helping maintain a strong and stable economy."Evans is looking forward to continuing his work with the Chicago Fed's staff and board of directors as well as the people of the Seventh Federal Reserve District."The bank has a great reputation in the region because of Michael Moskows leadership," Evans said. "It is an honor to succeed him as president."Evans received a B.A. in economics from the University of Virginia and a Ph.D. in economics from Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh. He is married and has two children. For more information please see the following link:http://www.chicagofed.org/webpages/people/evans_charles.cfmThe Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago is one of 12 regional Reserve Banks that, along with the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., make up the nation's central bank. The Chicago Reserve Bank serves the Seventh Federal Reserve District, which encompasses the northern portions of Illinois and Indiana, southern Wisconsin, the Lower Peninsula of Michigan, and the state of Iowa. In addition to participation in the formulation of monetary policy, each Reserve Bank supervises member banks and bank holding companies, provides financial services to depository institutions and the U.S. government, and monitors economic conditions in its District.
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Watt, Ranking Member Miller, and members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to appear before you to discuss the Boards efforts to promote fair lending. It is widely known that there are racial and ethnic gaps in the availability and price of mortgage credit. These gaps have been highlighted by the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data, including pricing data required by the Boards regulation. The HMDA data have brought attention to these gaps and spurred a variety of efforts to address them by lenders, consumer and civil rights advocates, the Federal Reserve and other federal and state agencies, and, as indicated by todays hearing, the Congress. As with racial and ethnic disparities in income, education, employment, and healthcare, gaps in access to credit have long presented our society with moral, legal, social, and economic challenges. The Federal Reserve shares concerns that credit gaps may result in part from illegal discrimination, and we rigorously enforce compliance with the fair lending laws. When we find evidence of illegal discrimination, we take strong action. We recently referred two nationwide mortgage lenders to the Department of Justice (DOJ) because we found evidence that Hispanic and African-American borrowers paid more for their loans than comparable white borrowers. In my testimony today, I will first discuss the Federal Reserves efforts to ensure that banks maintain effective systems to prevent illegal discrimination; then, I will describe our efforts to detect and remedy violations when they occur. I will also explain more fully the recent mortgage pricing referrals to DOJ and the targeted pricing reviews on which they were based. As you have recognized by inviting many other government agencies to testify today, the Board has primary supervisory responsibility for only certain lenders, and my remarks are limited to how we supervise and enforce the law among those lenders. An Overview of Fair Lending Supervision and Enforcement at the Federal ReserveThe Board has a long-standing commitment to ensuring that every bank it supervises complies fully with the federal fair lending laws, namely the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) and the Fair Housing Act. This commitment is reflected in our organizational structure: we have made consumer compliance supervision, including fair lending, a distinct function in the Reserve Banks and at the Board; we have a specialized Fair Lending Enforcement Section at the Board; and we specially train examiners in consumer compliance supervision and have them focus exclusively on that task. Those examiners prepare a stand-alone consumer compliance examination report bearing a distinct consumer compliance rating for each of the state member banks we supervise.Our commitment to fair lending is also evidenced in how we make it an integral part of every consumer compliance examination we conduct. Federal Reserve examiners begin every consumer compliance examination by evaluating the institutions fair lending risk across all business lines, using the Interagency Fair Lending Examination Procedures. Examiners have long analyzed HMDA data as part of this process. Based on this evaluation, examiners identify specific business lines on which to focus, and in every examination at least one product or class of products is evaluated in detail. Additionally, examiners conduct fair lending reviews outside the usual examination cycle when warranted by heightened fair lending risk. For example, we conducted targeted mortgage pricing reviews outside the normal supervisory cycle after the first HMDA pricing data were released in 2005.When conducting fair lending examinations, our consumer compliance examiners perform two distinct functions. First, examiners evaluate the banks overall fair lending compliance program. In essence, examiners make sure that management is committed to fair lending and has put in place the appropriate systems, policies, and staff to prevent violations. Examiners assess whether the institution devotes a level of resources to consumer compliance that is commensurate with its size, the complexity of its business lines, and the fair lending risk of its business practices. Of course, the level of resources dedicated to fair lending will vary across institutions, but examiners require that every institution make fair lending a high priority, from the loan officer to the board of directors. If an institutions staff or systems fall short, examiners direct the institution to take corrective action.Second, examiners determine if the bank has violated the fair lending laws. To that end, they review lending policies and practices to make sure they are not discriminatory. Examiners also test the institutions actual lending record for specific types of discrimination, such as underwriting discrimination in consumer loans, or pricing discrimination in mortgage or automobile lending. This testing for discrimination may use statistical techniques, manual reviews of loan files, or both. When examiners find evidence of potential discrimination, they coordinate closely with the Boards Fair Lending Enforcement Section, which brings additional legal and statistical expertise to the examination and ensures that fair lending laws are enforced consistently and rigorously throughout the Federal Reserve System.Because the Federal Reserve requires banks to devote significant resources to fair lending and because we examine them routinely for fair lending compliance, we expect fair lending violations--especially those involving a pattern or practice of discrimination--to be rare among the banks we supervise. Our experience has been that such violations are indeed rare, but when they occur, we do not hesitate to take strong action. If we have reason to believe that there is a pattern or practice of discrimination under ECOA, the Board, like the other federal banking agencies, has a statutory responsibility under that Act to refer the matter to DOJ, which reviews the referral and decides if further investigation is warranted. A DOJ investigation may result in a public civil enforcement action or settlement. DOJ may decide instead to return the matter to the Federal Reserve for administrative enforcement. When this occurs, we ensure that the institution corrects the problems and makes amends to the victims.We take our responsibility to refer matters to DOJ seriously. In the first six months of this year alone, we referred five institutions after concluding that we had reason to believe that they had engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination: Last year, we referred four institutions to DOJ for a wide range of issues after concluding that we had reason to believe they had engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination. These issues included pricing discrimination in auto lending, mortgage redlining, and age discrimination: We referred an additional five matters in 2004 and 2005.2One referral involved racial and ethnic discrimination in mortgage underwriting, and the remaining four referrals involved marital status discrimination in auto and commercial lending. We believe that our referral record, which is publicly documented in our annual reports to Congress, demonstrates the Boards long-standing commitment to rigorous fair lending enforcement.Our referrals account for two of the three public fair lending enforcement actions that DOJ has brought in the past five years based on agency fair lending referrals. One of these enforcement actions involved redlining in mortgage, consumer, and small business lending; the other involved marital status discrimination in the pricing of automobile loans.3If a fair lending violation does not constitute a pattern or practice, the Federal Reserve makes sure that the bank remedies it. From 2004 through 2006, we cited approximately sixty banks for such violations involving discrimination on a prohibited basis under ECOA.4Many of these violations involved improperly requiring spousal signatures on loan documents, which discriminates on the basis of marital status.Most lenders readily agree to correct fair lending violations. In fact, lenders often take corrective steps as soon as they become aware of a problem. Thus, the Federal Reserve generally uses informal supervisory tools, such as Memoranda of Understanding between the banks Board of Directors and the Reserve Bank, or Board Resolutions, to ensure that violations are corrected. If necessary to protect consumers, however, we can and do bring public enforcement actions. In 2004, we publicly assessed a $70 million civil money penalty against CitiFinancial Credit Company and also ordered restitution to borrowers.5Fair Lending Enforcement Involving Discrimination in Mortgage PricingI would now like to discuss the Federal Reserves supervisory and enforcement activities against mortgage pricing discrimination. As mentioned earlier, we referred two nationwide lenders this year to DOJ for mortgage pricing discrimination. The first referral involved two of the fair lending risk factors that the agencies have identified and used for some time: (1) broad discretion in pricing by loan officers or brokers, and (2) financial incentives for loan officers or brokers to charge borrowers higher prices. The lending institution gave its loan officers discretion to charge overages and underages, that is, to set loan prices higher or lower than its standard rates. The institution also paid loan officers more if they charged overages. We found evidence that African-American and Hispanic borrowers paid higher overages than comparable non-Hispanic whites in multiple Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs).The second referral involved loans originated through mortgage brokers where the institution also permitted pricing discretion. African-Americans and Hispanics paid higher annual percentage rates than comparable non-Hispanic whites in multiple MSAs. While pricing discretion and financial incentives to charge borrowers more do not always result in fair lending violations, these referrals underscore that it is critical for lenders that permit these practices to have clear policies about their use and to monitor them effectively.Evaluating Pricing Discrimination Risk by Analyzing HMDA Data and Other InformationThe two previously mentioned referrals resulted from a process of targeted reviews of institutions for pricing discrimination that the Federal Reserve initiated when the HMDA pricing data first became available in 2005. We developed, and continue to refine, a HMDA data analysis program that identifies institutions with statistically significant pricing disparities by race or ethnicity.6Because HMDA data lack many factors that lenders routinely use to make credit decisions and set loan prices, such as information about the borrowers creditworthiness and loan-to-value ratios, HMDA data alone cannot be used to determine whether a lender discriminates. Thus, we analyze HMDA data in conjunction with other supervisory information to evaluate a lenders risk for discrimination.For the 2005 HMDA pricing data--the most recent year for which the data are publicly available--Federal Reserve examiners performed a pricing discrimination risk assessment for each institution that we identified through our HMDA data analysis. These risk assessments incorporated not just the institutions HMDA data, but also the strength of the institutions fair lending compliance program, our past supervisory experience with the institution, consumer complaints against the institution, and the presence of fair lending risk factors such as discretionary pricing. Based on these comprehensive assessments, we determined which institutions would receive a targeted pricing review. Depending on the examination schedule, the targeted pricing review could occur as part of the institutions next examination, or outside the usual supervisory cycle.Even if an institution is not identified by our HMDA analysis, examiners may still conclude that the institution is at risk for pricing discrimination and perform a pricing review. We supervise many institutions that are not required to report data under HMDA. Also, many of the HMDA-reporting institutions we supervise originate few higher-priced loans and, therefore, report very little pricing data. For these institutions, examiners analyze other available information to assess pricing discrimination risk and perform a pricing review when appropriate.Performing Targeted Pricing Reviews to Detect Mortgage Pricing DiscriminationDuring a targeted pricing review, the Federal Reserve collects additional information, including potential pricing factors that are not available in the HMDA data, to determine whether any pricing disparity by race or ethnicity is fully attributable to legitimate factors, or whether any portion of the pricing disparity may be attributable to illegal discrimination. To perform these reviews, we use analytical techniques that account for the increasing complexity of the mortgage market. Two industry changes in particular--the proliferation of product offerings and the increased use of risk-based pricing--have significantly increased the complexity of fair lending reviews. It is not uncommon for a lender to offer many different products, each with its own pricing based on the borrowers credit risk.To effectively detect discrimination in the expanding range of products and credit risk categories, the Federal Reserve increasingly uses statistical techniques. When performing a pricing review, we typically obtain extensive proprietary, loan-level data on all mortgage loans originated by the lender, including prime loans (i.e., not just higher-priced loans reported under HMDA). To determine how to analyze these data, we study the lenders specific business model, pricing policies, and product offerings. With respect to product offerings, we take great care in defining the products or class of products we analyze, since each product may have different pricing that must be considered in the analysis.On the basis of our review of the lenders policies, we determine which factors from the lenders data should be considered. We then create a statistical model that takes into account those factors and is tailored to that specific lender. We typically will test for discrimination in particular geographic markets, such as MSAs. It is important to look at specific markets because relatively small unexplained pricing disparities at the national level can mask much larger disparities in individual markets.As I mentioned earlier, based on our pricing reviews, we concluded that we had reason to believe that two nationwide lenders had engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination, and we referred them to DOJ. After accounting for legitimate factors reflected in the lenders specific pricing policies, we found that minorities still paid more for their mortgages than non-Hispanic white borrowers in multiple MSAs. In the remaining pricing reviews that we have completed, we found that minorities did not pay more than non-Hispanic white borrowers, after taking into account the legitimate factors that the lenders used to price loans.Insights Related to the Pricing Review ProcessThese reviews have reinforced for the Federal Reserve several important aspects of fair lending supervision and enforcement. First, HMDA data are most helpful as a fair lending tool when they are used in conjunction with other risk factors and supervisory information to identify institutions that warrant closer review. In particular, our referrals have confirmed that pricing discretion and incentives to charge more remain significant fair lending risks. Second, to be accurate, our reviews need to be based on the institutions specific pricing policies and product offerings. Unless we take the time to understand the lenders business and tailor our analysis accordingly, we risk either missing violations or erroneously concluding that a lender discriminated when it did not. Third, it is important to test separately for discrimination in different geographic markets. A lender may have a relatively small, unexplained pricing disparity across the nation as a whole, but still discriminate in distinct geographic markets, such as individual MSAs. As we move into our third year of analyzing the HMDA pricing data, we will continue to leverage these data and our examination resources to effectively enforce the fair lending laws.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is committed to addressing racial and ethnic gaps in the availability and affordability of credit. With our supervisory and enforcement authority, we ensure that banks we supervise comply fully with the fair lending laws and take strong action in the rare cases when they do not. More broadly, our regulation requiring lenders to report data on mortgage pricing has helped shine a brighter light on racial and ethnic pricing disparities and spurred efforts from all quarters to address them. This hearing is an important example of those efforts, and we are pleased to have this opportunity to work with you to ensure that consumer credit markets are free from illegal discrimination.Footnotes1.ECOA generally prohibits creditors from considering age when evaluating creditworthiness, except that a creditor may consider the age of an applicant 62 years or older in the applicants favor.Return to text2.One of our 2005 referrals was included in our 2006 annual report because of a change in reporting periods. The referral had not been reported in the 2005 annual report, which only included referrals made through June 2005. Additionally, one referral was inadvertently omitted from the 2005 annual report.Return to text3.SeeUnited Statesv.First American Bank, Civil Action No. 04C 4585 (N.D. Ill. July 13, 2004), andUnited Statesv.Compass Bank, Civil Action No. 07-H-0102-S (N.D. Ala. January 12, 2007).Return to text4.In total during this time period, we cited almost 400 banks for all types of Regulation B violations, including violations that do not involve discrimination. In addition, during this time, we cited almost 300 banks for violations of HMDA.Return to text5.The Federal Reserve alleged that CitiFinancial violated ECOA by improperly requiring spousal signatures and that it engaged in unsafe and unsound lending practices. See In the Matter of CitiGroup Inc. and CitiFinancial Credit Company, Order to Cease and Desist and Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty Issued Upon Consent (May 27, 2004).Return to text6.Our HMDA analysis program was originally developed to analyze denial data and examiners continue to use this analysis when they decide the focus of a fair lending examination. Detecting underwriting discrimination remains an important part of the examination process. In 2005, for example, we referred an institution to DOJ because it had rejected several minority applicants for insufficient collateral without ordering an appraisal, but it had not rejected any white applicants for this reason without first ordering an appraisal. Because of a change in reporting periods, this referral appears in our 2006 annual report. Our referrals account for two of the three public fair lending enforcement actions that DOJ has brought in the past five years based on agency fair lending referrals. One of these enforcement actions involved redlining in mortgage, consumer, and small business lending; the other involved marital status discrimination in the pricing of automobile loans.3If a fair lending violation does not constitute a pattern or practice, the Federal Reserve makes sure that the bank remedies it. From 2004 through 2006, we cited approximately sixty banks for such violations involving discrimination on a prohibited basis under ECOA.4Many of these violations involved improperly requiring spousal signatures on loan documents, which discriminates on the basis of marital status.Most lenders readily agree to correct fair lending violations. In fact, lenders often take corrective steps as soon as they become aware of a problem. Thus, the Federal Reserve generally uses informal supervisory tools, such as Memoranda of Understanding between the banks Board of Directors and the Reserve Bank, or Board Resolutions, to ensure that violations are corrected. If necessary to protect consumers, however, we can and do bring public enforcement actions. In 2004, we publicly assessed a $70 million civil money penalty against CitiFinancial Credit Company and also ordered restitution to borrowers.5Fair Lending Enforcement Involving Discrimination in Mortgage PricingI would now like to discuss the Federal Reserves supervisory and enforcement activities against mortgage pricing discrimination. As mentioned earlier, we referred two nationwide lenders this year to DOJ for mortgage pricing discrimination. The first referral involved two of the fair lending risk factors that the agencies have identified and used for some time: (1) broad discretion in pricing by loan officers or brokers, and (2) financial incentives for loan officers or brokers to charge borrowers higher prices. The lending institution gave its loan officers discretion to charge overages and underages, that is, to set loan prices higher or lower than its standard rates. The institution also paid loan officers more if they charged overages. We found evidence that African-American and Hispanic borrowers paid higher overages than comparable non-Hispanic whites in multiple Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs).The second referral involved loans originated through mortgage brokers where the institution also permitted pricing discretion. African-Americans and Hispanics paid higher annual percentage rates than comparable non-Hispanic whites in multiple MSAs. While pricing discretion and financial incentives to charge borrowers more do not always result in fair lending violations, these referrals underscore that it is critical for lenders that permit these practices to have clear policies about their use and to monitor them effectively.Evaluating Pricing Discrimination Risk by Analyzing HMDA Data and Other InformationThe two previously mentioned referrals resulted from a process of targeted reviews of institutions for pricing discrimination that the Federal Reserve initiated when the HMDA pricing data first became available in 2005. We developed, and continue to refine, a HMDA data analysis program that identifies institutions with statistically significant pricing disparities by race or ethnicity.6Because HMDA data lack many factors that lenders routinely use to make credit decisions and set loan prices, such as information about the borrowers creditworthiness and loan-to-value ratios, HMDA data alone cannot be used to determine whether a lender discriminates. Thus, we analyze HMDA data in conjunction with other supervisory information to evaluate a lenders risk for discrimination.For the 2005 HMDA pricing data--the most recent year for which the data are publicly available--Federal Reserve examiners performed a pricing discrimination risk assessment for each institution that we identified through our HMDA data analysis. These risk assessments incorporated not just the institutions HMDA data, but also the strength of the institutions fair lending compliance program, our past supervisory experience with the institution, consumer complaints against the institution, and the presence of fair lending risk factors such as discretionary pricing. Based on these comprehensive assessments, we determined which institutions would receive a targeted pricing review. Depending on the examination schedule, the targeted pricing review could occur as part of the institutions next examination, or outside the usual supervisory cycle.Even if an institution is not identified by our HMDA analysis, examiners may still conclude that the institution is at risk for pricing discrimination and perform a pricing review. We supervise many institutions that are not required to report data under HMDA. Also, many of the HMDA-reporting institutions we supervise originate few higher-priced loans and, therefore, report very little pricing data. For these institutions, examiners analyze other available information to assess pricing discrimination risk and perform a pricing review when appropriate.Performing Targeted Pricing Reviews to Detect Mortgage Pricing DiscriminationDuring a targeted pricing review, the Federal Reserve collects additional information, including potential pricing factors that are not available in the HMDA data, to determine whether any pricing disparity by race or ethnicity is fully attributable to legitimate factors, or whether any portion of the pricing disparity may be attributable to illegal discrimination. To perform these reviews, we use analytical techniques that account for the increasing complexity of the mortgage market. Two industry changes in particular--the proliferation of product offerings and the increased use of risk-based pricing--have significantly increased the complexity of fair lending reviews. It is not uncommon for a lender to offer many different products, each with its own pricing based on the borrowers credit risk.To effectively detect discrimination in the expanding range of products and credit risk categories, the Federal Reserve increasingly uses statistical techniques. When performing a pricing review, we typically obtain extensive proprietary, loan-level data on all mortgage loans originated by the lender, including prime loans (i.e., not just higher-priced loans reported under HMDA). To determine how to analyze these data, we study the lenders specific business model, pricing policies, and product offerings. With respect to product offerings, we take great care in defining the products or class of products we analyze, since each product may have different pricing that must be considered in the analysis.On the basis of our review of the lenders policies, we determine which factors from the lenders data should be considered. We then create a statistical model that takes into account those factors and is tailored to that specific lender. We typically will test for discrimination in particular geographic markets, such as MSAs. It is important to look at specific markets because relatively small unexplained pricing disparities at the national level can mask much larger disparities in individual markets.As I mentioned earlier, based on our pricing reviews, we concluded that we had reason to believe that two nationwide lenders had engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination, and we referred them to DOJ. After accounting for legitimate factors reflected in the lenders specific pricing policies, we found that minorities still paid more for their mortgages than non-Hispanic white borrowers in multiple MSAs. In the remaining pricing reviews that we have completed, we found that minorities did not pay more than non-Hispanic white borrowers, after taking into account the legitimate factors that the lenders used to price loans.Insights Related to the Pricing Review ProcessThese reviews have reinforced for the Federal Reserve several important aspects of fair lending supervision and enforcement. First, HMDA data are most helpful as a fair lending tool when they are used in conjunction with other risk factors and supervisory information to identify institutions that warrant closer review. In particular, our referrals have confirmed that pricing discretion and incentives to charge more remain significant fair lending risks. Second, to be accurate, our reviews need to be based on the institutions specific pricing policies and product offerings. Unless we take the time to understand the lenders business and tailor our analysis accordingly, we risk either missing violations or erroneously concluding that a lender discriminated when it did not. Third, it is important to test separately for discrimination in different geographic markets. A lender may have a relatively small, unexplained pricing disparity across the nation as a whole, but still discriminate in distinct geographic markets, such as individual MSAs. As we move into our third year of analyzing the HMDA pricing data, we will continue to leverage these data and our examination resources to effectively enforce the fair lending laws.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is committed to addressing racial and ethnic gaps in the availability and affordability of credit. With our supervisory and enforcement authority, we ensure that banks we supervise comply fully with the fair lending laws and take strong action in the rare cases when they do not. More broadly, our regulation requiring lenders to report data on mortgage pricing has helped shine a brighter light on racial and ethnic pricing disparities and spurred efforts from all quarters to address them. This hearing is an important example of those efforts, and we are pleased to have this opportunity to work with you to ensure that consumer credit markets are free from illegal discrimination.Footnotes1.ECOA generally prohibits creditors from considering age when evaluating creditworthiness, except that a creditor may consider the age of an applicant 62 years or older in the applicants favor.Return to text2.One of our 2005 referrals was included in our 2006 annual report because of a change in reporting periods. The referral had not been reported in the 2005 annual report, which only included referrals made through June 2005. Additionally, one referral was inadvertently omitted from the 2005 annual report.Return to text3.SeeUnited Statesv.First American Bank, Civil Action No. 04C 4585 (N.D. Ill. July 13, 2004), andUnited Statesv.Compass Bank, Civil Action No. 07-H-0102-S (N.D. Ala. January 12, 2007).Return to text4.In total during this time period, we cited almost 400 banks for all types of Regulation B violations, including violations that do not involve discrimination. In addition, during this time, we cited almost 300 banks for violations of HMDA.Return to text5.The Federal Reserve alleged that CitiFinancial violated ECOA by improperly requiring spousal signatures and that it engaged in unsafe and unsound lending practices. See In the Matter of CitiGroup Inc. and CitiFinancial Credit Company, Order to Cease and Desist and Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty Issued Upon Consent (May 27, 2004).Return to text6.Our HMDA analysis program was originally developed to analyze denial data and examiners continue to use this analysis when they decide the focus of a fair lending examination. Detecting underwriting discrimination remains an important part of the examination process. In 2005, for example, we referred an institution to DOJ because it had rejected several minority applicants for insufficient collateral without ordering an appraisal, but it had not rejected any white applicants for this reason without first ordering an appraisal. Because of a change in reporting periods, this referral appears in our 2006 annual report. If a fair lending violation does not constitute a pattern or practice, the Federal Reserve makes sure that the bank remedies it. From 2004 through 2006, we cited approximately sixty banks for such violations involving discrimination on a prohibited basis under ECOA.4Many of these violations involved improperly requiring spousal signatures on loan documents, which discriminates on the basis of marital status. Most lenders readily agree to correct fair lending violations. In fact, lenders often take corrective steps as soon as they become aware of a problem. Thus, the Federal Reserve generally uses informal supervisory tools, such as Memoranda of Understanding between the banks Board of Directors and the Reserve Bank, or Board Resolutions, to ensure that violations are corrected. If necessary to protect consumers, however, we can and do bring public enforcement actions. In 2004, we publicly assessed a $70 million civil money penalty against CitiFinancial Credit Company and also ordered restitution to borrowers.5 Fair Lending Enforcement Involving Discrimination in Mortgage Pricing I would now like to discuss the Federal Reserves supervisory and enforcement activities against mortgage pricing discrimination. As mentioned earlier, we referred two nationwide lenders this year to DOJ for mortgage pricing discrimination. The first referral involved two of the fair lending risk factors that the agencies have identified and used for some time: (1) broad discretion in pricing by loan officers or brokers, and (2) financial incentives for loan officers or brokers to charge borrowers higher prices. The lending institution gave its loan officers discretion to charge overages and underages, that is, to set loan prices higher or lower than its standard rates. The institution also paid loan officers more if they charged overages. We found evidence that African-American and Hispanic borrowers paid higher overages than comparable non-Hispanic whites in multiple Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs). The second referral involved loans originated through mortgage brokers where the institution also permitted pricing discretion. African-Americans and Hispanics paid higher annual percentage rates than comparable non-Hispanic whites in multiple MSAs. While pricing discretion and financial incentives to charge borrowers more do not always result in fair lending violations, these referrals underscore that it is critical for lenders that permit these practices to have clear policies about their use and to monitor them effectively. Evaluating Pricing Discrimination Risk by Analyzing HMDA Data and Other InformationThe two previously mentioned referrals resulted from a process of targeted reviews of institutions for pricing discrimination that the Federal Reserve initiated when the HMDA pricing data first became available in 2005. We developed, and continue to refine, a HMDA data analysis program that identifies institutions with statistically significant pricing disparities by race or ethnicity.6Because HMDA data lack many factors that lenders routinely use to make credit decisions and set loan prices, such as information about the borrowers creditworthiness and loan-to-value ratios, HMDA data alone cannot be used to determine whether a lender discriminates. Thus, we analyze HMDA data in conjunction with other supervisory information to evaluate a lenders risk for discrimination. For the 2005 HMDA pricing data--the most recent year for which the data are publicly available--Federal Reserve examiners performed a pricing discrimination risk assessment for each institution that we identified through our HMDA data analysis. These risk assessments incorporated not just the institutions HMDA data, but also the strength of the institutions fair lending compliance program, our past supervisory experience with the institution, consumer complaints against the institution, and the presence of fair lending risk factors such as discretionary pricing. Based on these comprehensive assessments, we determined which institutions would receive a targeted pricing review. Depending on the examination schedule, the targeted pricing review could occur as part of the institutions next examination, or outside the usual supervisory cycle.Even if an institution is not identified by our HMDA analysis, examiners may still conclude that the institution is at risk for pricing discrimination and perform a pricing review. We supervise many institutions that are not required to report data under HMDA. Also, many of the HMDA-reporting institutions we supervise originate few higher-priced loans and, therefore, report very little pricing data. For these institutions, examiners analyze other available information to assess pricing discrimination risk and perform a pricing review when appropriate. Performing Targeted Pricing Reviews to Detect Mortgage Pricing DiscriminationDuring a targeted pricing review, the Federal Reserve collects additional information, including potential pricing factors that are not available in the HMDA data, to determine whether any pricing disparity by race or ethnicity is fully attributable to legitimate factors, or whether any portion of the pricing disparity may be attributable to illegal discrimination. To perform these reviews, we use analytical techniques that account for the increasing complexity of the mortgage market. Two industry changes in particular--the proliferation of product offerings and the increased use of risk-based pricing--have significantly increased the complexity of fair lending reviews. It is not uncommon for a lender to offer many different products, each with its own pricing based on the borrowers credit risk.To effectively detect discrimination in the expanding range of products and credit risk categories, the Federal Reserve increasingly uses statistical techniques. When performing a pricing review, we typically obtain extensive proprietary, loan-level data on all mortgage loans originated by the lender, including prime loans (i.e., not just higher-priced loans reported under HMDA). To determine how to analyze these data, we study the lenders specific business model, pricing policies, and product offerings. With respect to product offerings, we take great care in defining the products or class of products we analyze, since each product may have different pricing that must be considered in the analysis.On the basis of our review of the lenders policies, we determine which factors from the lenders data should be considered. We then create a statistical model that takes into account those factors and is tailored to that specific lender. We typically will test for discrimination in particular geographic markets, such as MSAs. It is important to look at specific markets because relatively small unexplained pricing disparities at the national level can mask much larger disparities in individual markets.As I mentioned earlier, based on our pricing reviews, we concluded that we had reason to believe that two nationwide lenders had engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination, and we referred them to DOJ. After accounting for legitimate factors reflected in the lenders specific pricing policies, we found that minorities still paid more for their mortgages than non-Hispanic white borrowers in multiple MSAs. In the remaining pricing reviews that we have completed, we found that minorities did not pay more than non-Hispanic white borrowers, after taking into account the legitimate factors that the lenders used to price loans.Insights Related to the Pricing Review ProcessThese reviews have reinforced for the Federal Reserve several important aspects of fair lending supervision and enforcement. First, HMDA data are most helpful as a fair lending tool when they are used in conjunction with other risk factors and supervisory information to identify institutions that warrant closer review. In particular, our referrals have confirmed that pricing discretion and incentives to charge more remain significant fair lending risks. Second, to be accurate, our reviews need to be based on the institutions specific pricing policies and product offerings. Unless we take the time to understand the lenders business and tailor our analysis accordingly, we risk either missing violations or erroneously concluding that a lender discriminated when it did not. Third, it is important to test separately for discrimination in different geographic markets. A lender may have a relatively small, unexplained pricing disparity across the nation as a whole, but still discriminate in distinct geographic markets, such as individual MSAs. As we move into our third year of analyzing the HMDA pricing data, we will continue to leverage these data and our examination resources to effectively enforce the fair lending laws.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is committed to addressing racial and ethnic gaps in the availability and affordability of credit. With our supervisory and enforcement authority, we ensure that banks we supervise comply fully with the fair lending laws and take strong action in the rare cases when they do not. More broadly, our regulation requiring lenders to report data on mortgage pricing has helped shine a brighter light on racial and ethnic pricing disparities and spurred efforts from all quarters to address them. This hearing is an important example of those efforts, and we are pleased to have this opportunity to work with you to ensure that consumer credit markets are free from illegal discrimination. Footnotes 2.One of our 2005 referrals was included in our 2006 annual report because of a change in reporting periods. The referral had not been reported in the 2005 annual report, which only included referrals made through June 2005. Additionally, one referral was inadvertently omitted from the 2005 annual report.Return to text3.SeeUnited Statesv.First American Bank, Civil Action No. 04C 4585 (N.D. Ill. July 13, 2004), andUnited Statesv.Compass Bank, Civil Action No. 07-H-0102-S (N.D. Ala. January 12, 2007).Return to text4.In total during this time period, we cited almost 400 banks for all types of Regulation B violations, including violations that do not involve discrimination. In addition, during this time, we cited almost 300 banks for violations of HMDA.Return to text5.The Federal Reserve alleged that CitiFinancial violated ECOA by improperly requiring spousal signatures and that it engaged in unsafe and unsound lending practices. See In the Matter of CitiGroup Inc. and CitiFinancial Credit Company, Order to Cease and Desist and Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty Issued Upon Consent (May 27, 2004).Return to text6.Our HMDA analysis program was originally developed to analyze denial data and examiners continue to use this analysis when they decide the focus of a fair lending examination. Detecting underwriting discrimination remains an important part of the examination process. In 2005, for example, we referred an institution to DOJ because it had rejected several minority applicants for insufficient collateral without ordering an appraisal, but it had not rejected any white applicants for this reason without first ordering an appraisal. Because of a change in reporting periods, this referral appears in our 2006 annual report. 2.One of our 2005 referrals was included in our 2006 annual report because of a change in reporting periods. The referral had not been reported in the 2005 annual report, which only included referrals made through June 2005. Additionally, one referral was inadvertently omitted from the 2005 annual report.Return to text 3.SeeUnited Statesv.First American Bank, Civil Action No. 04C 4585 (N.D. Ill. July 13, 2004), andUnited Statesv.Compass Bank, Civil Action No. 07-H-0102-S (N.D. Ala. January 12, 2007).Return to text 4.In total during this time period, we cited almost 400 banks for all types of Regulation B violations, including violations that do not involve discrimination. In addition, during this time, we cited almost 300 banks for violations of HMDA.Return to text 5.The Federal Reserve alleged that CitiFinancial violated ECOA by improperly requiring spousal signatures and that it engaged in unsafe and unsound lending practices. See In the Matter of CitiGroup Inc. and CitiFinancial Credit Company, Order to Cease and Desist and Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty Issued Upon Consent (May 27, 2004).Return to text 6.Our HMDA analysis program was originally developed to analyze denial data and examiners continue to use this analysis when they decide the focus of a fair lending examination. Detecting underwriting discrimination remains an important part of the examination process. In 2005, for example, we referred an institution to DOJ because it had rejected several minority applicants for insufficient collateral without ordering an appraisal, but it had not rejected any white applicants for this reason without first ordering an appraisal. Because of a change in reporting periods, this referral appears in our 2006 annual report.
Three federal agencies and two associations of state regulators will cooperate in an innovative pilot project to conduct targeted consumer-protection compliance reviews of selected non-depository lenders with significant subprime mortgage operations. The collaborative state/federal pilot is scheduled to begin in the fourth quarter of this year and will focus on non-depository subsidiaries of bank and thrift holding companies, as well as mortgage brokers doing business with, or working for, these entities. Additionally, the states will conduct coordinated examinations of independent state-licensed subprime lenders and their associated mortgage brokers. The agencies will select a sample of entities under their respective supervisory or other authorities for review or investigation. The agencies will also share information about the reviews and investigations, take action as appropriate, collaborate on the lessons learned, and seek ways to better cooperate in ensuring effective and consistent reviews of these institutions. The agencies collaborating on the effort are the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal Trade Commission, and state agencies represented by the Conference of State Bank Supervisors and the American Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators. By joining together in applying a coordinated review program, the regulatory agencies will be better positioned to evaluate and more consistently assess subprime mortgage lending practices across a broad range of mortgage lenders and other participants within the industry. The agencies will evaluate the companies' underwriting standards, as well as senior management oversight of the risk-management practices used for ensuring compliance with state and federal consumer protection regulations and laws, including the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, the Truth in Lending Act, the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act, the Federal Trade Commission Act, and the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act. The agencies will initiate appropriate corrective or enforcement action as warranted by the findings of the reviews or investigations. At the conclusion of the reviews, the agencies will analyze the results and determine whether the project is to be continued. If so, the agencies will determine the focus of future reviews at that time.
The federal financial regulatory agencies on Thursday issued a statement setting forth the agencies policy for enforcing specific anti-money laundering requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA). The purpose of theInteragency Statement on Enforcement of Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering Requirementsis to provide greater consistency among the agencies in enforcement decisions in BSA matters and to offer insight into the considerations that form the basis of those decisions. The applicable statutes provide that if a regulated institution fails to establish and maintain a BSA compliance program or fails to correct a previously identified problem with its BSA compliance program, the appropriate agency shall issue a formal cease and desist order. The statement, which reflects the agencies current practices on enforcement with respect to BSA compliance, describes the circumstances under which the agencies will issue a cease and desist order in compliance with these statutory provisions. The statement also makes clear that the agencies may take formal or informal enforcement actions to address other concerns related to BSA or anti-money laundering, depending on the facts. The statement complements the Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering Examination Manual, which was similarly designed to foster interagency consistency and transparency regarding the BSA examination process. The statement, which was issued by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of Thrift Supervision, and the National Credit Union Administration, is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of a Final Decision and Order of Prohibition against Michelle M. Moore, a former employee of RBC Centura Bank, Rocky Mount, North Carolina. The Order prohibits Ms. Moore from participating in the conduct of the affairs of any financial institution or holding company and orders her to make restitution to the Bank in the sum of $59,823.53 for its loss as a result of Moore's violations and unsafe or unsound practices. Attached are the Boards Final Decision and Order relating to this action.
Governor Kevin Warsh Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear today on behalf of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to discuss the systemic risk implications of the growth of hedge funds. The Board believes that the increased scale and scope of hedge funds has brought significant net benefits to financial markets. Indeed, hedge funds have the potential to reduce systemic risk by dispersing risks more broadly and by serving as a large pool of opportunistic capital that can stabilize financial markets in the event of disturbances. At the same time, the recent growth of hedge funds presents some formidable challenges to the achievement of public policy objectives, including significant risk-management challenges to market participants. If market participants prove unwilling or unable to meet these challenges, losses in the hedge fund sector could pose significant risks to financial stability. The Board believes that the "Principles and Guidelines Regarding Private Pools of Capital" issued by the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG) in February provides a sound framework for addressing these challenges associated with hedge funds, including the potential for systemic risk.1The Board shares the considered judgment of the PWG: the most effective mechanism for limiting systemic risks from hedge funds is market discipline; and, the most important providers of market discipline are the large, global commercial and investment banks that are their principal creditors and counterparties. The emphasis on market discipline neither endorses the status quo nor implies a passive role for government. In recent years, the global banks have significantly strengthened their practices and procedures for managing risk exposures to hedge funds. But, further progress on this front is needed--in no small part because of the increasing complexity of structured credit products such as collateralized debt obligations.2The Board believes that even those banks with the most sophisticated risk-management practices must further strengthen their enterprise-wide systems to put the PWG Principles fully into practice. As the PWG Principles rightly emphasize, supervisors of global banks are responsible for promoting market discipline by monitoring and evaluating banks' management of their exposures to hedge funds. As the umbrella supervisor of U.S. bank holding companies, the Federal Reserve continues to pay keen attention to hedge fund exposures and is working to ensure stronger risk-management practices. In addition, through the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve is actively facilitating collaboration and coordination among domestic and international supervisors of the global banks that are key counterparties and creditors of hedge funds. This area of significant focus--targeting management of exposures to hedge funds--is part of a broader, comprehensive set of supervisory initiatives that seeks to ensure that banks' risk-management practices and market infrastructures are sufficiently robust to cope with stresses that may accompany a deterioration of market conditions. To that end, the Federal Reserve has been focusing on five key supervisory initiatives: (1) comprehensive reviews of firms' stress-testing practices; (2) a multilateral supervisory assessment of the leading global banks' current practices for managing their exposures to hedge funds; (3) a review of the risks associated with the rapid growth of "leveraged lending"; (4) a new assessment of practices to manage liquidity risk; and (5) continued efforts to reduce risks associated with weaknesses in the clearing and settlement of credit derivatives and other over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives. Indeed, this Committee should be assured that the Federal Reserve has taken on these initiatives with great purpose and resolve. These initiatives are fully consistent with the founding purpose assigned to the Federal Reserve by Congress: to help mitigate the risks to the financial system and the broader economy caused by periodic bouts of instability and financial stress. Hedge FundsAlthough there is no precise legal definition, the term "hedge fund" generally refers to a pooled investment vehicle that is privately organized, administered by a professional investment manager, and not widely available to the public. The assets, investment strategies, and risk profiles of funds that meet this broad definition are quite diverse. In no sense are hedge funds an "asset class," like stocks, bonds, commodities, or real estate. While some hedge funds pursue investment strategies similar to those pursued by private equity funds, the strategies of the sector as a whole are quite varied. Some hedge funds are highly leveraged, while many use little or no leverage. The hedge fund sector has grown very rapidly in recent years. By the end of 2006, more than 9,000 funds managed more than $1-1/2 trillion of assets.3Assets managed in the United States are estimated to account for about 60 percent of the total. The hedge fund industry remains small relative to the U.S. mutual fund industry, which included more than 8,000 funds with about $10-1/2 trillion of assets under management at the end of 2006.4Hedge funds, however, can make greater use of leverage than mutual funds. Their market impact is further magnified by the active trading of some funds. The aggregate trading volumes of hedge funds reportedly account for significant shares of total trading volumes in some segments of the financial markets.5 Possible Implications of Hedge Fund Growth for Financial Stability and Systemic RiskIn important respects, the activities of hedge funds tend to foster financial stability. They are significant providers of liquidity across the financial markets. Many hedge funds are devoted to exploiting arbitrage opportunities that emerge when financial asset prices become misaligned. For example, when interest rates spiked in the summer of 2003, demands by hedgers of mortgage prepayment risks strained the liquidity of interest rate options markets, sending option prices soaring. Some hedge funds saw profit opportunities in selling interest rate options, and their actions helped restore liquidity to the markets and reduced the cost of hedging. The growth of hedge funds has also contributed to a broader dispersion of risks in the financial system, which thus far seems to have made the financial system somewhat less volatile. For example, in 2001 and 2002, significant losses caused by corporate bond defaults were absorbed without causing any discernible stress in the financial system. This experience contrasted with earlier periods when financial risks were concentrated at banks and other insured depositories. In those earlier periods, declines in asset prices created considerable financial and economic stress--the losses produced failures of many depositories and severely impaired the capital and lending capacity of others. At the same time, the growth of hedge funds clearly presents risk-management challenges to participants in financial markets. If those risk-management challenges are not addressed successfully, problems in the hedge fund sector could pose risks to the broader financial system. For example, when the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) nearly failed in September 1998, market participants were concerned that LTCM's losses would force liquidation of its very large positions in a wide range of financial markets, which could amplify price movements and erode market liquidity. Indeed, the primary factor that induced LTCM's counterparties and creditors to recapitalize the institution was their fear that liquidation of LTCM's positions would adversely affect the value of their own trading positions and their exposures to other counterparties. In recent months, many market participants have expressed concern that a widening of credit spreads from relatively narrow levels could lead to hedge fund losses that would make funds unwilling or unable to maintain their existing positions, thus potentially eroding market liquidity. Such circumstances could pose significant challenges to hedge funds' counterparties and creditors and perhaps to other market participants. Thus far, however, the repricing of credit risk does not appear to have imposed significant strains on the financial system. Limiting Potential Systemic Risks from Hedge FundsSince the LTCM episode, policymakers have continued to discuss the best approach to limiting potential systemic risks from the activities of hedge funds. In the immediate aftermath of the episode, the PWG studied the implications for financial stability and published its conclusions in April 1999 in a report entitled "Hedge Funds, Leverage, and the Lessons of Long-Term Capital Management."6The report concluded that the episode had posed a threat to financial stability as a result of a breakdown in market discipline by its creditors and counterparties, which allowed LTCM to become leveraged excessively. The report concluded that the most effective means of limiting systemic risk from hedge funds was to reinvigorate market discipline. To that end, the PWG made various recommendations, which were directed primarily at enhancing credit risk management by hedge funds' creditors and counterparties. Late last year, the PWG reassessed how best to address the challenges posed by the continued growth of the hedge fund sector. The results of that reassessment were reflected in the PWG's release on February 22 of this year of an "Agreement Among PWG and U.S. Agency Principals on Principles and Guidelines Regarding Private Pools of Capital."The term "private pools of capital" was intended broadly to describe pooled investment vehicles that are privately organized, administered by a professional manager, and not generally available to the public. Thus, the definition includes hedge funds, private equity funds, and venture capital funds. The PWG highlighted certain overarching principles, followed by principles that specifically addressed investor protection and systemic risk. The balance of my testimony will focus on the application of the systemic risk principles to hedge funds. As I have noted, the overarching principle is that the most effective mechanism for limiting systemic risk from hedge funds is market discipline. In this regard, the 2007 PWG Principles are consistent with the 1999 PWG report. Four specific systemic risk principles set out by the PWG furnish guidance to four sets of parties that have important roles in imparting market discipline: creditors and counterparties, investors, hedge fund managers, and supervisors of creditors and counterparties. The key creditors and counterparties of hedge funds are a relatively small group of global commercial and investment banks. These global banks provide credit to hedge funds through securities repurchase agreements (repos) and act as counterparties to the funds' OTC and exchange-traded derivatives. The terms at which these global banks transact with hedge funds can act as an important constraint on hedge fund leverage. Furthermore, losses to these global banks from their credit exposures to hedge funds or from market disruptions that could accompany liquidation of hedge funds' positions are the most plausible channel through which excessive leverage by hedge funds could threaten the broader financial system or the real economy. Thus, the management by these banks of their exposures to hedge funds is extremely important. The PWG Principles call upon the key counterparties to commit resources and maintain policies and procedures consistent with best practices for counterparty risk management. These policies and procedures relate to due diligence; exposure measurement, including stress testing; and margin requirements and other credit terms. There should be a strong correlation between the information held by a counterparty about a hedge fund's risk profile and the terms on which credit is extended. The principles indicate that counterparties should seek quantitative and qualitative indicators of a fund's exposures to market and credit risk and its vulnerabilities to liquidity pressures from counterparties and investors. When sufficient information is not forthcoming from a fund, a counterparty should correspondingly tighten its margin requirements and other credit terms. Since 1999, foundations, endowments, public and private pension funds, and other institutions have become an increasingly significant source of capital to the hedge fund sector. These institutions, many of which are quite sophisticated, are another source of market discipline on risk-taking by hedge funds. Accordingly, the PWG Principles call upon investors to carefully evaluate the strategies and risk-management capabilities of hedge funds and to ensure that a fund's risk profile is compatible with the investor's appetite for risk. The Board supports the PWG's formation of an "investors group" to develop detailed guidelines for best practices for investors in hedge funds, including practices relating to due diligence and ongoing assessments of a fund's risk profile. Managers of hedge funds also can contribute to limiting the systemic risks from their activities. In particular, their management of funding liquidity risk is a crucial determinant of whether losses suffered by a fund in adverse market conditions spill over to their counterparties. Since 1999, the Managed Funds Association, the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), and other organizations have issued and updated guidance on sound practices regarding valuation, risk management, and disclosure. The PWG Principles call for fund managers to meet those industry sound practices. Furthermore, the hedge fund industry should periodically review guidance on sound practices, and when necessary, enhance it. The Board supports the PWG's formation of a hedge fund "managers group" to review and enhance existing guidance on sound practices in light of the PWG Principles. Finally, because all the key counterparties of hedge funds are subject to prudential regulation, their supervisors have a vital role to play in limiting systemic risks, including those that may emanate from hedge funds. The PWG Principles call for supervisors to communicate clearly to counterparties their expectations regarding prudent management of the counterparties' credit exposures to hedge funds and to other leveraged counterparties. The principles also emphasize the need for international policy coordination among the supervisors of the key counterparties, which are organized in the United States and several European countries. The Federal Reserve's Responsibilities as a Banking SupervisorThe Federal Reserve continues to work with other domestic and international prudential supervisors to communicate supervisory expectations with respect to prudent management of credit exposures to hedge funds and other leveraged counterparties. After the LTCM episode, the Federal Reserve contributed substantively to a report by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) that identified sound practices for managing such exposures. These practices covered the overall strategy for credit risk management, the processes for information gathering and due diligence, the measurement and control of credit exposures, the limit-setting process, the use of collateral and other mechanisms for limiting losses, and the ongoing monitoring of positions and exposures. IOSCO issued similar supervisory guidance around the same time. As the umbrella supervisor of U.S. bank holding companies, the Federal Reserve began issuing supervisory guidance on the management of counterparty credit risks in the early 1990s. The BCBS sound practices were incorporated in this guidance to reflect the lessons learned from the LTCM episode. Adherence to the guidance is assessed as part of examinations of the global banks that are among the principal hedge fund counterparties. The Federal Reserve's supervision of counterparty risk management practices is part of a broader, more comprehensive set of supervisory initiatives. The goal of these initiatives is to assess whether global banks' risk-management practices and financial market infrastructures are sufficiently robust to cope with stresses that could accompany a deterioration of market conditions, including a deterioration that might result from the rapid liquidation of hedge funds' positions. As I will discuss in greater detail, those supervisory initiatives include (1) comprehensive reviews of firms' stress-testing practices; (2) a multilateral supervisory assessment of the leading global banks' current practices for managing their exposures to hedge funds; (3) a review of the risks associated with the rapid growth of "leveraged lending"; (4) a new assessment of practices to manage liquidity risk; and (5) continued efforts to reduce risks associated with weaknesses in the clearing and settlement of credit derivatives and other OTC derivatives. 1. Stress-testing.Global banks perform stress tests to assess the potential effects of a variety of adverse scenarios, including the effects of greater market volatility or reduced liquidity on their market risks and counterparty credit risks. They also consider scenarios in which their access to funding could be reduced, and develop contingency funding plans accordingly. A review of selected global banks' stress-testing practices that the Federal Reserve conducted in 2006 indicated a need for the banks to enhance their capacity to aggregate credit exposures at the firmwide level, including across counterparties; to assess the potential for counterparty credit losses to be compounded by losses on the banks' proprietary trading positions; and to assess the potential effects of a rapid and possibly protracted decline in asset market liquidity. 2. Management of Exposures to Hedge Funds.In the fall of 2006, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York initiated a multilateral supervisory review of the leading global banks' current practices for managing their exposures to hedge funds. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and prudential supervisors in Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom are participating in this review. The first phase of the review was completed last December. The reviewers found that banks' current and potential future credit exposures to hedge funds were small relative to the banks' capital, largely because of the pervasive use of collateral agreements. It was not clear, however, how well the banks' measurement of potential exposures captures the possible size of those exposures under more adverse market scenarios. The multilateral review is ongoing. 3. Leveraged Lending.The Federal Reserve is focusing on the risks to U.S. bank holding companies from leveraged lending activities--that is, from lending to relatively higher risk corporate borrowers, often to finance acquisitions or leveraged buyouts. The largest U.S. banks typically distribute a large share of the loans that they originate to other banks and institutional investors. Nonetheless, the banks can be exposed to significant risks, and the review is intended to assess the scale of these risks and the effectiveness of the banks' associated risk-management practices. The Federal Reserve's efforts in this area are being coordinated with the OCC and the SEC. 4. Liquidity Risk Management.The financial system's capacity to cope with stress depends critically on the management of funding liquidity pressures that may arise, especially pressures on the large global banks that play a central role in financial markets. The Federal Reserve is beginning a review of liquidity risk-management practices at the largest U.S. bank holding companies, focusing on the firms' efforts to ensure adequate funding in more adverse market scenarios. 5. Weaknesses in Clearing and Settlement of OTC Derivatives.The Federal Reserve first brought together the group of supervisors participating in the multilateral review of management of hedge fund exposures in September 2005 to oversee derivatives dealers' efforts to address weaknesses in settlement practices in the credit derivatives markets. Our intent has been to ensure that the clearing and settlement practices for all OTC derivatives are sufficiently robust that they would not be a source of increased risk during a period of significantly greater price volatility or trading volumes. Of greatest concern in September 2005 was the widespread failure of derivatives dealers to enforce a contractual requirement that a counterparty receive the dealer's prior written consent before assigning a credit derivative to another dealer. The failure to enforce this requirement fundamentally compromised counterparty risk management by creating confusion about the identity of counterparties. It also contributed to growing backlogs of unconfirmed credit derivatives trades. The assignment problem was quickly resolved by widespread adoption of an industry protocol that created strong incentives to obtain prompt written consent to assignments. The broader problem of confirmation backlogs for credit derivatives is being addressed through more widespread use of an electronic confirmation platform. Building on the success of that initiative, the supervisors are now overseeing dealers' efforts to address confirmation backlogs in the over-the-counter markets for equity derivatives. ConclusionThe PWG Principles provide a sound framework for addressing the public policy issues raised by the growth of hedge funds, including the potential systemic risk consequences. These principles are not an endorsement of the status quo. To the contrary, hedge funds, their creditors and counterparties, and their investors, need to take action to put these principles fully into practice. The Federal Reserve has worked, and will continue to work, with the PWG and others to promote practices consistent with the PWG's Principles for Private Pools of Capital. In particular, the Federal Reserve will continue to work with other supervisors to ensure that global banks manage their exposures to hedge funds prudently. More generally, the Federal Reserve will continue to pursue a comprehensive set of initiatives that seek to ensure that banks' risk-management practices and market infrastructures are sufficiently robust to cope with any stresses that may result from a deterioration of the benign financial conditions experienced in recent years. Footnotes 1.www.ustreas.gov/press/releases/hp272.htmReturn to text 2.A collateralized debt obligation (CDO) is a security that entitles the purchaser to some portion of the cash flows from a portfolio of assets, which may include bonds, loans, mortgage-backed securities, or other CDOs. For a given pool, CDOs designated as senior debt, mezzanine debt, subordinated debt, and equity often are issued.Return to text 3.www.fsforum.org/publications/HLI_Update-finalwithoutembargo19May07.pdf (148 KB PDF)Return to text 4.See Investment Company Institute (2007),2007 Investment Company Fact Book(Washington, D.C.: ICI, May).Return to text 5.Greenwich Associates (2004), "Hedge Funds: The End of the Beginning?", December; Greenwich Associates (2006), "For Hedge Funds, Fixed-Income Trading Volumes Soar, While Costs Take on New Importance," December.Return to text 6.www.treas.gov/press/releases/reports/hedgfund.pdf (361 KB PDF)Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Monetary Economics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts I would like to thank Christina Romer and David Romer for giving me the chance to address participants in the Summer Institute, sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). As an academic, I regularly attended the Summer Institute and presented or commented on research here. I also served for a time as the director of the Monetary Economics group, the position now shared by David and Christina. The informal nature of the institute, the large number of talented people in attendance, and the opportunity to hear about the very latest work in the field--often while in early draft form--made these few weeks each summer one of the most stimulating times of the year for me. In my current position, I am keenly aware of the long history of fruitful interaction between economists inside and outside of central banks, and I am eager to see this interaction continue. This ongoing intellectual exchange, by improving our understanding of the economy and the workings of monetary policy, has had and will continue to have sizable benefits.Today I will offer a few remarks on the relationships among monetary policy, inflation, and the public's expectations of inflation, focusing--as seems appropriate for this audience--on some important open questions. I will also give a short overview of the way the Federal Reserve Board staff forecasts inflation, including some discussion of how the staff incorporates information about expected inflation into its forecasting process.As you know, the control of inflation is central to good monetary policy. Price stability, which is one leg of the Federal Reserve's dual mandate from the Congress, is a good thing in itself, for reasons that economists understand much better today than they did a few decades ago. Inflation injects noise into the price system, makes long-term financial planning more complex, and interacts in perverse ways with imperfectly indexed tax and accounting rules. In the short-to-medium term, the maintenance of price stability helps avoid the pattern of stop-go monetary policies that were the source of much instability in output and employment in the past. More fundamentally, experience suggests that high and persistent inflation undermines public confidence in the economy and in the management of economic policy generally, with potentially adverse effects on risk-taking, investment, and other productive activities that are sensitive to the public's assessments of the prospects for future economic stability. In the long term, low inflation promotes growth, efficiency, and stability--which, all else being equal, support maximum sustainable employment, the other leg of the mandate given to the Federal Reserve by the Congress.Admittedly, measuring the long-term relationship between growth or productivity and inflation is difficult. For example, it may be that low inflation has accompanied good economic performance in part because countries that maintain low inflation tend to pursue other sound economic policies as well. Still, I think we can agree that, at a minimum, the opposite proposition--that inflationary policies promote employment growth in the long run--has been entirely discredited and, indeed, that policies based on this proposition have led to very bad outcomes whenever they have been applied.Inflation Expectations: Conceptual FrameworksUndoubtedly, the state of inflation expectations greatly influences actual inflation and thus the central bank's ability to achieve price stability. But what do we mean, precisely, by "the state of inflation expectations"? How should we measure inflation expectations, and how should we use that information for forecasting and controlling inflation? I certainly do not have complete answers to those questions, but I believe that they are of great practical importance. I hope my remarks here will stimulate some of you to work on these issues.What is the right conceptual framework for thinking about inflation expectations in the current context? The traditional rational-expectations model of inflation and inflation expectations has been a useful workhorse for thinking about issues of credibility and institutional design, but, to my mind, it is less helpful for thinking about economies in which (1) the structure of the economy is constantly evolving in ways that are imperfectly understood by both the public and policymakers and (2) the policymakers' objective function is not fully known by private agents. In particular, together with the assumption that the central bank's objective function is fixed and known to the public, the traditional rational-expectations approach implies that the public has firm knowledge of the long-run equilibrium inflation rate; consequently, their long-run inflation expectations do not vary over time in response to new information.But in fact, as I will discuss in more detail later, long-run inflation expectations do vary over time. That is, they are not perfectlyanchoredin real economies; moreover, the extent to which they are anchored can change, depending on economic developments and (most important) the current and past conduct of monetary policy. In this context, I use the term "anchored" to mean relatively insensitive to incoming data. So, for example, if the public experiences a spell of inflation higher than their long-run expectation, but their long-run expectation of inflation changes little as a result, then inflation expectations are well anchored. If, on the other hand, the public reacts to a short period of higher-than-expected inflation by marking up their long-run expectation considerably, then expectations are poorly anchored.Although variations in the extent to which inflation expectations are anchored are not easily handled in a traditional rational-expectations framework, they seem to fit quite naturally into the burgeoning literature on learning in macroeconomics. The premise of this literature is that people do not have full information about the economy or about the objectives of the central bank, but they instead must make statistical inferences about the unknown parameters governing the evolution of the economy. In a learning context, the concept of anchored expectations is easily formalized in a variety of ways; in general, if the public is modeled as being confident in its current estimate of the long-run inflation rate, so that new information has relatively little effect on that estimate, then the essential idea of well-anchored expectations has been captured.Allowing for learning has important implications for how we think about the economy and policy. For example, some work has shown that the process of learning can affect the dynamics and even the potential stability of the economy (see, of many possible examples, Bullard and Mitra, 2002). Considerations of how the public learns about the economy affect the form of optimal monetary policy (Gaspar, Smets, and Vestin, 2006). Notably, in a world with rational expectations and in which private agents are assumed already to understand all aspects of the economic environment, talking about the effects of central bank communication would not be sensible, whereas models with learning accommodate the analysis of communication-related issues quite well (Orphanides and Williams, 2005; Bernanke, 2004). Macroeconomic models with learning also give content to the idea of an economy moving gradually from one regime to another, particularly if the central bank as well as the public is assumed to be updating its beliefs. For example, if the central bank and the public learn from experience that high inflation imposes greater costs and fewer benefits than previously thought, then the equilibrium will adjust toward one with lower inflation and lower inflation expectations. This line of explanation of how economies move between monetary regimes, which has been explored by Sargent and others, strikes me as quite plausible as a historical description (Sargent, 1999). In sum, many of the most interesting issues in contemporary monetary theory require an analytical framework that involves learning by private agents and possibly the central bank as well.Implications of Anchored Inflation ExpectationsWhy do we care about the variability of inflation expectations? As my colleague Rick Mishkin recently discussed, the extent to which inflation expectations are anchored has first-order implications for the performance of inflation and of the economy more generally (Mishkin, 2007). Mishkin illustrated this point by considering the implications of the fact that inflation expectations have become much better anchored over the past thirty years for the estimated coefficients of the conventional Phillips curve, which I define here to encompass specifications that use lagged values of inflation to proxy for expectations or other sources of inflation inertia. As he noted, many studies of the conventional Phillips curve find that the sensitivity of inflation to activity indicators is lower today than in the past (that is, the Phillips curve appears to have become flatter);1and that the long-run effect on inflation of "supply shocks," such as changes in the price of oil, also appears to be lower than in the past (Hooker, 2002). These findings are of much more than academic interest. To the extent that the Phillips curve may have flattened, inflation will now tend to be more stable than in the past in the face of variations in aggregate demand. (Of course, this can be a good thing or a bad thing, depending on whether inflation expectations are anchored in the vicinity of price stability.) Likewise, a lower sensitivity of long-run inflation to supply shocks would imply that such shocks are much less likely to generate economic instability today than they would have been several decades ago. Notably, the sharp increases in energy prices over the past few years have not led either to persistent inflation or to a recession, in contrast (for example) to the U.S. experience of the 1970s.Various factors might account for these changes in the Phillips curve, but, as Mishkin pointed out, better-anchored inflation expectations--themselves, of course, the product of monetary policies that brought inflation down and have kept it relatively stable--certainly play some role. If people set prices and wages with reference to the rate of inflation they expect in the long run and if inflation expectations respond less than previously to variations in economic activity, then inflation itself will become relatively more insensitive to the level of activity--that is, the conventional Phillips curve will be flatter.Similar logic explains the finding that inflation is less responsive than it used to be to changes in oil prices and other supply shocks. Certainly, increases in energy prices affect overall inflation in the short run because energy products such as gasoline are part of the consumer's basket and because energy costs loom large in the production of some goods and services. However, a one-off change in energy prices can translate into persistent inflation only if it leads to higher expected inflation and a consequent "wage-price spiral." With inflation expectations well anchored, a one-time increase in energy prices should not lead to a permanent increase in inflation but only to a change in relative prices. A related implication is that, if inflation expectations are well anchored, changes in energy (and food) prices should have relatively little influence on "core" inflation, that is, inflation excluding the prices of food and energy.Although inflation expectations seem much better anchored today than they were a few decades ago, they appear to remain imperfectly anchored. A number of studies confirm that observation. For example, Grkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) found that long-run inflation expectations, as measured by the difference in yields between nominal and inflation-indexed bonds, move in response to news about the economy, rather than remaining unaffected. Levin, Natalucci, and Piger (2004) have shown that some survey measures of inflation expectations in the United States respond to recent changes in the actual rate of inflation, which would not be the case if expectations were perfectly anchored. Models of the term structure of interest rates better fit the data under the assumption that both inflation expectations and beliefs about the central bank's reaction function are evolving (Kozicki and Tinsley, 2001; Rudebusch and Wu, 2003; Cogley, 2005).An indirect but elegant way to make the point that inflation expectations remain imperfectly anchored comes from a statistical analysis of inflation by Stock and Watson (2007). Stock and Watson model inflation as having two components, which may be interpreted as the trend and the cycle. Changes in the trend component are highly persistent whereas shocks to the cyclical component are temporary.2The key finding of this research is that the variability of the trend component of inflation (and thus the share of the overall variability of inflation that it can explain) appears to have fallen significantly after about 1983. That is, unexpected changes in inflation are today much more likely to be transitory than they were before the early 1980s. Because it seems quite unlikely that changes in inflation could persist indefinitely unless long-run expectations of inflation also changed, I interpret the Stock-Watson finding as consistent with the view that inflation expectations have become much more anchored since the early 1980s. At the same time, that the variability of the trend component of inflation, though modest, remains positive, implies that long-run expectations of inflation are not perfectly anchored today.The policy implications of the much-improved but still imperfect anchoring of inflation expectations are not at all straightforward. To evaluate these implications, we must understand better the historical variation in inflation expectations, the effect of this variation on actual inflation and economic activity, and the relationship between policy actions and the formation of inflation expectations. With the hope of promoting progress on these broad topics, I pose three questions to researchers, the answer to any of which would be quite useful for practical policymaking.First, how should the central bank best monitor the public's inflation expectations? Theoretical treatments tend to neglect the fact that in practice many measures of inflation expectations exist, including the forecasts of professional economists, results from surveys of consumers, information extracted from financial markets such as the market for inflation-indexed debt, and limited information on firms' pricing plans. In a very interesting paper, Mankiw, Reis, and Wolfers (2003) compared the available measures, emphasizing in particular that median measures of inflation expectations often obscure substantial cross-sectional dispersion of expectations.3On which measure or combination of measures should central bankers focus to assess inflation developments and the degree to which expectations are anchored? Do we need new measures of expectations or new surveys? Information on the price expectations of businesses--who are, after all, the price setters in the first instance--as well as information on nominal wage expectations is particularly scarce.Second, how do changes in various measures of inflation expectations feed through to actual pricing behavior? Promising recent research has looked at price changes at very disaggregated levels for insight into the pricing decision (Bils and Klenow, 2004; Nakamura and Steinsson, 2007). But this research has not yet linked pricing decisions at the microeconomic level to inflation expectations; undertaking that next step would no doubt be difficult but also very valuable.Third, what factors affect the level of inflation expectations and the degree to which they are anchored? Answering this question essentially involves estimating the learning rule followed by the public or various components of the public, although one could consider alternative frameworks like Carroll's (2003) epidemiological model of the propagation of information among private agents. A fuller understanding of the public's learning rules would improve the central bank's capacity to assess its own credibility, to evaluate the implications of its policy decisions and communications strategy, and perhaps to forecast inflation. Realistically calibrated models with learning would also inform our thinking about policy and the economy.Inflation Forecasting at the Federal ReserveI would like to shift gears at this point to tell you a bit about how the Federal Reserve Board staff goes about forecasting inflation. Obviously, this activity provides critical inputs into the making of monetary policy, and as I will discuss, the staff's long-term track record in forecasting inflation is quite good by any reasonable benchmark. I hope that my brief description will stimulate your interest in the complex and challenging problems of real-time macroeconomic forecasting. But, as you will see, the discussion of practical inflation forecasting will bring us back to one theme of my remarks--that our ability to forecast inflation and predict how inflation will respond to policy actions depends very much on our capacity to measure and to understand what determines the public's expectations of inflation.The Board staff employs a variety of formal models, both structural and purely statistical, in its forecasting efforts. However, the forecasts of inflation (and of other key macroeconomic variables) that are provided to the Federal Open Market Committee are developed through an eclectic process that combines model-based projections, anecdotal and other "extra-model" information, and professional judgment. In short, for all the advances that have been made in modeling and statistical analysis, practical forecasting continues to involve art as well as science.The forecasting procedures used depend importantly on the forecast horizon. For near-term inflation forecasting--say, for the current quarter and the next--the staff relies most heavily on a disaggregated, bottom-up approach that focuses on estimating and forecasting price behavior for the various categories of goods and services that make up the aggregate price index in question. For example, we know from historical experience that the prices of some types of goods and services tend to be quite volatile, including not only (as is well known) the prices of energy and some types of food but also some "core" prices such as airfares, apparel prices, and hotel rates. The monthly autocorrelations of price changes in these categories tend to be low or even negative. In contrast, changes in inflation rates in some services categories, such as shelter costs, tend to be more persistent. In assessing what price changes in a particular category imply for future price changes in that category, the staff uses not only various forms of time-series analysis but also specialized knowledge about how the various indexes are constructed--for example, whether certain categories are sampled every month in all localities and how seasonal adjustments are performed. In making very near-term price forecasts, the staff also uses diverse information from a variety of sources, such as surveys of prices of gasoline and other important items, news reports about price-change announcements, and anecdotal information from our business contacts. Conceptually, one might think of this effort to distinguish transitory from persistent price changes as a more nuanced way of estimating the underlying inflation trend, analogous to the trend measures provided by more mechanical indicators such as trimmed-mean or weighted-median inflation rates.An accurate forecast of very near-term inflation is important not only for its own sake but also because it provides a better "jumping-off point" for the longer-term forecast. Because inflation continues to exhibit some inertia, improved near-term forecasts translate into more-accurate longer-term projections as well.For forecasting horizons beyond a quarter or two, detailed analyses of individual price components become less useful, and thus the staff's emphasis shifts to inflation's fundamental determinants. Food and energy inflation are forecasted separately from the core, using information from futures prices and other sources. However, forecasts of core inflation must take into account the extent to which food and energy costs are passed through to other prices.To project core inflation at longer-term horizons, the staff consults a range of econometric models. Most of the models used are based on versions of the new Keynesian Phillips curve, which links inflation to inflation expectations, the extent of economic slack, and indicators of supply shocks. Despite the common conceptual framework, the model specifications employed differ considerably in their details, including how lagged inflation enters the equation, how resource utilization is measured, and whether a survey-based measure of inflation expectations is included. In principle, formal econometric tests could determine how much weight should be put on the forecast of each model, but in practice the data do not permit sharp inferences; moreover, estimated forecasting equations may not reflect information about special factors affecting the outlook. Because of these considerations, as I have already noted, the staff's inflation forecasts inevitably reflect a substantial degree of expert judgment and the use of information not captured by the models.Another reason for the reliance on judgment in the forecasting process is the practical requirement that the forecast for inflation be consistent with the staff's overall view of the economy, including the forecasts for key economic variables such as wages, interest rates, and consumption spending. Achieving this consistency requires a thoughtful understanding of why sectoral forecasts may be at odds and how best to reconcile those differences. Again, in principle, consistency of sectoral forecasts could be ensured by estimating the inflation equation as part of a general equilibrium system. Indeed, considerable progress has been made in recent years, at the Board and elsewhere, in developing dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models detailed enough for policy application. These models have become increasingly useful for policy analysis and for the simulation of alternative scenarios. They are likely to play a more significant role in the forecasting process over time as well, though, like other formal methods, they are unlikely to displace expert judgment.A potential drawback of the simple Phillips curve model for analyzing and forecasting inflation is that it does not explicitly incorporate the possible influence of labor costs on the inflation process. The Board's large macroeconomic simulation model, known as FRB/US, projects inflation through a system approach that captures the interaction of wage and price determination. Interestingly, however, the system approach does not seem to forecast price inflation as well as single-equation Phillips curve models do. This weaker performance appears to reflect, at least in part, the shortcomings of the available data on labor compensation. The two principal quarterly indicators of aggregate hourly compensation are the employment cost index (ECI) and nonfarm compensation per hour (CPH). Both are imperfect measures of the labor costs relevant to pricing decisions. For example, the ECI's fixed employment and occupation weights may not reflect changes in the labor market, and the ECI excludes stock options and similar forms of payment. CPH is volatile, perhaps in part because it measures stock options at exercise rather than when granted, and it is subject to substantial revisions. Moreover, these two hourly compensation measures often give contradictory signals. Despite these problems, labor market developments certainly influence how the staff and policymakers view the inflation process and inflation risks, illustrating yet another point in the forecasting process at which judgment must play an important role. In particular, in evaluating labor-market conditions and trends in labor costs, the staff takes note of a wide range of data, anecdotes, and other qualitative information as well as the official data on compensation.Overall, the Board staff's inflation forecasting has been remarkably good, at least compared with the available alternatives (Romer and Romer, 2000; Sims, 2002). To cite a recent study, Faust and Wright (2007) show that real-time staff forecasts of inflation reliably outperform statistical benchmarks at all horizons and that this advantage is not solely the result of the staff's expertise at estimating near-term inflation rates.To link this discussion of forecasting to the first portion of my remarks, I turn to the treatment of inflation expectations in staff forecasts. As I noted earlier, while inflation expectations doubtless are crucial determinants of observed inflation, measuring expectations and inferring just how they affect inflation are difficult tasks. A popular shortcut is to include lagged inflation terms in the Phillips curve equation; besides being a convenient means of capturing the inertial component in inflation, the estimated coefficients on lagged inflation almost certainly reflect to some degree the formation of inflation expectations and their influence on the inflation process. However, using lagged inflation as a proxy for inflation expectations has drawbacks, notably its susceptibility to the Lucas critique.4The staff consequently analyzes a number of survey measures of inflation expectations. One question in choosing among measures of expectations is whether to focus on measures of short-term inflation expectations (say, twelve months ahead) or of longer-term expectations (five to ten years ahead). Generally, measures of longer-term inflation expectations, such as the five-to-ten-year expected inflation measures from the Michigan/Reuters survey of households and from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, seem to be better gauges of the expectations that influence wage- and price-setting behavior.The staff also looks at measures derived from comparing yields on nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury securities (the breakeven inflation rate). Measures of inflation compensation derived from the market for inflation-indexed securities are influenced by changes in inflation risk premiums and liquidity premiums, and analyses are constrained by the fact that these markets have been operating in the United States for only a relatively short period. Nevertheless, unlike survey measures, breakeven inflation rates are determined in a market in which investors back their views with real money. Moreover, breakeven measures of inflation expectations provide information on the expectations of a different group of agents--financial-market participants--which can be compared with the views of economists and consumers as represented by surveys.Measurement is only one aspect of understanding inflation expectations. We also need a better understanding of how inflation expectations affect actual inflation and of the factors that determine inflation expectations. I will say a few words about the latter issue in the context of the practical problems of forecasting and policy analysis faced by the staff of the Federal Reserve Board.Model-based simulations of the inflation process are useful tools for both forecasting and policy analysis. In conducting such simulations, the analyst must specify how inflation expectations are formed--in particular, how they react to actual changes in the economy and in policy. In most simulations of the FRB/US model, the public is assumed to update its inflation projections based on the historical relationship between inflation and other key economic variables. Essentially, this approach assumes that the public updates its inflation expectations in a sensible way based on economic developments but does not assume that the public has full knowledge of the underlying model of the economy, consistent with the structure of learning models (Brayton and others, 1997).Recent staff work at the Board has analyzed the implications of expanding the set of variables allowed to influence the public's long-term inflation expectations to include, among others, the federal funds rate.5If the public's long-term inflation expectations are influenced directly by Fed actions, as this specification suggests, a number of interesting implications follow. One is that the output costs of disinflation may be lower than those suggested by reduced-form-type Phillips curves. Intuitively, if the Fed attempts to disinflate by raising the federal funds rate, the disinflationary effect will be felt not only through the usual output gap channel but also through a direct restraint on long-term inflation expectations. This interpretation is consistent with some analyses of the Volcker disinflation; although the costs of that disinflation were high, they were perhaps less than economists would have predicted in advance, given conventional estimates of the sacrifice ratio (Erceg and Levin, 2003).To be sure, this and similar analyses remain speculative. A good deal more must be done before such work proves a reliable basis for policy choices. Nevertheless, I hope this example illustrates for you the theme of my remarks, that a deeper understanding of the determinants and effects of the public's expectations of inflation could have significant practical payoffs.ReferencesBernanke, Ben (2004)."Fedspeak,"at the meetings of the American Economic Association, San Diego, California, January 3, 2004.Bils, Mark and Peter Klenow (2004)."Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 112 (October), pp. 847-85.Bullard, James, and Kaushik Mitra (2002)."Learning about Monetary Policy Rules,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 49(September), pp. 1105-29.Brayton, Flint, Eileen Mauskopf, David Reifschneider, Peter Tinsley, and John Williams (1997)."The Role of Expectations in the FRB/US Macroeconomic Model,"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 83(April), pp. 227-45.Carroll, Christopher D. (2003)."Macroeconomic Expectations of Households and Professional Forecasters,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 118 (February), pp. 269-98.Cogley, Timothy (2005)."Changing Beliefs and the Term Structure of Interest Rates: Cross-Equation Restrictions with Drifting Parameters,"Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 8 (April), pp. 420-51.Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas J. Sargent (2007)."Inflation Gap Persistence in the U.S. (5.7 MB PDF)"University of California, Davis, working paper, January.Erceg, Christopher, and Andrew Levin (2003)."Imperfect Credibility and Inflation Persistence,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (May), pp. 915-44.Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2007)."Comparing Greenbook and Reduced Form Forecasts Using a Large Realtime Dataset (259 KB PDF),"Johns Hopkins University and Board of Governors, working paper.Gaspar, Vitor, Frank Smets, and David Vestin (2006)."Adaptive Learning, Persistence, and Optimal Monetary Policy,"Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 4 (April-May), pp. 376-85.Gordon, Robert J. (2007)."Phillips Curve Specification and the Decline in U.S. Output and Inflation Volatility (1.1 MB PDF),"presented at the Symposium on The Phillips Curve and the Natural Rate of Unemployment, Institut fr Weltwirtschaft, Kiel, Germany, June 3-4.Grkaynak, Refet, Brian Sack, and Eric Swanson (2005)."The Sensitivity of Long-term Interest Rates to Economic News: Evidence and Implications for Macroeconomic Models,"American Economic Review, vol. 95 (March), pp. 425-36.Hooker, Mark (2002)."Are Oil Shocks Inflationary? Asymmetric and Nonlinear Specifications versus Changes in Regime,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 34 (May), pp. 540-61.Kozicki, Sharon, and Peter Tinsley (2001)."Shifting Endpoints in the Term Structure of Interest Rates,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 47(June), pp. 613-52.Levin, Andrew, Fabio Natalucci, and Jeremy Piger (2004)."The Macroeconomic Effects of Inflation Targeting (406 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Review, vol. 86 (July), pp. 51-80.Mankiw, N. Gregory, Ricardo Reis, and Justin Wolfers (2003). "Disagreement about Inflation Expectations," NBERMacroeconomics Annual, pp. 209-248.Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007)."Inflation Dynamics,"National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 13147, June.Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson (2007)."Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu Cost Models (577 KB PDF),"Harvard University, working paper, May.Nason, James (2006)."Instability in U.S. Inflation: 1967-2005,"Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,Economic Review, vol. 91 (Second Quarter), pp. 39-59.Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (2005)."Inflation Scares and Forecast-based Monetary Policy,"Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 8 (April), pp. 498-527.Roberts, John (2006)."Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 2 (September), pp. 193-230.Romer, Christina, and David Romer (2000)."Federal Reserve Information and the Behavior of Interest Rates,"American Economic Review, vol. 90 (June), pp. 429-57.Rudebusch, Glenn, and Tao Wu (2003)."A Macro-Finance Model of the Term Structure, Monetary Policy, and the Economy (562 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2003-17, September.Sargent, Thomas J. (1999).The Conquest of American Inflation. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.Sims, Christopher (2002). "The Role of Models and Probabilities in the Monetary Policy Process,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2, pp. 1-40.Stock, James, and Mark Watson (2007)."Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 39 (February), pp. 3-34.Footnotes1.Roberts (2006) provides a recent overview. He attributes most of the "flattening" of the Phillips curve to changes in the conduct of monetary policy.See also Nason (2006). Gordon (2007) provides an opposing view.Return to text2.Stock and Watson assume that transitory shocks last only one quarter. Cogley and Sargent (2007) explore the Stock-Watson specification in more detail, arguing that the transitory component of inflation is best modeled as having somewhat greater persistence.Return to text3.A particularly valuable part of the paper is a case study of the evolution of expectations during the Volcker disinflation of 1979-1982. Histograms of the quarterly range of inflation expectations show only a very gradual adjustment of inflation expectations as the disinflation proceeded, with significant reductions in expectations occurring only in the third year of the disinflation. Moreover, the range of disagreement widened (and even became somewhat bimodal) as individual respondents evidently differed in their willingness to accept the Fed"s declared commitment to reducing inflation as being a true break from the past. Capturing this behavior in a formal model would be challenging but worthwhile.Return to text4.The Lucas critique holds that reduced-form empirical relationships estimated on historical data may break down when policies change.Return to text5.In this empirical work, the public"s long-run inflation expectations are proxied for by the long-run inflation projections taken from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (Mishkin, 2007).Return to text Today I will offer a few remarks on the relationships among monetary policy, inflation, and the public's expectations of inflation, focusing--as seems appropriate for this audience--on some important open questions. I will also give a short overview of the way the Federal Reserve Board staff forecasts inflation, including some discussion of how the staff incorporates information about expected inflation into its forecasting process. As you know, the control of inflation is central to good monetary policy. Price stability, which is one leg of the Federal Reserve's dual mandate from the Congress, is a good thing in itself, for reasons that economists understand much better today than they did a few decades ago. Inflation injects noise into the price system, makes long-term financial planning more complex, and interacts in perverse ways with imperfectly indexed tax and accounting rules. In the short-to-medium term, the maintenance of price stability helps avoid the pattern of stop-go monetary policies that were the source of much instability in output and employment in the past. More fundamentally, experience suggests that high and persistent inflation undermines public confidence in the economy and in the management of economic policy generally, with potentially adverse effects on risk-taking, investment, and other productive activities that are sensitive to the public's assessments of the prospects for future economic stability. In the long term, low inflation promotes growth, efficiency, and stability--which, all else being equal, support maximum sustainable employment, the other leg of the mandate given to the Federal Reserve by the Congress. Admittedly, measuring the long-term relationship between growth or productivity and inflation is difficult. For example, it may be that low inflation has accompanied good economic performance in part because countries that maintain low inflation tend to pursue other sound economic policies as well. Still, I think we can agree that, at a minimum, the opposite proposition--that inflationary policies promote employment growth in the long run--has been entirely discredited and, indeed, that policies based on this proposition have led to very bad outcomes whenever they have been applied. Inflation Expectations: Conceptual FrameworksUndoubtedly, the state of inflation expectations greatly influences actual inflation and thus the central bank's ability to achieve price stability. But what do we mean, precisely, by "the state of inflation expectations"? How should we measure inflation expectations, and how should we use that information for forecasting and controlling inflation? I certainly do not have complete answers to those questions, but I believe that they are of great practical importance. I hope my remarks here will stimulate some of you to work on these issues. What is the right conceptual framework for thinking about inflation expectations in the current context? The traditional rational-expectations model of inflation and inflation expectations has been a useful workhorse for thinking about issues of credibility and institutional design, but, to my mind, it is less helpful for thinking about economies in which (1) the structure of the economy is constantly evolving in ways that are imperfectly understood by both the public and policymakers and (2) the policymakers' objective function is not fully known by private agents. In particular, together with the assumption that the central bank's objective function is fixed and known to the public, the traditional rational-expectations approach implies that the public has firm knowledge of the long-run equilibrium inflation rate; consequently, their long-run inflation expectations do not vary over time in response to new information. But in fact, as I will discuss in more detail later, long-run inflation expectations do vary over time. That is, they are not perfectlyanchoredin real economies; moreover, the extent to which they are anchored can change, depending on economic developments and (most important) the current and past conduct of monetary policy. In this context, I use the term "anchored" to mean relatively insensitive to incoming data. So, for example, if the public experiences a spell of inflation higher than their long-run expectation, but their long-run expectation of inflation changes little as a result, then inflation expectations are well anchored. If, on the other hand, the public reacts to a short period of higher-than-expected inflation by marking up their long-run expectation considerably, then expectations are poorly anchored. Although variations in the extent to which inflation expectations are anchored are not easily handled in a traditional rational-expectations framework, they seem to fit quite naturally into the burgeoning literature on learning in macroeconomics. The premise of this literature is that people do not have full information about the economy or about the objectives of the central bank, but they instead must make statistical inferences about the unknown parameters governing the evolution of the economy. In a learning context, the concept of anchored expectations is easily formalized in a variety of ways; in general, if the public is modeled as being confident in its current estimate of the long-run inflation rate, so that new information has relatively little effect on that estimate, then the essential idea of well-anchored expectations has been captured. Allowing for learning has important implications for how we think about the economy and policy. For example, some work has shown that the process of learning can affect the dynamics and even the potential stability of the economy (see, of many possible examples, Bullard and Mitra, 2002). Considerations of how the public learns about the economy affect the form of optimal monetary policy (Gaspar, Smets, and Vestin, 2006). Notably, in a world with rational expectations and in which private agents are assumed already to understand all aspects of the economic environment, talking about the effects of central bank communication would not be sensible, whereas models with learning accommodate the analysis of communication-related issues quite well (Orphanides and Williams, 2005; Bernanke, 2004). Macroeconomic models with learning also give content to the idea of an economy moving gradually from one regime to another, particularly if the central bank as well as the public is assumed to be updating its beliefs. For example, if the central bank and the public learn from experience that high inflation imposes greater costs and fewer benefits than previously thought, then the equilibrium will adjust toward one with lower inflation and lower inflation expectations. This line of explanation of how economies move between monetary regimes, which has been explored by Sargent and others, strikes me as quite plausible as a historical description (Sargent, 1999). In sum, many of the most interesting issues in contemporary monetary theory require an analytical framework that involves learning by private agents and possibly the central bank as well. Implications of Anchored Inflation ExpectationsWhy do we care about the variability of inflation expectations? As my colleague Rick Mishkin recently discussed, the extent to which inflation expectations are anchored has first-order implications for the performance of inflation and of the economy more generally (Mishkin, 2007). Mishkin illustrated this point by considering the implications of the fact that inflation expectations have become much better anchored over the past thirty years for the estimated coefficients of the conventional Phillips curve, which I define here to encompass specifications that use lagged values of inflation to proxy for expectations or other sources of inflation inertia. As he noted, many studies of the conventional Phillips curve find that the sensitivity of inflation to activity indicators is lower today than in the past (that is, the Phillips curve appears to have become flatter);1and that the long-run effect on inflation of "supply shocks," such as changes in the price of oil, also appears to be lower than in the past (Hooker, 2002). These findings are of much more than academic interest. To the extent that the Phillips curve may have flattened, inflation will now tend to be more stable than in the past in the face of variations in aggregate demand. (Of course, this can be a good thing or a bad thing, depending on whether inflation expectations are anchored in the vicinity of price stability.) Likewise, a lower sensitivity of long-run inflation to supply shocks would imply that such shocks are much less likely to generate economic instability today than they would have been several decades ago. Notably, the sharp increases in energy prices over the past few years have not led either to persistent inflation or to a recession, in contrast (for example) to the U.S. experience of the 1970s. Various factors might account for these changes in the Phillips curve, but, as Mishkin pointed out, better-anchored inflation expectations--themselves, of course, the product of monetary policies that brought inflation down and have kept it relatively stable--certainly play some role. If people set prices and wages with reference to the rate of inflation they expect in the long run and if inflation expectations respond less than previously to variations in economic activity, then inflation itself will become relatively more insensitive to the level of activity--that is, the conventional Phillips curve will be flatter. Similar logic explains the finding that inflation is less responsive than it used to be to changes in oil prices and other supply shocks. Certainly, increases in energy prices affect overall inflation in the short run because energy products such as gasoline are part of the consumer's basket and because energy costs loom large in the production of some goods and services. However, a one-off change in energy prices can translate into persistent inflation only if it leads to higher expected inflation and a consequent "wage-price spiral." With inflation expectations well anchored, a one-time increase in energy prices should not lead to a permanent increase in inflation but only to a change in relative prices. A related implication is that, if inflation expectations are well anchored, changes in energy (and food) prices should have relatively little influence on "core" inflation, that is, inflation excluding the prices of food and energy. Although inflation expectations seem much better anchored today than they were a few decades ago, they appear to remain imperfectly anchored. A number of studies confirm that observation. For example, Grkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) found that long-run inflation expectations, as measured by the difference in yields between nominal and inflation-indexed bonds, move in response to news about the economy, rather than remaining unaffected. Levin, Natalucci, and Piger (2004) have shown that some survey measures of inflation expectations in the United States respond to recent changes in the actual rate of inflation, which would not be the case if expectations were perfectly anchored. Models of the term structure of interest rates better fit the data under the assumption that both inflation expectations and beliefs about the central bank's reaction function are evolving (Kozicki and Tinsley, 2001; Rudebusch and Wu, 2003; Cogley, 2005). An indirect but elegant way to make the point that inflation expectations remain imperfectly anchored comes from a statistical analysis of inflation by Stock and Watson (2007). Stock and Watson model inflation as having two components, which may be interpreted as the trend and the cycle. Changes in the trend component are highly persistent whereas shocks to the cyclical component are temporary.2The key finding of this research is that the variability of the trend component of inflation (and thus the share of the overall variability of inflation that it can explain) appears to have fallen significantly after about 1983. That is, unexpected changes in inflation are today much more likely to be transitory than they were before the early 1980s. Because it seems quite unlikely that changes in inflation could persist indefinitely unless long-run expectations of inflation also changed, I interpret the Stock-Watson finding as consistent with the view that inflation expectations have become much more anchored since the early 1980s. At the same time, that the variability of the trend component of inflation, though modest, remains positive, implies that long-run expectations of inflation are not perfectly anchored today. The policy implications of the much-improved but still imperfect anchoring of inflation expectations are not at all straightforward. To evaluate these implications, we must understand better the historical variation in inflation expectations, the effect of this variation on actual inflation and economic activity, and the relationship between policy actions and the formation of inflation expectations. With the hope of promoting progress on these broad topics, I pose three questions to researchers, the answer to any of which would be quite useful for practical policymaking. First, how should the central bank best monitor the public's inflation expectations? Theoretical treatments tend to neglect the fact that in practice many measures of inflation expectations exist, including the forecasts of professional economists, results from surveys of consumers, information extracted from financial markets such as the market for inflation-indexed debt, and limited information on firms' pricing plans. In a very interesting paper, Mankiw, Reis, and Wolfers (2003) compared the available measures, emphasizing in particular that median measures of inflation expectations often obscure substantial cross-sectional dispersion of expectations.3On which measure or combination of measures should central bankers focus to assess inflation developments and the degree to which expectations are anchored? Do we need new measures of expectations or new surveys? Information on the price expectations of businesses--who are, after all, the price setters in the first instance--as well as information on nominal wage expectations is particularly scarce. Second, how do changes in various measures of inflation expectations feed through to actual pricing behavior? Promising recent research has looked at price changes at very disaggregated levels for insight into the pricing decision (Bils and Klenow, 2004; Nakamura and Steinsson, 2007). But this research has not yet linked pricing decisions at the microeconomic level to inflation expectations; undertaking that next step would no doubt be difficult but also very valuable. Third, what factors affect the level of inflation expectations and the degree to which they are anchored? Answering this question essentially involves estimating the learning rule followed by the public or various components of the public, although one could consider alternative frameworks like Carroll's (2003) epidemiological model of the propagation of information among private agents. A fuller understanding of the public's learning rules would improve the central bank's capacity to assess its own credibility, to evaluate the implications of its policy decisions and communications strategy, and perhaps to forecast inflation. Realistically calibrated models with learning would also inform our thinking about policy and the economy. Inflation Forecasting at the Federal ReserveI would like to shift gears at this point to tell you a bit about how the Federal Reserve Board staff goes about forecasting inflation. Obviously, this activity provides critical inputs into the making of monetary policy, and as I will discuss, the staff's long-term track record in forecasting inflation is quite good by any reasonable benchmark. I hope that my brief description will stimulate your interest in the complex and challenging problems of real-time macroeconomic forecasting. But, as you will see, the discussion of practical inflation forecasting will bring us back to one theme of my remarks--that our ability to forecast inflation and predict how inflation will respond to policy actions depends very much on our capacity to measure and to understand what determines the public's expectations of inflation. The Board staff employs a variety of formal models, both structural and purely statistical, in its forecasting efforts. However, the forecasts of inflation (and of other key macroeconomic variables) that are provided to the Federal Open Market Committee are developed through an eclectic process that combines model-based projections, anecdotal and other "extra-model" information, and professional judgment. In short, for all the advances that have been made in modeling and statistical analysis, practical forecasting continues to involve art as well as science. The forecasting procedures used depend importantly on the forecast horizon. For near-term inflation forecasting--say, for the current quarter and the next--the staff relies most heavily on a disaggregated, bottom-up approach that focuses on estimating and forecasting price behavior for the various categories of goods and services that make up the aggregate price index in question. For example, we know from historical experience that the prices of some types of goods and services tend to be quite volatile, including not only (as is well known) the prices of energy and some types of food but also some "core" prices such as airfares, apparel prices, and hotel rates. The monthly autocorrelations of price changes in these categories tend to be low or even negative. In contrast, changes in inflation rates in some services categories, such as shelter costs, tend to be more persistent. In assessing what price changes in a particular category imply for future price changes in that category, the staff uses not only various forms of time-series analysis but also specialized knowledge about how the various indexes are constructed--for example, whether certain categories are sampled every month in all localities and how seasonal adjustments are performed. In making very near-term price forecasts, the staff also uses diverse information from a variety of sources, such as surveys of prices of gasoline and other important items, news reports about price-change announcements, and anecdotal information from our business contacts. Conceptually, one might think of this effort to distinguish transitory from persistent price changes as a more nuanced way of estimating the underlying inflation trend, analogous to the trend measures provided by more mechanical indicators such as trimmed-mean or weighted-median inflation rates. An accurate forecast of very near-term inflation is important not only for its own sake but also because it provides a better "jumping-off point" for the longer-term forecast. Because inflation continues to exhibit some inertia, improved near-term forecasts translate into more-accurate longer-term projections as well. For forecasting horizons beyond a quarter or two, detailed analyses of individual price components become less useful, and thus the staff's emphasis shifts to inflation's fundamental determinants. Food and energy inflation are forecasted separately from the core, using information from futures prices and other sources. However, forecasts of core inflation must take into account the extent to which food and energy costs are passed through to other prices. To project core inflation at longer-term horizons, the staff consults a range of econometric models. Most of the models used are based on versions of the new Keynesian Phillips curve, which links inflation to inflation expectations, the extent of economic slack, and indicators of supply shocks. Despite the common conceptual framework, the model specifications employed differ considerably in their details, including how lagged inflation enters the equation, how resource utilization is measured, and whether a survey-based measure of inflation expectations is included. In principle, formal econometric tests could determine how much weight should be put on the forecast of each model, but in practice the data do not permit sharp inferences; moreover, estimated forecasting equations may not reflect information about special factors affecting the outlook. Because of these considerations, as I have already noted, the staff's inflation forecasts inevitably reflect a substantial degree of expert judgment and the use of information not captured by the models. Another reason for the reliance on judgment in the forecasting process is the practical requirement that the forecast for inflation be consistent with the staff's overall view of the economy, including the forecasts for key economic variables such as wages, interest rates, and consumption spending. Achieving this consistency requires a thoughtful understanding of why sectoral forecasts may be at odds and how best to reconcile those differences. Again, in principle, consistency of sectoral forecasts could be ensured by estimating the inflation equation as part of a general equilibrium system. Indeed, considerable progress has been made in recent years, at the Board and elsewhere, in developing dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models detailed enough for policy application. These models have become increasingly useful for policy analysis and for the simulation of alternative scenarios. They are likely to play a more significant role in the forecasting process over time as well, though, like other formal methods, they are unlikely to displace expert judgment. A potential drawback of the simple Phillips curve model for analyzing and forecasting inflation is that it does not explicitly incorporate the possible influence of labor costs on the inflation process. The Board's large macroeconomic simulation model, known as FRB/US, projects inflation through a system approach that captures the interaction of wage and price determination. Interestingly, however, the system approach does not seem to forecast price inflation as well as single-equation Phillips curve models do. This weaker performance appears to reflect, at least in part, the shortcomings of the available data on labor compensation. The two principal quarterly indicators of aggregate hourly compensation are the employment cost index (ECI) and nonfarm compensation per hour (CPH). Both are imperfect measures of the labor costs relevant to pricing decisions. For example, the ECI's fixed employment and occupation weights may not reflect changes in the labor market, and the ECI excludes stock options and similar forms of payment. CPH is volatile, perhaps in part because it measures stock options at exercise rather than when granted, and it is subject to substantial revisions. Moreover, these two hourly compensation measures often give contradictory signals. Despite these problems, labor market developments certainly influence how the staff and policymakers view the inflation process and inflation risks, illustrating yet another point in the forecasting process at which judgment must play an important role. In particular, in evaluating labor-market conditions and trends in labor costs, the staff takes note of a wide range of data, anecdotes, and other qualitative information as well as the official data on compensation. Overall, the Board staff's inflation forecasting has been remarkably good, at least compared with the available alternatives (Romer and Romer, 2000; Sims, 2002). To cite a recent study, Faust and Wright (2007) show that real-time staff forecasts of inflation reliably outperform statistical benchmarks at all horizons and that this advantage is not solely the result of the staff's expertise at estimating near-term inflation rates. To link this discussion of forecasting to the first portion of my remarks, I turn to the treatment of inflation expectations in staff forecasts. As I noted earlier, while inflation expectations doubtless are crucial determinants of observed inflation, measuring expectations and inferring just how they affect inflation are difficult tasks. A popular shortcut is to include lagged inflation terms in the Phillips curve equation; besides being a convenient means of capturing the inertial component in inflation, the estimated coefficients on lagged inflation almost certainly reflect to some degree the formation of inflation expectations and their influence on the inflation process. However, using lagged inflation as a proxy for inflation expectations has drawbacks, notably its susceptibility to the Lucas critique.4The staff consequently analyzes a number of survey measures of inflation expectations. One question in choosing among measures of expectations is whether to focus on measures of short-term inflation expectations (say, twelve months ahead) or of longer-term expectations (five to ten years ahead). Generally, measures of longer-term inflation expectations, such as the five-to-ten-year expected inflation measures from the Michigan/Reuters survey of households and from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, seem to be better gauges of the expectations that influence wage- and price-setting behavior. The staff also looks at measures derived from comparing yields on nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury securities (the breakeven inflation rate). Measures of inflation compensation derived from the market for inflation-indexed securities are influenced by changes in inflation risk premiums and liquidity premiums, and analyses are constrained by the fact that these markets have been operating in the United States for only a relatively short period. Nevertheless, unlike survey measures, breakeven inflation rates are determined in a market in which investors back their views with real money. Moreover, breakeven measures of inflation expectations provide information on the expectations of a different group of agents--financial-market participants--which can be compared with the views of economists and consumers as represented by surveys. Measurement is only one aspect of understanding inflation expectations. We also need a better understanding of how inflation expectations affect actual inflation and of the factors that determine inflation expectations. I will say a few words about the latter issue in the context of the practical problems of forecasting and policy analysis faced by the staff of the Federal Reserve Board. Model-based simulations of the inflation process are useful tools for both forecasting and policy analysis. In conducting such simulations, the analyst must specify how inflation expectations are formed--in particular, how they react to actual changes in the economy and in policy. In most simulations of the FRB/US model, the public is assumed to update its inflation projections based on the historical relationship between inflation and other key economic variables. Essentially, this approach assumes that the public updates its inflation expectations in a sensible way based on economic developments but does not assume that the public has full knowledge of the underlying model of the economy, consistent with the structure of learning models (Brayton and others, 1997). Recent staff work at the Board has analyzed the implications of expanding the set of variables allowed to influence the public's long-term inflation expectations to include, among others, the federal funds rate.5If the public's long-term inflation expectations are influenced directly by Fed actions, as this specification suggests, a number of interesting implications follow. One is that the output costs of disinflation may be lower than those suggested by reduced-form-type Phillips curves. Intuitively, if the Fed attempts to disinflate by raising the federal funds rate, the disinflationary effect will be felt not only through the usual output gap channel but also through a direct restraint on long-term inflation expectations. This interpretation is consistent with some analyses of the Volcker disinflation; although the costs of that disinflation were high, they were perhaps less than economists would have predicted in advance, given conventional estimates of the sacrifice ratio (Erceg and Levin, 2003). To be sure, this and similar analyses remain speculative. A good deal more must be done before such work proves a reliable basis for policy choices. Nevertheless, I hope this example illustrates for you the theme of my remarks, that a deeper understanding of the determinants and effects of the public's expectations of inflation could have significant practical payoffs. References Bernanke, Ben (2004)."Fedspeak,"at the meetings of the American Economic Association, San Diego, California, January 3, 2004. Bils, Mark and Peter Klenow (2004)."Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 112 (October), pp. 847-85. Bullard, James, and Kaushik Mitra (2002)."Learning about Monetary Policy Rules,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 49(September), pp. 1105-29. Brayton, Flint, Eileen Mauskopf, David Reifschneider, Peter Tinsley, and John Williams (1997)."The Role of Expectations in the FRB/US Macroeconomic Model,"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 83(April), pp. 227-45. Carroll, Christopher D. (2003)."Macroeconomic Expectations of Households and Professional Forecasters,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 118 (February), pp. 269-98. Cogley, Timothy (2005)."Changing Beliefs and the Term Structure of Interest Rates: Cross-Equation Restrictions with Drifting Parameters,"Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 8 (April), pp. 420-51. Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas J. Sargent (2007)."Inflation Gap Persistence in the U.S. (5.7 MB PDF)"University of California, Davis, working paper, January. Erceg, Christopher, and Andrew Levin (2003)."Imperfect Credibility and Inflation Persistence,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (May), pp. 915-44. Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2007)."Comparing Greenbook and Reduced Form Forecasts Using a Large Realtime Dataset (259 KB PDF),"Johns Hopkins University and Board of Governors, working paper. Gaspar, Vitor, Frank Smets, and David Vestin (2006)."Adaptive Learning, Persistence, and Optimal Monetary Policy,"Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 4 (April-May), pp. 376-85. Gordon, Robert J. (2007)."Phillips Curve Specification and the Decline in U.S. Output and Inflation Volatility (1.1 MB PDF),"presented at the Symposium on The Phillips Curve and the Natural Rate of Unemployment, Institut fr Weltwirtschaft, Kiel, Germany, June 3-4. Grkaynak, Refet, Brian Sack, and Eric Swanson (2005)."The Sensitivity of Long-term Interest Rates to Economic News: Evidence and Implications for Macroeconomic Models,"American Economic Review, vol. 95 (March), pp. 425-36. Hooker, Mark (2002)."Are Oil Shocks Inflationary? Asymmetric and Nonlinear Specifications versus Changes in Regime,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 34 (May), pp. 540-61. Kozicki, Sharon, and Peter Tinsley (2001)."Shifting Endpoints in the Term Structure of Interest Rates,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 47(June), pp. 613-52. Levin, Andrew, Fabio Natalucci, and Jeremy Piger (2004)."The Macroeconomic Effects of Inflation Targeting (406 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Review, vol. 86 (July), pp. 51-80. Mankiw, N. Gregory, Ricardo Reis, and Justin Wolfers (2003). "Disagreement about Inflation Expectations," NBERMacroeconomics Annual, pp. 209-248. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007)."Inflation Dynamics,"National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 13147, June. Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson (2007)."Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu Cost Models (577 KB PDF),"Harvard University, working paper, May. Nason, James (2006)."Instability in U.S. Inflation: 1967-2005,"Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,Economic Review, vol. 91 (Second Quarter), pp. 39-59. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (2005)."Inflation Scares and Forecast-based Monetary Policy,"Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 8 (April), pp. 498-527. Roberts, John (2006)."Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 2 (September), pp. 193-230. Romer, Christina, and David Romer (2000)."Federal Reserve Information and the Behavior of Interest Rates,"American Economic Review, vol. 90 (June), pp. 429-57. Rudebusch, Glenn, and Tao Wu (2003)."A Macro-Finance Model of the Term Structure, Monetary Policy, and the Economy (562 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2003-17, September. Sargent, Thomas J. (1999).The Conquest of American Inflation. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Sims, Christopher (2002). "The Role of Models and Probabilities in the Monetary Policy Process,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2, pp. 1-40. Stock, James, and Mark Watson (2007)."Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 39 (February), pp. 3-34. Footnotes 1.Roberts (2006) provides a recent overview. He attributes most of the "flattening" of the Phillips curve to changes in the conduct of monetary policy.See also Nason (2006). Gordon (2007) provides an opposing view.Return to text 2.Stock and Watson assume that transitory shocks last only one quarter. Cogley and Sargent (2007) explore the Stock-Watson specification in more detail, arguing that the transitory component of inflation is best modeled as having somewhat greater persistence.Return to text 3.A particularly valuable part of the paper is a case study of the evolution of expectations during the Volcker disinflation of 1979-1982. Histograms of the quarterly range of inflation expectations show only a very gradual adjustment of inflation expectations as the disinflation proceeded, with significant reductions in expectations occurring only in the third year of the disinflation. Moreover, the range of disagreement widened (and even became somewhat bimodal) as individual respondents evidently differed in their willingness to accept the Fed"s declared commitment to reducing inflation as being a true break from the past. Capturing this behavior in a formal model would be challenging but worthwhile.Return to text 4.The Lucas critique holds that reduced-form empirical relationships estimated on historical data may break down when policies change.Return to text 5.In this empirical work, the public"s long-run inflation expectations are proxied for by the long-run inflation projections taken from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (Mishkin, 2007).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the appointment of Maureen Hannan as director of the Division of Information Technology, effective August 5. Hannan began her career at the Board in 1979 as a unit supervisor in the division, which provides information technology services to the Board, the Reserve Banks, and the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council. She was appointed assistant director of the division in 1998, associate director in 2000, and deputy director in 2002.Hannan succeeds Marianne Emerson, who will be leaving after twenty-five years of service at the Board. Hannan studied management at George Mason University and attended Harvard Business Schools Advanced Management Program.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings for May 21 and June 25, 2007.The minutes are attached. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Thursday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on June 27-28, 2007. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Boards Annual Report. The summary description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Boards web site atwww.federalreserve.gov/fomc.Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, June 27-28, 2007.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Prohibition and Order of Assessment of Civil Money Penalty in the amount of $50,000 against Josephine Wang, a former director, controlling shareholder and institution-affiliated party of Asian Bank, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and its parent, Asian Financial Corporation. Ms. Wang, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order which was based on her alleged participation in unsafe and unsound practices, breaches of fiduciary duty and violations of law and regulation by repeatedly overdrawing her accounts at the bank and depositing checks which she knew would be dishonored to cover overdrafts.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Bernanke presented identical testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on July 19, 2007 Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the Federal Reserve'sMonetary Policy Report to the Congress. As you know, this occasion marks the thirtieth year of semiannual testimony on the economy and monetary policy by the Federal Reserve. In establishing these hearings, the Congress proved prescient in anticipating the worldwide trend toward greater transparency and accountability of central banks in the making of monetary policy. Over the years, these testimonies and the associated reports have proved an invaluable vehicle for the Federal Reserve's communication with the public about monetary policy, even as they have served to enhance the Federal Reserve's accountability for achieving the dual objectives of maximum employment and price stability set for it by the Congress. I take this opportunity to reiterate the Federal Reserve's strong support of the dual mandate; in pursuing maximum employment and price stability, monetary policy makes its greatest possible contribution to the general economic welfare. Let me now review the current economic situation and the outlook, beginning with developments in the real economy and the situation regarding inflation before turning to monetary policy. I will conclude with comments on issues related to lending to households and consumer protection--topics not normally addressed in monetary policy testimony but, in light of recent developments, deserving of our attention today. After having run at an above-trend rate earlier in the current economic recovery, U.S. economic growth has proceeded during the past year at a pace more consistent with sustainable expansion. Despite the downshift in growth, the demand for labor has remained solid, with more than 850,000 jobs having been added to payrolls thus far in 2007 and the unemployment rate having remained at 4-1/2 percent. The combination of moderate gains in output and solid advances in employment implies that recent increases in labor productivity have been modest by the standards of the past decade. The cooling of productivity growth in recent quarters is likely the result of cyclical or other temporary factors, but the underlying pace of productivity gains may also have slowed somewhat. To a considerable degree, the slower pace of economic growth in recent quarters reflects the ongoing adjustment in the housing sector. Over the past year, home sales and construction have slowed substantially and house prices have decelerated. Although a leveling-off of home sales in the second half of 2006 suggested some tentative stabilization of housing demand, sales have softened further this year, leading the number of unsold new homes in builders' inventories to rise further relative to the pace of new home sales. Accordingly, construction of new homes has sunk further, with starts of new single-family houses thus far this year running 10 percent below the pace in the second half of last year. The pace of home sales seems likely to remain sluggish for a time, partly as a result of some tightening in lending standards and the recent increase in mortgage interest rates. Sales should ultimately be supported by growth in income and employment as well as by mortgage rates that--despite the recent increase--remain fairly low relative to historical norms. However, even if demand stabilizes as we expect, the pace of construction will probably fall somewhat further as builders work down stocks of unsold new homes. Thus, declines in residential construction will likely continue to weigh on economic growth over coming quarters, although the magnitude of the drag on growth should diminish over time. Real consumption expenditures appear to have slowed last quarter, following two quarters of rapid expansion. Consumption outlays are likely to continue growing at a moderate pace, aided by a strong labor market. Employment should continue to expand, though possibly at a somewhat slower pace than in recent years as a result of the recent moderation in the growth of output and ongoing demographic shifts that are expected to lead to a gradual decline in labor force participation. Real compensation appears to have risen over the past year, and barring further sharp increases in consumer energy costs, it should rise further as labor demand remains strong and productivity increases. In the business sector, investment in equipment and software showed a modest gain in the first quarter. A similar outcome is likely for the second quarter, as weakness in the volatile transportation equipment category appears to have been offset by solid gains in other categories. Investment in nonresidential structures, after slowing sharply late last year, seems to have grown fairly vigorously in the first half of 2007. Like consumption spending, business fixed investment overall seems poised to rise at a moderate pace, bolstered by gains in sales and generally favorable financial conditions. Late last year and early this year, motor vehicle manufacturers and firms in several other industries found themselves with elevated inventories, which led them to reduce production to better align inventories with sales. Excess inventories now appear to have been substantially eliminated and should not prove a further restraint on growth. The global economy continues to be strong. Supported by solid economic growth abroad, U.S. exports should expand further in coming quarters. Nonetheless, our trade deficit--which was about 5-1/4 percent of nominal gross domestic product (GDP) in the first quarter--is likely to remain high. For the most part, financial markets have remained supportive of economic growth. However, conditions in the subprime mortgage sector have deteriorated significantly, reflecting mounting delinquency rates on adjustable-rate loans. In recent weeks, we have also seen increased concerns among investors about credit risk on some other types of financial instruments. Credit spreads on lower-quality corporate debt have widened somewhat, and terms for some leveraged business loans have tightened. Even after their recent rise, however, credit spreads remain near the low end of their historical ranges, and financing activity in the bond and business loan markets has remained fairly brisk.Overall, the U.S. economy appears likely to expand at a moderate pace over the second half of 2007, with growth then strengthening a bit in 2008 to a rate close to the economy's underlying trend. Such an assessment was made around the time of the June meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Reserve Banks, all of whom participate in deliberations on monetary policy. The central tendency of the growth forecasts, which are conditioned on the assumption of appropriate monetary policy, is for real GDP to expand roughly 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent this year and 2-1/2 to 2-3/4 percent in 2008. The forecasted performance for this year is about 1/4 percentage point below that projected in February, the difference being largely the result of weaker-than-expected residential construction activity this year. The unemployment rate is anticipated to edge up to between 4-1/2 and 4-3/4 percent over the balance of this year and about 4-3/4 percent in 2008, a trajectory about the same as the one expected in February.I turn now to the inflation situation. Sizable increases in food and energy prices have boosted overall inflation and eroded real incomes in recent months--both unwelcome developments. As measured by changes in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE inflation), inflation ran at an annual rate of 4.4 percent over the first five months of this year, a rate that, if maintained, would clearly be inconsistent with the objective of price stability.1Because monetary policy works with a lag, however, policymakers must focus on the economic outlook. Food and energy prices tend to be quite volatile, so that, looking forward, core inflation (which excludes food and energy prices) may be a better gauge than overall inflation of underlying inflation trends. Core inflation has moderated slightly over the past few months, with core PCE inflation coming in at an annual rate of about 2 percent so far this year.Although the most recent readings on core inflation have been favorable, month-to-month movements in inflation are subject to considerable noise, and some of the recent improvement could also be the result of transitory influences. However, with long-term inflation expectations contained, futures prices suggesting that investors expect energy and other commodity prices to flatten out, and pressures in both labor and product markets likely to ease modestly, core inflation should edge a bit lower, on net, over the remainder of this year and next year. The central tendency of FOMC participants' forecasts for core PCE inflation--2 to 2-1/4 percent for 2007 and 1-3/4 to 2 percent in 2008--is unchanged from February. If energy prices level off as currently anticipated, overall inflation should slow to a pace close to that of core inflation in coming quarters.At each of its four meetings so far this year, the FOMC maintained its target for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 percent, judging that the existing stance of policy was likely to be consistent with growth running near trend and inflation staying on a moderating path. As always, in determining the appropriate stance of policy, we will be alert to the possibility that the economy is not evolving in the way we currently judge to be the most likely. One risk to the outlook is that the ongoing housing correction might prove larger than anticipated, with possible spillovers onto consumer spending. Alternatively, consumer spending, which has advanced relatively vigorously, on balance, in recent quarters, might expand more quickly than expected; in that case, economic growth could rebound to a pace above its trend. With the level of resource utilization already elevated, the resulting pressures in labor and product markets could lead to increased inflation over time. Yet another risk is that energy and commodity prices could continue to rise sharply, leading to further increases in headline inflation and, if those costs passed through to the prices of non-energy goods and services, to higher core inflation as well. Moreover, if inflation were to move higher for an extended period and that increase became embedded in longer-term inflation expectations, the re-establishment of price stability would become more difficult and costly to achieve. With the level of resource utilization relatively high and with a sustained moderation in inflation pressures yet to be convincingly demonstrated, the FOMC has consistently stated that upside risks to inflation are its predominant policy concern. In addition to its dual mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability, the Federal Reserve has an important responsibility to help protect consumers in financial services transactions. For nearly forty years, the Federal Reserve has been active in implementing, interpreting, and enforcing consumer protection laws. I would like to discuss with you this morning some of our recent initiatives and actions, particularly those related to subprime mortgage lending.Promoting access to credit and to homeownership are important objectives, and responsible subprime mortgage lending can help advance both goals. In designing regulations, policymakers should seek to preserve those benefits. That said, the recent rapid expansion of the subprime market was clearly accompanied by deterioration in underwriting standards and, in some cases, by abusive lending practices and outright fraud. In addition, some households took on mortgage obligations they could not meet, perhaps in some cases because they did not fully understand the terms. Financial losses have subsequently induced lenders to tighten their underwriting standards. Nevertheless, rising delinquencies and foreclosures are creating personal, economic, and social distress for many homeowners and communities--problems that likely will get worse before they get better.The Federal Reserve is responding to these difficulties at both the national and the local levels. In coordination with the other federal supervisory agencies, we are encouraging the financial industry to work with borrowers to arrange prudent loan modifications to avoid unnecessary foreclosures. Federal Reserve Banks around the country are cooperating with community and industry groups that work directly with borrowers having trouble meeting their mortgage obligations. We continue to work with organizations that provide counseling about mortgage products to current and potential homeowners. We are also meeting with market participants--including lenders, investors, servicers, and community groups--to discuss their concerns and to gain information about market developments.We are conducting a top-to-bottom review of possible actions we might take to help prevent recurrence of these problems. First, we are committed to providing more-effective disclosures to help consumers defend against improper lending. Three years ago, the Board began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z, which implements the Truth in Lending Act (TILA). The initial focus of our review was on disclosures related to credit cards and other revolving credit accounts. After conducting extensive consumer testing, we issued a proposal in May that would require credit card issuers to provide clearer and easier-to-understand disclosures to customers. In particular, the new disclosures would highlight applicable rates and fees, particularly penalties that might be imposed. The proposed rules would also require card issuers to provide forty-five days' advance notice of a rate increase or any other change in account terms so that consumers will not be surprised by unexpected charges and will have time to explore alternatives.We are now engaged in a similar review of the TILA rules for mortgage loans. We began this review last year by holding four public hearings across the country, during which we gathered information on the adequacy of disclosures for mortgages, particularly for nontraditional and adjustable-rate products. As we did with credit card lending, we will conduct extensive consumer testing of proposed disclosures. Because the process of designing and testing disclosures involves many trial runs, especially given today's diverse and sometimes complex credit products, it may take some time to complete our review and propose new disclosures.However, some other actions can be implemented more quickly. By the end of the year, we will propose changes to TILA rules to address concerns about mortgage loan advertisements and solicitations that may be incomplete or misleading and to require lenders to provide mortgage disclosures more quickly so that consumers can get the information they need when it is most useful to them. We already have improved a disclosure that creditors must provide to every applicant for an adjustable-rate mortgage product to explain better the features and risks of these products, such as payment shock and rising loan balances. We are certainly aware, however, that disclosure alone may not be sufficient to protect consumers. Accordingly, we plan to exercise our authority under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) to address specific practices that are unfair or deceptive. We held a public hearing on June 14 to discuss industry practices, including those pertaining to pre-payment penalties, the use of escrow accounts for taxes and insurance, stated-income and low-documentation lending, and the evaluation of a borrower's ability to repay. The discussion and ideas we heard were extremely useful, and we look forward to receiving additional public comments in coming weeks. Based on the information we are gathering, I expect that the Board will propose additional rules under HOEPA later this year.In coordination with the other federal supervisory agencies, last year we issued principles-based guidance on nontraditional mortgages, and in June of this year we issued supervisory guidance on subprime lending. These statements emphasize the fundamental consumer protection principles of sound underwriting and effective disclosures. In addition, we reviewed our policies related to the examination of nonbank subsidiaries of bank and financial holding companies for compliance with consumer protection laws and guidance.As a result of that review and following discussions with the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal Trade Commission, and state regulators, as represented by the Conference of State Bank Supervisors and the American Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators, we are launching a cooperative pilot project aimed at expanding consumer protection compliance reviews at selected nondepository lenders with significant subprime mortgage operations. The reviews will begin in the fourth quarter of this year and will include independent state-licensed mortgage lenders, nondepository mortgage lending subsidiaries of bank and thrift holding companies, and mortgage brokers doing business with or serving as agents of these entities. The agencies will collaborate in determining the lessons learned and in seeking ways to better cooperate in ensuring effective and consistent examinations of and improved enforcement for nondepository mortgage lenders. Working together to address jurisdictional issues and to improve information-sharing among agencies, we will seek to prevent abusive and fraudulent lending while ensuring that consumers retain access to beneficial credit.I believe that the actions I have described today will help address the current problems. The Federal Reserve looks forward to working with the Congress on these important issues. Footnotes 1. Despite the recent surge, total PCE inflation is 2.3 percent over the past twelve months.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserves public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur. Standard Chartered plc, London, United Kingdom Standard Chartered Bank, London, United Kingdom Standard Chartered New York Branch, New York, New York Written Agreement dated October 7, 2004 Terminated July 10, 2007
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserves public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur.Texas State Bank, McAllen, Tex.Written Agreement dated April 25, 2006Terminated July 2, 2007 The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserves public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur. Texas State Bank, McAllen, Tex.Written Agreement dated April 25, 2006Terminated July 2, 2007