The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday published its annual adjustment of the dollar amount that triggers additional disclosure requirements under the Truth in Lending Act for home mortgage loans that bear rates or fees above a certain amount. The dollar amount of the fee-based trigger has been adjusted to $561 for 2008 based on the annual percentage change reflected in the Consumer Price Index that was in effect on June 1, 2007. The adjustment is effective January 1, 2008. The Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act of 1994 restricts credit terms such as balloon payments and requires additional disclosures when total points and fees payable by the consumer exceed the fee-based trigger (initially set at $400 and adjusted annually) or 8 percent of the total loan amount, whichever is larger. The Board's notice is attached. Federal Register Notice48 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the approval of an application by Caixa Econômica Federal, Brasília, Brazil, to establish a representative office in Jersey City, New Jersey. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the proposal filed by Mercantile Bancorp, Inc., Quincy, Illinois, to acquire HNB Financial Services, Inc. and its subsidiary bank, HNB National Bank, both of Hannibal, Missouri. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the proposal by National City Corporation, Cleveland, Ohio, to merge with MAF Bancorp, Inc., Clarendon Hills, Illinois, and thereby acquire its subsidiaries, Mid America Bank, fsb, Clarendon Hills, and St. Francis Equity Properties, Inc., Brookfield, Wisconsin. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application and notice under sections 3 and 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by The Bank of Nova Scotia, Toronto, Canada, to acquire 10 percent of the outstanding voting shares of First BanCorp, San Juan, and, indirectly, its subsidiary bank, FirstBank of Puerto Rico, Santurce, both in Puerto Rico, and its subsidiary savings association, FirstBank Florida, Miami, Florida.Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application and notice under sections 3 and 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by The Bank of Nova Scotia, Toronto, Canada, to acquire 10 percent of the outstanding voting shares of First BanCorp, San Juan, and, indirectly, its subsidiary bank, FirstBank of Puerto Rico, Santurce, both in Puerto Rico, and its subsidiary savings association, FirstBank Florida, Miami, Florida. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the approval of an application by The State Export-Import Bank of Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the proposal by Wells Fargo & Company, San Francisco, to acquire Greater Bay Bancorp, East Palo Alto, and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiary, Greater Bay Bank, National Association, Palo Alto, all of California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, Minneapolis, Kansas City, and Dallas decreasing the discount rate at the Banks from 6-1/4 percent to 5-3/4 percent, effective immediately. The Board also approved an action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, decreasing the discount rate at the Bank from 6-1/4 percent to 5-3/4 percent, effective August 20, 2007.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday alerted the public to instances of illegitimate checks being drawn on an entity named TUC Private Currency Office and other questionable practices by The United Cities Corp., Miami, Florida. Reports of these practices have surfaced in Florida. In addition to issuing illegitimate checks, The United Cities Corp. claims to have created a currency called “The United States Private Dollar.” On its website, The United Cities Corp. says that it received confirmation of the legitimacy of “The United States Private Dollar” from the Federal Reserve System. This claim is untrue. The Federal Reserve does not endorse any private currency. Documents that appear to be checks or drafts drawn on the TUC Private Currency Office (containing an address of 3501 West Vine Street, Suite 315, Kissimmee, FL 34741 and an invalid ABA routing number of 079457847) have been issued and presented for payment at a number of banks. These documents are not legitimate checks or negotiable instruments. They should not be presented or accepted for payment or deposit. Anyone who has acquired these checks should not attempt to deposit or use them, but should instead contact their local law enforcement office or United States Secret Service office. A related alert has been issued by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and is available athttp://www.occ.gov/.
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) on Monday announced that they have concurrently assessed $20 million in civil money penalties against American Express Bank International (AEBI) of Miami, Florida, for violations of the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA). In addition, FinCEN announced a separate $5 million civil money penalty against American Express Travel Related Services Company, Inc., a money services business, located in Salt Lake City, Utah, for its violations of the BSA. The orders are part of coordinated actions with the U.S. Department of Justice, which is today announcing the execution of a deferred prosecution agreement with AEBI in connection with charges that the company failed to maintain an anti-money laundering program. AEBI will forfeit $55 million to the United States to settle the Department’s forfeiture claims. The payments to be made by the American Express entities under these actions total $65 million. FinCEN’s total penalties of $25 million will be satisfied by a single $10 million payment to the U.S. Department of the Treasury, and the remaining $15 million satisfied by a portion of the $55 million forfeiture to the U.S. Department of Justice. The Federal Reserve Board’s $20 million penalty will be deemed satisfied by the payments made by AEBI to the U.S. Department of Justice and FinCEN. The Federal Reserve Board concurrently issued a Cease and Desist Order requiring AEBI to take certain corrective actions. AEBI and American Express Travel Related Services, without admitting any allegations, consented to the payment of the penalties and the issuance of the orders by the Federal Reserve Board and FinCEN. The Federal Reserve Board based its assessment of a civil money penalty and issuance of a Cease and Desist Order on the failure of AEBI to establish and maintain an adequate anti-money laundering program. AEBI is an Edge Act corporation that offers traditional private banking services. The Federal Reserve Board determined that AEBI had significant breakdowns in carrying out its BSA compliance activities and, as a result, failed to establish and maintain procedures adequately designed to ensure and monitor AEBI’s compliance with the BSA and related laws and regulations. "Today's action by the Federal Reserve underscores the necessity for banking institutions to have anti-money laundering controls in place that are commensurate with the level of risk associated with their operations. Every banking organization should ensure that its risk-management practices are effective in mitigating the risks associated with its particular operations,” said Roger T. Cole, director of the Federal Reserve Board’s Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation.FinCEN determined that AEBI repeatedly failed, over the course of several years, to adequately respond to certain supervisory findings with respect to the effectiveness of account monitoring controls to ensure compliance with the BSA. FinCEN also determined that AEBI failed to implement adequate internal controls, failed to conduct adequate independent testing, and failed to designate compliance personnel to ensure compliance with the BSA. AEBI operated in certain high-risk jurisdictions and business lines without commensurate systems and controls to detect and report money laundering and other suspicious activity in a timely manner, as well as manage the risks of money laundering, including the potential for illicit drug trafficking-based Black Market Peso Exchange transactions. FinCEN also determined that the money services business, a wholly-owned subsidiary of American Express Company, failed to file a significant number of suspicious activity reports in accordance with the BSA. “These joint and concurrent actions serve as another example of collaboration by federal agencies to apply a consistent approach to Bank Secrecy Act enforcement,” said FinCEN Director James H. Freis, Jr. “Enforcement actions, especially major enforcement actions, are rare and only applied when appropriate. It is a well-considered public policy choice to place BSA responsibilities on our financial institutions which serve as gatekeepers to the financial system. The information lost when a company fails in its obligations puts other companies, and the broader financial system, at risk.” Copies of the agencies’ enforcement actions are attached. FinCEN enforcement action (3.4 MB PDF) U.S. Department of Justice deferred prosecution agreement (1.1 MB PDF)
The federal financial regulatory agencies today issued proposed illustrations of consumer information for certain adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) products described in the agencies’ Statement on Subprime Mortgage Lending (Subprime Statement), effective July 10, 2007. The Subprime Statement recommends communications that ensure consumers have clear, balanced, and timely information about the relative benefits and risks of certain ARM products. The illustrations are intended to assist institutions in providing this information. The illustrations consist of (1) an explanation of some key features and risks that the Subprime Statement identifies, including payment shock, and (2) a chart that shows the potential consequences of payment shock in a concrete, readily understandable manner. The agencies seek public comment on all aspects of the proposed illustrations. Comments are due 60 days after publication in the Federal Register. The proposed illustrations are attached. Federal Register Notice317 KB PDF|TEXT
To promote the restoration of orderly conditions in financial markets, the Federal Reserve Board approved temporary changes to its primary credit discount window facility. The Board approved a 50 basis point reduction in the primary credit rate to 5-3/4 percent, to narrow the spread between the primary credit rate and the Federal Open Market Committee's target federal funds rate to 50 basis points. The Board is also announcing a change to the Reserve Banks' usual practices to allow the provision of term financing for as long as 30 days, renewable by the borrower. These changes will remain in place until the Federal Reserve determines that market liquidity has improved materially. These changes are designed to provide depositories with greater assurance about the cost and availability of funding. The Federal Reserve will continue to accept a broad range of collateral for discount window loans, including home mortgages and related assets. Existing collateral margins will be maintained. In taking this action, the Board approved the requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and San Francisco.
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the Interagency Minority Depository Institutions National Conference, Miami, Florida It is a pleasure to be here today to talk about issues and programs of mutual interest, with a focus on the Federal Reserve's work to strengthen our support of minority-owned depository institutions. The Federal Reserve recognizes the important role that minority-owned banks play in the financial services market through the services they provide to their communities. I have chaired the oversight committee on consumer and community affairs at the Board since March and am especially excited to be involved with a number of new and ongoing initiatives. In particular, this morning I am delighted to announce a new program that formalizes the Federal Reserve's long-standing commitment to minority-owned depository institutions. In addition, I will discuss several ongoing supervisory and regulatory initiatives that aim to improve consumer information and expand consumer protection. Federal Reserve System's Minority-Owned Institutions (MOI) ProgramNationally, there about 200 minority-owned depository institutions serving a broad range of communities and populations. These banks have long played a unique and important role in our banking system by providing access to credit and financial services in markets that have historically been underserved. The Federal Reserve, which supervises just under twenty of these institutions, is committed to promoting the success of the minority-owned depository institutions we oversee. Supporting these institutions is fundamental to our overall supervisory responsibilities for ensuring a safe, sound, and competitive banking system that also protects consumers. We have consistently provided ongoing assistance, through our regulatory, supervisory, and community development functions, to address the unique challenges and needs of minority-owned banks, while at the same time holding them to the high standards of supervisory performance. The Federal Reserve has tapped the expertise at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia to spearhead development of a proactive training and technical assistance program for minority-owned depository institutions. The new minority-owned institutions (MOI) program I will discuss today reflects our experience in addressing the needs of these institutions as well as the insights offered in a recent report issued by the Government Accountability Office. In developing the program, Federal Reserve staff met with a number of minority-owned and de novo banking organizations across the country, as well as trade groups, bank consultants, and other federal banking agencies, to gain the insight into the challenges the organizations confront in raising capital, growing their institutions, and attracting talent. This process provided valuable insight into the needs of minority-owned banks and contributed significantly to the design of the program. The outreach and market research efforts also informed our understanding of the various issues that de novo and smaller institutions face in general. As a result, some elements of the curriculum may ultimately have broader applicability. Certainly, the components that address broad challenges, coupled with more-targeted training, will address the unique information and technical assistance needs of minority-owned banks. To ensure broad access to the program, all aspects of the training program will be available through a variety of distribution channels: classroom-style workshops, self-paced PC-based programs, and a web-based resource and information center. The innovative MOI program consists of three modules, each focusing on issues that are most relevant at a particular point in a bank's life cycle: "Starting Up," "Managing Initial Growth," and "Managing a Mature Institution." The program thus will be valuable for potential entrants as well as those that have been in the market for many years. I think of the new MOI program as a type of course of study in a contemporary MBA curriculum, one that draws on insights and experiences from economics, accounting, finance, and compliance and focuses on the particular challenges of establishing and sustaining robust and vibrant minority-owned depository institutions.The first module, "Starting Up," addresses the steps in filing an application and other issues related to a bank's chartering process, such as raising capital, assembling a successful board and management team, and conducting market analyses. The second module, "Managing Initial Growth," targets institutions that are managing growth and other transitions that occur during the first five years of their existence. Training at this stage focuses on the institution's need to stabilize operations in a competitive environment and addresses issues essential to sustainability, such as maintaining capital and liquidity, managing credit and interest rate risk, ensuring compliance with banking laws and regulations, and developing new products. The third module, "Managing a Mature Institution," focuses on growing the institution and shareholder value. Participants in this portion of the training will learn more about how to achieve growth targets in a safe and sound manner, measure performance of the board and management team, and expand their market. While these training modules are comprehensive in scope, the course designers recognize that there may be additional information and training needs. A great deal of flexibility is being built into the curriculum, so that an expanded version of the modules can be provided to institutions that have specific concerns or issues. In addition, each module features a section on supervisory and regulatory relations, to help build and maintain a strong dialogue between minority-owned banks and their regulators. The program also provides for quality control and continuing assessment, through such elements as instructor coaching and curriculum evaluation, to ensure that the course remains responsive to the target audiences' needs. I am also excited about a related benefit of the new MOI program--the possibility of enhancing the Federal Reserve's role as a supervisor of these banks. Concepts underpinning the MOI training program are being incorporated into our examiner education curricula, providing an opportunity for a deeper understanding within the supervision community of the issues unique to minority-owned depositories. This responds directly to the interests expressed by participants in the outreach and market research phase of program development. Many of the bankers indicated that it was important to improve understanding of their business models and strategies among the supervisory agencies, while at the same time holding their minority-owned institutions to the same supervisory standards as other depository institutions. A pilot program will be launched this fall, with a number of workshops to be held in selected Federal Reserve Districts and a roll-out of some web-based training. Throughout the pilot period and after launch of the full program in early 2008, the Federal Reserve will continue to work with the industry and interagency partners to identify ways to increase the training's responsiveness. This innovative MOI initiative underscores our commitment to providing essential information and supervisory support that helps institutions both improve their operating efficiency--thereby reducing costs and, ultimately, regulatory burden--and enhance their ability to serve their communities more effectively. Federal Reserve's Functions and Roles in Bank Oversight and Consumer Protection The Federal Reserve's MOI program demonstrates a long-standing commitment to fostering a banking system that is competitive, diverse, and fair, to the benefit of both banking organizations and consumers. Toward this end, we use all the supervisory, regulatory, and other tools available to us. One example is the recently issuedproposal on interagency Community Reinvestment Act(CRA) guidelines, which seeks to affirm that banks' investments in minority-owned banks receive favorable consideration under the investment test. Now I'd like to discuss some of those tools and several recent Federal Reserve initiatives to address current issues of concern, with an emphasis on consumer protection. The Federal Reserve fulfills its consumer protection mandate through four complementary processes. The first process is examining supervised financial institutions for safety and soundness, and for compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. This includes taking supervisory action as appropriate to enforce the laws and resolve any consumer complaints. The second is rulewriting--issuing regulations, either separately or jointly with other federal agencies, to implement the consumer financial services and fair lending laws. The third is promoting consumer education through publications and through partnerships with other organizations. And the fourth is promoting community development and fair and impartial access to credit by conducting outreach activities in lower-income communities and traditionally underserved markets. Supervisory Efforts on Subprime Mortgage LendingWith respect to supervision, the Federal Reserve exercises its examination and enforcement authority to monitor and address issues of concern at the banks it oversees. In addition, we often issue guidance to provide the industry with supervisory "best practices" for addressing safety and soundness and consumer protection matters. Guidance is generally a more-responsive supervisory tool than rules, and it allows institutions more flexibility in adopting new business practices. Over the years, the Federal Reserve, in concert with other supervisory agencies, has issued a series of supervisory guidance documents to address subprime and nontraditional mortgage lending issues. The guidance has underscored the importance of a well-structured risk-management program for subprime lenders and has stressed that lending standards should include well-defined underwriting parameters, such as acceptable loan-to-value ratios and debt-to-income ratios, and minimum acceptable credit scores. Guidance has also been used to address common predatory and abusive lending practices, including making unaffordable loans, inducing a borrower to refinance a loan repeatedly to generate fee income, and engaging in fraud or deception to conceal the true nature of the loan obligation. Most recently, supervisory guidance has emphasized the added dimension of risk when higher-risk loans are combined with other features--such as the use of simultaneous second lien loans in lieu of a down payment or the use of underwriting that involves little or no documentation of income or assets. Guidance has also underscored the safety and soundness and consumer protection concerns prompted by other underwriting practices often seen in subprime and nontraditional mortgage lending, such as excluding taxes and insurance in the underwriting process and allowing deferred repayment of principal by offering interest-only loans. Finally, this supervisory tool has been used to urge creditors to work with homeowners who are unable to make mortgage payments. Reviews of Non-Depository Subprime Mortgage LendersThis supervisory guidance, together with market forces, has contributed to adjustments in subprime lending practices, particularly by federally supervised banks. However, we are all keenly aware that ongoing issues in the subprime market require additional action to address the very real and significant impact that rising delinquencies and foreclosures are having on individuals and communities. Various outreach and research efforts by the Federal Reserve have deepened our understanding of the issues and revealed that many of the most-worrisome practices are found in credit extensions by nondepository lenders and brokers, many of which are outside the supervisory scope of the federal banking agencies. The Federal Reserve Board is committed to deterring abusive lending and ensuring that all lenders are complying with consumer protection laws. To that end, the Board has taken the lead in launching a pilot project involving consumer compliance reviews of selected nondepository lenders that have significant subprime mortgage operations. The Board's partners in the project are the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal Trade Commission, and the states (through the Conference of State Bank Supervisors and the American Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators). As part of this project, the Board will examine nonbank subsidiaries of bank holding companies for compliance with laws that the Federal Reserve enforces. These laws include the Truth in Lending Act, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act, the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act, and the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act. The other partners in the project will conduct similar reviews of nondepository subsidiaries of thrift holding companies, independent mortgage lending companies, and mortgage brokers doing business with these entities. The partner agencies will share information about the examinations, review the lessons learned, and seek additional ways to cooperate to ensure effective and consistent supervision of these entities. At the conclusion of the reviews, the agencies will analyze the results and determine whether the project is to be continued and, if so, what the focus of future reviews will be. Regulatory InitiativesIn addition to exercising supervisory authority, the Federal Reserve is using its regulatory power toreview the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) regulations, with the intent of making the disclosures that help consumers understand their loan terms more effective. To be effective, disclosures must give consumers information about credit pricing at a time when the information is relevant, in language they can easily understand. The information must also be in a format that allows consumers to pick out and use the information that is most important to them. Better credit disclosure facilitates better-informed credit decisions, and hence more-effective competition among creditors. In a nutshell, effective disclosure empowers consumers and enhances competition. The Federal Reserve Board has recently taken a new approach to increasing the effectiveness of disclosure--namely, surveying and responding to consumers through consumer testing. Having taught at a business school for many years, I am well aware of the types of consumer testing that firms have long employed: surveys, focus groups, and so-called "mall intercepts," whereby shoppers are interviewed at random. Systematically using such techniques to tailor the disclosure requirements set out in the regulations of the Federal Reserve and other financial regulators is, however, relatively novel. After extensive consumer testing, the Board issued a proposal in May that reflects consumers' thoughts on clearer and easier-to-understand credit card disclosures. In particular, the proposed disclosures would highlight applicable rates and fees, especially penalties that might be imposed. The proposed rules would also require card issuers to provide forty-five days' advance notice of a rate increase or any other change in account terms so that consumers will not be surprised by unexpected charges and will have time to explore alternatives. Recognizing the value of public input and our experiences in consumer testing, the Board is now engaged in a similar review of the TILA rules for mortgage loans. This process began last summer when the Board convenedfour public hearingsacross the country to gather information on the adequacy of current mortgage disclosures, particularly disclosures for nontraditional and adjustable-rate products. As with credit card lending, the Board is committed to conducting extensive consumer testing of proposed mortgage disclosures to identify what information consumers need, use, and retain when embarking on a search for a mortgage. The process of designing and testing disclosures is necessarily time intensive. However, it is a valuable investment, one that will ensure that we have a thorough review resulting in a substantive proposal that presents meaningful new disclosures. Simultaneously, the Federal Reserve is undertaking other projects that can be implemented more quickly. For example, the Board plans to respond to concerns about misleading or incomplete marketing practices in the mortgage market. By the end of the year, we will propose changes to TILA rules concerning mortgage loan advertisements and solicitations. These proposed rules will also address issues relating to the timing of disclosures, to ensure not only that consumers get the information they need, but that they get it when it would be most useful to them. The Federal Reserve recognizes that disclosures may not be sufficient to protect consumers from harmful mortgage products or terms. Therefore, the Board plans to exercise its authority under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) to address specific practices that are unfair or deceptive. In June, I chaired a daylongpublic hearingat which we received valuable insight from both industry and consumer groups into the impact of specific mortgage practices on subprime borrowers. Some of the practices we are looking at are pre-payment penalties, the waiver of escrow accounts for taxes and insurance, and the proliferation of stated-income or low-documentation loans. Concerns have also been expressed about underwriting standards that do not fully take into consideration the borrower's ability to repay. The Board is closely examining these issues and discussing possible remedies. We expect to propose rules under HOEPA later this year. Community Affairs and Consumer Education RolesThe Federal Reserve also looks beyond its supervisory and regulatory functions to address concerns of information asymmetries and access to financial services in local markets. A core principle of economics is that markets are more competitive, and therefore more efficient, when accurate information is available to both consumers and suppliers. The Federal Reserve dedicates considerable resources to community development and consumer education efforts designed to help facilitate the flow of accurate information to communities and consumers, particularly those that have been traditionally underserved. The Board, each of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks, and many of the Branch offices have a Community Affairs Office (CAO). These offices work to promote community development and fair and impartial access to credit by focusing on low- and moderate-income consumers. The community affairs function develops programs, partnerships, and initiatives that bring consumers into the financial and economic mainstream and that assist financial institutions in identifying viable opportunities in markets that may be underserved. The CAOs also engage in research to help improve understanding of how financial services policies and practices affect lower-income households and neighborhoods. In addition, the Federal Reserve has a robust consumer education program. Through our consumer education publications, programs, and partnerships, the Federal Reserve informs consumers about financial transactions and the regulations that govern those transactions, to help them understand consumer protections and their rights when shopping for various products. For example, the Board has published brochures to assist consumers when they are shopping for a credit card, looking for a mortgage, or leasing a vehicle. We have alsopublished brochuresto help consumers understand their checking accounts and overdraft protection programs and to educate them on the effects of having their payments processed electronically. Recently the Board has focused on helping consumers better understand nontraditional mortgage products and adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) and has prepared a consumer publication on these products. In June, we launched anonline mortgage calculatorthat allows consumers to easily compare their monthly payments, and the amount of equity they will build, under several kinds of fixed- and adjustable-rate mortgages. In my time at the Federal Reserve, I have had the opportunity to see the benefits that community development and consumer education efforts offer. As noted earlier, I am actively involved with the work of the Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs through my chairmanship of the oversight committee. In addition, I am pleased to be serving on the board ofNeighborWorks America®, a national nonprofit organization dedicated to promoting and preserving affordable housing for low- and moderate-income families and neighborhoods. These roles give me valuable insight into the complexity of the financial services issues in these markets as well as an appreciation of the organizations and institutions that are committed to understanding these challenges and designing creative solutions to overcome them. ConclusionIn closing, I would like thank you for the opportunity to underscore the Federal Reserve's commitment to promoting the vibrant, competitive, and diverse banking markets that are so vital to our economy. We are dedicated to using our roles as supervisors, regulators, community development facilitators, and consumer educators to support the banking organizations that contribute to our robust financial services system--and the consumers who are vital to that system's success.
The Federal Reserve is providing liquidity to facilitate the orderly functioning of financial markets. The Federal Reserve will provide reserves as necessary through open market operations to promote trading in the federal funds market at rates close to the Federal Open Market Committee's target rate of 5-1/4 percent. In current circumstances, depository institutions may experience unusual funding needs because of dislocations in money and credit markets. As always, the discount window is available as a source of funding.
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 percent. Economic growth was moderate during the first half of the year. Financial markets have been volatile in recent weeks, credit conditions have become tighter for some households and businesses, and the housing correction is ongoing. Nevertheless, the economy seems likely to continue to expand at a moderate pace over coming quarters, supported by solid growth in employment and incomes and a robust global economy. Readings on core inflation have improved modestly in recent months. However, a sustained moderation in inflation pressures has yet to be convincingly demonstrated. Moreover, the high level of resource utilization has the potential to sustain those pressures. Although the downside risks to growth have increased somewhat, the Committee's predominant policy concern remains the risk that inflation will fail to moderate as expected. Future policy adjustments will depend on the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Thomas M. Hoenig; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Frederic S. Mishkin; Michael H. Moskow; William Poole; Eric Rosengren; and Kevin M. Warsh.
Financial market conditions have deteriorated, and tighter credit conditions and increased uncertainty have the potential to restrain economic growth going forward. In these circumstances, although recent data suggest that the economy has continued to expand at a moderate pace, the Federal Open Market Committee judges that the downside risks to growth have increased appreciably. The Committee is monitoring the situation and is prepared to act as needed to mitigate the adverse effects on the economy arising from the disruptions in financial markets. Voting in favor of the policy announcement were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Richard W. Fisher; Thomas M. Hoenig; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Frederic S. Mishkin; Michael H. Moskow; Eric Rosengren; and Kevin M. Warsh.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming In my remarks this morning, I will begin with some observations about recent market developments and their economic implications. I will then try to place recent events in a broader historical context by discussing the evolution of housing markets and housing finance in the United States. In particular, I will argue that, over the years, institutional changes in U.S. housing and mortgage markets have significantly influenced both the transmission of monetary policy and the economy's cyclical dynamics. As our system of housing finance continues to evolve, understanding these linkages not only provides useful insights into the past but also holds the promise of helping us better cope with the implications of future developments. Recent Developments in Financial markets and the EconomyI will begin my review of recent developments by discussing the housing situation. As you know, the downturn in the housing market, which began in the summer of 2005, has been sharp. Sales of new and existing homes have declined significantly from their mid-2005 peaks and have remained slow in recent months. As demand has weakened, house prices have decelerated or even declined by some measures, and homebuilders have scaled back their construction of new homes. The cutback in residential construction has directly reduced the annual rate of U.S. economic growth about 3/4 percentage point on average over the past year and a half. Despite the slowdown in construction, the stock of unsold new homes remains quite elevated relative to sales, suggesting that further declines in homebuilding are likely. The outlook for home sales and construction will also depend on unfolding developments in mortgage markets. A substantial increase in lending to nonprime borrowers contributed to the bulge in residential investment in 2004 and 2005, and the tightening of credit conditions for these borrowers likely accounts for some of the continued softening in demand we have seen this year. As I will discuss, recent market developments have resulted in additional tightening of rates and terms for nonprime borrowers as well as for potential borrowers through "jumbo" mortgages. Obviously, if current conditions persist in mortgage markets, the demand for homes could weaken further, with possible implications for the broader economy. We are following these developments closely. As house prices have softened, and as interest rates have risen from the low levels of a couple of years ago, we have seen a marked deterioration in the performance of nonprime mortgages. The problems have been most severe for subprime mortgages with adjustable rates: the proportion of those loans with serious delinquencies rose to about 13-1/2 percent in June, more than double the recent low seen in mid-2005.1The adjustable-rate subprime mortgages originated in late 2005 and in 2006 have performed the worst, in part because of slippage in underwriting standards, reflected for example in high loan-to-value ratios and incomplete documentation. With many of these borrowers facing their first interest rate resets in coming quarters, and with softness in house prices expected to continue to impede refinancing, delinquencies among this class of mortgages are likely to rise further. Apart from adjustable-rate subprime mortgages, however, the deterioration in performance has been less pronounced, at least to this point. For subprime mortgages with fixed rather than variable rates, for example, serious delinquencies have been fairly stable at about 5-1/2 percent. The rate of serious delinquencies on alt-A securitized pools rose to nearly 3 percent in June, from a low of less than 1 percent in mid-2005. Delinquency rates on prime jumbo mortgages have also risen, though they are lower than those for prime conforming loans, and both rates are below 1 percent. Investors' concerns about mortgage credit performance have intensified sharply in recent weeks, reflecting, among other factors, worries about the housing market and the effects of impending interest-rate resets on borrowers' ability to remain current. Credit spreads on new securities backed by subprime mortgages, which had jumped earlier this year, rose significantly more in July. Issuance of such securities has been negligible since then, as dealers have faced difficulties placing even the AAA-rated tranches. Issuance of securities backed by alt-A and prime jumbo mortgages also has fallen sharply, as investors have evidently become concerned that the losses associated with these types of mortgages may be higher than had been expected. With securitization impaired, some major lenders have announced the cancellation of their adjustable-rate subprime lending programs. A number of others that specialize in nontraditional mortgages have been forced by funding pressures to scale back or close down. Some lenders that sponsor asset-backed commercial paper conduits as bridge financing for their mortgage originations have been unable to "roll" the maturing paper, forcing them to draw on back-up liquidity facilities or to exercise options to extend the maturity of their paper. As a result of these developments, borrowers face noticeably tighter terms and standards for all but conforming mortgages. As you know, the financial stress has not been confined to mortgage markets. The markets for asset-backed commercial paper and for lower-rated unsecured commercial paper market also have suffered from pronounced declines in investor demand, and the associated flight to quality has contributed to surges in the demand for short-dated Treasury bills, pushing T-bill rates down sharply on some days. Swings in stock prices have been sharp, with implied price volatilities rising to about twice the levels seen in the spring. Credit spreads for a range of financial instruments have widened, notably for lower-rated corporate credits. Diminished demand for loans and bonds to finance highly leveraged transactions has increased some banks' concerns that they may have to bring significant quantities of these instruments onto their balance sheets. These banks, as well as those that have committed to serve as back-up facilities to commercial paper programs, have become more protective of their liquidity and balance-sheet capacity. Although this episode appears to have been triggered largely by heightened concerns about subprime mortgages, global financial losses have far exceeded even the most pessimistic projections of credit losses on those loans. In part, these wider losses likely reflect concerns that weakness in U.S. housing will restrain overall economic growth. But other factors are also at work. Investor uncertainty has increased significantly, as the difficulty of evaluating the risks of structured products that can be opaque or have complex payoffs has become more evident. Also, as in many episodes of financial stress, uncertainty about possible forced sales by leveraged participants and a higher cost of risk capital seem to have made investors hesitant to take advantage of possible buying opportunities. More generally, investors may have become less willing to assume risk. Some increase in the premiums that investors require to take risk is probably a healthy development on the whole, as these premiums have been exceptionally low for some time. However, in this episode, the shift in risk attitudes has interacted with heightened concerns about credit risks and uncertainty about how to evaluate those risks to create significant market stress. On the positive side of the ledger, we should recognize that past efforts to strengthen capital positions and the financial infrastructure place the global financial system in a relatively strong position to work through this process. In the statement following its August 7 meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) recognized that the rise in financial volatility and the tightening of credit conditions for some households and businesses had increased the downside risks to growth somewhat but reiterated that inflation risks remained its predominant policy concern. In subsequent days, however, following several events that led investors to believe that credit risks might be larger and more pervasive than previously thought, the functioning of financial markets became increasingly impaired. Liquidity dried up and spreads widened as many market participants sought to retreat from certain types of asset exposures altogether. Well-functioning financial markets are essential for a prosperous economy. As the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve seeks to promote general financial stability and to help to ensure that financial markets function in an orderly manner. In response to the developments in the financial markets in the period following the FOMC meeting, the Federal Reserve provided reserves to address unusual strains in money markets. On August 17, the Federal Reserve Board announced a cut in the discount rate of 50 basis points and adjustments in the Reserve Banks' usual discount window practices to facilitate the provision of term financing for as long as thirty days, renewable by the borrower. The Federal Reserve also took a number of supplemental actions, such as cutting the fee charged for lending Treasury securities. The purpose of the discount window actions was to assure depositories of the ready availability of a backstop source of liquidity. Even if banks find that borrowing from the discount window is not immediately necessary, the knowledge that liquidity is available should help alleviate concerns about funding that might otherwise constrain depositories from extending credit or making markets. The Federal Reserve stands ready to take additional actions as needed to provide liquidity and promote the orderly functioning of markets. It is not the responsibility of the Federal Reserve--nor would it be appropriate--to protect lenders and investors from the consequences of their financial decisions. But developments in financial markets can have broad economic effects felt by many outside the markets, and the Federal Reserve must take those effects into account when determining policy. In a statement issued simultaneously with the discount window announcement, the FOMC indicated that the deterioration in financial market conditions and the tightening of credit since its August 7 meeting had appreciably increased the downside risks to growth. In particular, the further tightening of credit conditions, if sustained, would increase the risk that the current weakness in housing could be deeper or more prolonged than previously expected, with possible adverse effects on consumer spending and the economy more generally. The incoming data indicate that the economy continued to expand at a moderate pace into the summer, despite the sharp correction in the housing sector. However, in light of recent financial developments, economic data bearing on past months or quarters may be less useful than usual for our forecasts of economic activity and inflation. Consequently, we will pay particularly close attention to the timeliest indicators, as well as information gleaned from our business and banking contacts around the country. Inevitably, the uncertainty surrounding the outlook will be greater than normal, presenting a challenge to policymakers to manage the risks to their growth and price stability objectives. The Committee continues to monitor the situation and will act as needed to limit the adverse effects on the broader economy that may arise from the disruptions in financial markets. Beginnings: Mortgage Markets in the Early Twentieth CenturyLike us, our predecessors grappled with the economic and policy implications of innovations and institutional changes in housing finance. In the remainder of my remarks, I will try to set the stage for this weekend's conference by discussing the historical evolution of the mortgage market and some of the implications of that evolution for monetary policy and the economy. The early decades of the twentieth century are a good starting point for this review, as urbanization and the exceptionally rapid population growth of that period created a strong demand for new housing. Between 1890 and 1930, the number of housing units in the United States grew from about 10 million to about 30 million; the pace of homebuilding was particularly brisk during the economic boom of the 1920s. Remarkably, this rapid expansion of the housing stock took place despite limited sources of mortgage financing and typical lending terms that were far less attractive than those to which we are accustomed today. Required down payments, usually about half of the home's purchase price, excluded many households from the market. Also, by comparison with today's standards, the duration of mortgage loans was short, usually ten years or less. A "balloon" payment at the end of the loan often created problems for borrowers.2 High interest rates on loans reflected the illiquidity and the essentially unhedgeable interest rate risk and default risk associated with mortgages. Nationwide, the average spread between mortgage rates and high-grade corporate bond yields during the 1920s was about 200 basis points, compared with about 50 basis points on average since the mid-1980s. The absence of a national capital market also produced significant regional disparities in borrowing costs. Hard as it may be to conceive today, rates on mortgage loans before World War I were at times as much as 2 to 4 percentage points higher in some parts of the country than in others, and even in 1930, regional differences in rates could be more than a full percentage point.3 Despite the underdevelopment of the mortgage market, homeownership rates rose steadily after the turn of the century. As would often be the case in the future, government policy provided some inducement for homebuilding. When the federal income tax was introduced in 1913, it included an exemption for mortgage interest payments, a provision that is a powerful stimulus to housing demand even today. By 1930, about 46 percent of nonfarm households owned their own homes, up from about 37 percent in 1890. The limited availability of data prior to 1929 makes it hard to quantify the role of housing in the monetary policy transmission mechanism during the early twentieth century. Comparisons are also complicated by great differences between then and now in monetary policy frameworks and tools. Still, then as now, periods of tight money were reflected in higher interest rates and a greater reluctance of banks to lend, which affected conditions in mortgage markets. Moreover, students of the business cycle, such as Arthur Burns and Wesley Mitchell, have observed that residential construction was highly cyclical and contributed significantly to fluctuations in the overall economy (Burns and Mitchell, 1946). Indeed, if we take the somewhat less reliable data for 1901 to 1929 at face value, real housing investment was about three times as volatile during that era as it has been over the past half-century. During the past century we have seen two great sea changes in the market for housing finance. The first of these was the product of the New Deal. The second arose from financial innovation and a series of crises from the 1960s to the mid-1980s in depository funding of mortgages. I will turn first to the New Deal period. The New Deal and the Housing MarketThe housing sector, like the rest of the economy, was profoundly affected by the Great Depression. When Franklin Roosevelt took office in 1933, almost 10 percent of all homes were in foreclosure (Green and Wachter, 2005), construction employment had fallen by half from its late 1920s peak, and a banking system near collapse was providing little new credit. As in other sectors, New Deal reforms in housing and housing finance aimed to foster economic revival through government programs that either provided financing directly or strengthened the institutional and regulatory structure of private credit markets. Actually, one of the first steps in this direction was taken not by Roosevelt but by his predecessor, Herbert Hoover, who oversaw the creation of the Federal Home Loan Banking System in 1932. This measure reorganized the thrift industry (savings and loans and mutual savings banks) under federally chartered associations and established a credit reserve system modeled after the Federal Reserve. The Roosevelt administration pushed this and other programs affecting housing finance much further. In 1934, his administration oversaw the creation of the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). By providing a federally backed insurance system for mortgage lenders, the FHA was designed to encourage lenders to offer mortgages on more attractive terms. This intervention appears to have worked in that, by the 1950s, most new mortgages were for thirty years at fixed rates, and down payment requirements had fallen to about 20 percent. In 1938, the Congress chartered the Federal National Mortgage Association, or Fannie Mae, as it came to be known. The new institution was authorized to issue bonds and use the proceeds to purchase FHA mortgages from lenders, with the objectives of increasing the supply of mortgage credit and reducing variations in the terms and supply of credit across regions.4 Shaped to a considerable extent by New Deal reforms and regulations, the postwar mortgage market took on the form that would last for several decades. The market had two main sectors. One, the descendant of the pre-Depression market sector, consisted of savings and loan associations, mutual savings banks, and, to a lesser extent, commercial banks. With financing from short-term deposits, these institutions made conventional fixed-rate long-term loans to homebuyers. Notably, federal and state regulations limited geographical diversification for these lenders, restricting interstate banking and obliging thrifts to make mortgage loans in small local areas--within 50 miles of the home office until 1964, and within 100 miles after that. In the other sector, the product of New Deal programs, private mortgage brokers and other lenders originated standardized loans backed by the FHA and the Veterans' Administration (VA). These guaranteed loans could be held in portfolio or sold to institutional investors through a nationwide secondary market. No discussion of the New Deal's effect on the housing market and the monetary transmission mechanism would be complete without reference to Regulation Q--which was eventually to exemplify the law of unintended consequences. The Banking Acts of 1933 and 1935 gave the Federal Reserve the authority to impose deposit-rate ceilings on banks, an authority that was later expanded to cover thrift institutions. The Fed used this authority in establishing its Regulation Q. The so-called Reg Q ceilings remained in place in one form or another until the mid-1980s.5 The original rationale for deposit ceilings was to reduce "excessive" competition for bank deposits, which some blamed as a cause of bank failures in the early 1930s. In retrospect, of course, this was a dubious bit of economic analysis. In any case, the principal effects of the ceilings were not on bank competition but on the supply of credit. With the ceilings in place, banks and thrifts experienced what came to be known as disintermediation--an outflow of funds from depositories that occurred whenever short-term money-market rates rose above the maximum that these institutions could pay. In the absence of alternative funding sources, the loss of deposits prevented banks and thrifts from extending mortgage credit to new customers. The Transmission Mechanism and the New Deal ReformsUnder the New Deal system, housing construction soared after World War II, driven by the removal of wartime building restrictions, the need to replace an aging housing stock, rapid family formation that accompanied the beginning of the baby boom, and large-scale internal migration. The stock of housing units grew 20 percent between 1940 and 1950, with most of the new construction occurring after 1945. In 1951, the Treasury-Federal Reserve Accord freed the Fed from the obligation to support Treasury bond prices. Monetary policy began to focus on influencing short-term money markets as a means of affecting economic activity and inflation, foreshadowing the Federal Reserve's current use of the federal funds rate as a policy instrument. Over the next few decades, housing assumed a leading role in the monetary transmission mechanism, largely for two reasons: Reg Q and the advent of high inflation. The Reg Q ceilings were seldom binding before the mid-1960s, but disintermediation induced by the ceilings occurred episodically from the mid-1960s until Reg Q began to be phased out aggressively in the early 1980s. The impact of disintermediation on the housing market could be quite significant; for example, a moderate tightening of monetary policy in 1966 contributed to a 23 percent decline in residential construction between the first quarter of 1966 and the first quarter of 1967. State usury laws and branching restrictions worsened the episodes of disintermediation by placing ceilings on lending rates and limiting the flow of funds between local markets. For the period 1960 to 1982, when Reg Q assumed its greatest importance, statistical analysis shows a high correlation between single-family housing starts and the growth of small time deposits at thrifts, suggesting that disintermediation effects were powerful; in contrast, since 1983 this correlation is essentially zero.6 Economists at the time were well aware of the importance of the disintermediation phenomenon for monetary policy. Frank de Leeuw and Edward Gramlich highlighted this particular channel in their description of an early version of the MPS macroeconometric model, a joint product of researchers at the Federal Reserve, MIT, and the University of Pennsylvania (de Leeuw and Gramlich, 1969). The model attributed almost one-half of the direct first-year effects of monetary policy on the real economy--which were estimated to be substantial--to disintermediation and other housing-related factors, despite the fact that residential construction accounted for only 4 percent of nominal gross domestic product (GDP) at the time. As time went on, however, monetary policy mistakes and weaknesses in the structure of the mortgage market combined to create deeper economic problems. For reasons that have been much analyzed, in the late 1960s and the 1970s the Federal Reserve allowed inflation to rise, which led to corresponding increases in nominal interest rates. Increases in short-term nominal rates not matched by contractually set rates on existing mortgages exposed a fundamental weakness in the system of housing finance, namely, the maturity mismatch between long-term mortgage credit and the short-term deposits that commercial banks and thrifts used to finance mortgage lending. This mismatch led to a series of liquidity crises and, ultimately, to a rash of insolvencies among mortgage lenders. High inflation was also ultimately reflected in high nominal long-term rates on new mortgages, which had the effect of "front loading" the real payments made by holders of long-term, fixed-rate mortgages. This front-loading reduced affordability and further limited the extension of mortgage credit, thereby restraining construction activity. Reflecting these factors, housing construction experienced a series of pronounced boom and bust cycles from the early 1960s through the mid-1980s, which contributed in turn to substantial swings in overall economic growth. The Emergence of Capital Markets as a Source of Housing FinanceThe manifest problems associated with relying on short-term deposits to fund long-term mortgage lending set in train major changes in financial markets and financial instruments, which collectively served to link mortgage lending more closely to the broader capital markets. The shift from reliance on specialized portfolio lenders financed by deposits to a greater use of capital markets represented the second great sea change in mortgage finance, equaled in importance only by the events of the New Deal. Government actions had considerable influence in shaping this second revolution. In 1968, Fannie Mae was split into two agencies: the Government National Mortgage Association (Ginnie Mae) and the re-chartered Fannie Mae, which became a privately owned government-sponsored enterprise (GSE), authorized to operate in the secondary market for conventional as well as guaranteed mortgage loans. In 1970, to compete with Fannie Mae in the secondary market, another GSE was created--the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, or Freddie Mac. Also in 1970, Ginnie Mae issued the first mortgage pass-through security, followed soon after by Freddie Mac. In the early 1980s, Freddie Mac introduced collateralized mortgage obligations (CMOs), which separated the payments from a pooled set of mortgages into "strips" carrying different effective maturities and credit risks. Since 1980, the outstanding volume of GSE mortgage-backed securities has risen from less than $200 billion to more than $4 trillion today. Alongside these developments came the establishment of private mortgage insurers, which competed with the FHA, and private mortgage pools, which bundled loans not handled by the GSEs, including loans that did not meet GSE eligibility criteria--so-called nonconforming loans. Today, these private pools account for around $2 trillion in residential mortgage debt. These developments did not occur in time to prevent a large fraction of the thrift industry from becoming effectively insolvent by the early 1980s in the wake of the late-1970s surge in inflation.7In this instance, the government abandoned attempts to patch up the system and instead undertook sweeping deregulation. Reg Q was phased out during the 1980s; state usury laws capping mortgage rates were abolished; restrictions on interstate banking were lifted by the mid-1990s; and lenders were permitted to offer adjustable-rate mortgages as well as mortgages that did not fully amortize and which therefore involved balloon payments at the end of the loan period. Critically, the savings and loan crisis of the late 1980s ended the dominance of deposit-taking portfolio lenders in the mortgage market. By the 1990s, increased reliance on securitization led to a greater separation between mortgage lending and mortgage investing even as the mortgage and capital markets became more closely integrated. About 56 percent of the home mortgage market is now securitized, compared with only 10 percent in 1980 and less than 1 percent in 1970. In some ways, the new mortgage market came to look more like a textbook financial market, with fewer institutional "frictions" to impede trading and pricing of event-contingent securities. Securitization and the development of deep and liquid derivatives markets eased the spreading and trading of risk. New types of mortgage products were created. Recent developments notwithstanding, mortgages became more liquid instruments, for both lenders and borrowers. Technological advances facilitated these changes; for example, computerization and innovations such as credit scores reduced the costs of making loans and led to a "commoditization" of mortgages. Access to mortgage credit also widened; notably, loans to subprime borrowers accounted for about 13 percent of outstanding mortgages in 2006. I suggested that the mortgage market has become more like the frictionless financial market of the textbook, with fewer institutional or regulatory barriers to efficient operation. In one important respect, however, that characterization is not entirely accurate. A key function of efficient capital markets is to overcome problems of information and incentives in the extension of credit. The traditional model of mortgage markets, based on portfolio lending, solved these problems in a straightforward way: Because banks and thrifts kept the loans they made on their own books, they had strong incentives to underwrite carefully and to invest in gathering information about borrowers and communities. In contrast, when most loans are securitized and originators have little financial or reputational capital at risk, the danger exists that the originators of loans will be less diligent. In securitization markets, therefore, monitoring the originators and ensuring that they have incentives to make good loans is critical. I have argued elsewhere that, in some cases, the failure of investors to provide adequate oversight of originators and to ensure that originators' incentives were properly aligned was a major cause of the problems that we see today in the subprime mortgage market (Bernanke, 2007). In recent months we have seen a reassessment of the problems of maintaining adequate monitoring and incentives in the lending process, with investors insisting on tighter underwriting standards and some large lenders pulling back from the use of brokers and other agents. We will not return to the days in which all mortgage lending was portfolio lending, but clearly the originate-to-distribute model will be modified--is already being modified--to provide stronger protection for investors and better incentives for originators to underwrite prudently. The Monetary Transmission Mechanism Since the Mid-1980sThe dramatic changes in mortgage finance that I have described appear to have significantly affected the role of housing in the monetary transmission mechanism. Importantly, the easing of some traditional institutional and regulatory frictions seems to have reduced the sensitivity of residential construction to monetary policy, so that housing is no longer so central to monetary transmission as it was.8In particular, in the absence of Reg Q ceilings on deposit rates and with a much-reduced role for deposits as a source of housing finance, the availability of mortgage credit today is generally less dependent on conditions in short-term money markets, where the central bank operates most directly. Most estimates suggest that, because of the reduced sensitivity of housing to short-term interest rates, the response of the economy to a given change in the federal funds rate is modestly smaller and more balanced across sectors than in the past.9These results are embodied in the Federal Reserve's large econometric model of the economy, which implies that only about 14 percent of the overall response of output to monetary policy is now attributable to movements in residential investment, in contrast to the model's estimate of 25 percent or so under what I have called the New Deal system. The econometric findings seem consistent with the reduced synchronization of the housing cycle and the business cycle during the present decade. In all but one recession during the period from 1960 to 1999, declines in residential investment accounted for at least 40 percent of the decline in overall real GDP, and the sole exception--the 1970 recession--was preceded by a substantial decline in housing activity before the official start of the downturn. In contrast, residential investmentboostedoverall real GDP growth during the 2001 recession. More recently, the sharp slowdown in housing has been accompanied, at least thus far, by relatively good performance in other sectors. That said, the current episode demonstrates that pronounced housing cycles are not a thing of the past. My discussion so far has focused primarily on the role of variations in housing finance and residential construction in monetary transmission. But, of course, housing may have indirect effects on economic activity, most notably by influencing consumer spending. With regard to household consumption, perhaps the most significant effect of recent developments in mortgage finance is that home equity, which was once a highly illiquid asset, has become instead quite liquid, the result of the development of home equity lines of credit and the relatively low cost of cash-out refinancing. Economic theory suggests that the greater liquidity of home equity should allow households to better smooth consumption over time. This smoothing in turn should reduce the dependence of their spending on current income, which, by limiting the power of conventional multiplier effects, should tend to increase macroeconomic stability and reduce the effects of a given change in the short-term interest rate. These inferences are supported by some empirical evidence.10 On the other hand, the increased liquidity of home equity may lead consumer spending to respond more than in past years to changes in the values of their homes; some evidence does suggest that the correlation of consumption and house prices is higher in countries, like the United States, that have more sophisticated mortgage markets (Calza, Monacelli, and Stracca, 2007). Whether the development of home equity loans and easier mortgage refinancing has increased the magnitude of the real estate wealth effect--and if so, by how much--is a much-debated question that I will leave to another occasion. ConclusionI hope this exploration of the history of housing finance has persuaded you that institutional factors can matter quite a bit in determining the influence of monetary policy on housing and the role of housing in the business cycle. Certainly, recent developments have added yet further evidence in support of that proposition. The interaction of housing, housing finance, and economic activity has for years been of central importance for understanding the behavior of the economy, and it will continue to be central to our thinking as we try to anticipate economic and financial developments. In closing, I would like to express my particular appreciation for an individual whom I count as a friend, as I know many of you do: Edward Gramlich. Ned was scheduled to be on the program but his illness prevented him from making the trip. As many of you know, Ned has been a research leader in the topics we are discussing this weekend, and he has just finished a very interesting book on subprime mortgage markets. We will miss not only Ned's insights over the course of this conference but his warmth and wit as well. Ned and his wife Ruth will be in the thoughts of all of us. References Benito, A., J. Thompson, M. Waldron, and R. Wood (2006)."House Prices and Consumer Spending (420 KB PDF),"Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, vol. 46 (Summer), 142-54. Bennett, P., R. Peach, and S. Peristiani (2001)."Structural Change in the Mortgage Market and the Propensity to Refinance,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 33 (no. 4), pp. 955-75. Bernanke, Ben S. (2007)."The Subprime Mortgage Market,"speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago's 43rd Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Chicago, May 17, www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2007. Burns, Arthur F., and Wesley C. Mitchell (1946).Measuring Business Cycles(New York: National Bureau of Economic Research). Calza, A., T. Monacelli, and L. Stracca (2007)."Mortgage Markets, Collateral Constraints, and Monetary Policy: Do Institutional Factors Matter?"CFS Working Paper Series No. 2007/10 (Frankfurt: Center for Financial Studies). de Leeuw, Frank, and Edward M. Gramlich (1969)."The Channels of Monetary Policy: A Further Report on the Federal Reserve-MIT Model,"Journal of Finance, vol. 24 (May, Papers and Proceedings of the American Finance Association), pp. 265-90. Dynan, Karen E., Douglas W. Elmendorf, and Daniel E. Sichel (2005)."Can Financial Innovation Help to Explain the Reduced Volatility of Economic Activity?"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 53 (January), pp. 123-50. Estrella, Arturo (2002)."Securitization and the Efficacy of Monetary Policy (568 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Economic Policy Review,vol. 9 (May), pp. 243-55. Green, Richard K., and Susan M. Wachter (2005)."The American Mortgage in Historical and International Context (190 KB PDF),"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 19 (no. 4), pp. 93-114. Hurst, E., and F. Stafford (2004)."Home is Where the Equity Is: Mortgage Refinancing and Household Consumption,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 36 (no. 6), pp. 985-1014. Mahoney, Patrick I., and Alice P. White (1985). "The Thrift Industry in Transition,"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 71 (March), pp. 137-56. McCarthy, J., and R. Peach (2002)."Monetary Policy Transmission to Residential Investment (225 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Economic Policy Review, vol. 8 (no. 1), pp. 139-58. Snowden, Kenneth A. (1987). "Mortgage Rates and American Capital Market Development in the Late Nineteenth Century,"Journal of Economic History, vol. 47 (no. 3), pp. 671-91. U.S. Department of Commerce (1937).Financial Survey of Urban Housing(Washington: Government Printing Office). Weiss, Marc A. (1989)."Marketing and Financing Home Ownership: Mortgage Lending and Public Policy in the United States, 1918-1989 (617 KB PDF),"inBusiness and Economic History,series 2, vol. 18, William J. Hausman, ed., Wilmington, Del.: Business History Conference, pp. 109-18. Footnotes 1.Estimates of delinquencies are based on data from First American LoanPerformance.Return to text 2.Weiss (1989) provides an overview of the evolution of mortgage lending over the past 100 years.Return to text 3.Snowden (1987) discusses regional variations in home mortgage rates at the end of the nineteenth century. In addition, the U.S. Department of Commerce (1937) provides information on mortgage rates for various U.S. cities for the 1920s and early 1930s.Return to text 4.Later, in anticipation of the end of World War II, the Congress created the Veterans' Administration Home Loan Guarantee Program, which supported mortgage lending to returning GIs on attractive terms, often including little or no down-payment requirement. In 1948, the Congress authorized Fannie Mae to purchase these VA loans as well.Return to text 5.Regulation Q provisions that still exist restrict banks' ability to pay interest on some deposits, but these remaining provisions have little effect on the ability of depository institutions to raise funds.Return to text 6.In detrended data, the correlation between quarterly single-family housing starts and the growth of small time deposits at thrifts during the preceding quarter was 0.53 for the 1960-1982 period; since 1983, this correlation has fallen to -0.02.Return to text 7.Mahoney and White (1985) reported that the net worth of 156 thrift institutions was less than 1 percent of assets in 1984; when reported net worth was adjusted to exclude regulatory additions that did not represent true capital, this figure swelled to 253.Return to text 8.Institutional factors can still be relevant, however, as can be seen by international comparisons. For example, in the United Kingdom, where the predominance of adjustable-rate mortgages makes changes in short-term interest rates quite visible to borrowers and homeowners, housing has a significant role in the monetary transmission mechanism through cash-flow effects on consumption, among other channels (Benito, Thompson, Waldron and Wood, 2006). Although adjustable-rate mortgages have become more important in the United States and now account for about 40 percent of the market, most adjustable-rate mortgages here are actually hybrids in that they bear a fixed rate for the first several years of the loan.Return to text 9.For example, McCarthy and Peach (2002) report a substantial decline in the short-run, though not long-run, interest elasticity of residential investment and real GDP after the early 1980s. Work by Dynan, Elmendorf, and Sichel (2006) supports this conclusion as does other work at the Federal Reserve on models for forecasting residential investment. Modeling work at the Fed also shows that the short-run sensitivity of residential investment to nominal mortgage rates fell by more than half after the end of the New Deal system, but, in line with the findings of McCarthy and Peach, remained largely static after 1982. Estrella (2002) finds that secular changes in mortgage securitization have reduced the interest sensitivity of housing to short-term interest rates and the response of real output to an unanticipated change in monetary policy.Return to text 10.Dynan, Elmendorf and Sichel (2006) argue that financial innovation has made it easier for households to use the equity in their homes to buffer their spending against income shocks, thereby reducing the volatility of aggregate consumption. Studies by Hurst and Stafford (2004) and Bennett, Peach and Peristiani (2001) provide indirect evidence supporting this argument.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Tuesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on August 7, 2007.The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The summary description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting.FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board’s web site atwww.federalreserve.gov/fomc.Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, August 7, 2007 The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Tuesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on August 7, 2007. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The summary description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board’s web site atwww.federalreserve.gov/fomc.Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, August 7, 2007
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Capital City Bank, Tallahassee, Florida, a state member bank. Capital City Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires Capital City Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $85,045.00, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Chemical Bank, Midland, Michigan, a state member bank. Chemical Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board’s Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires Chemical Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $16,245.00, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Hanmi Bank, Los Angeles, California, a state member bank. Hanmi Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires Hanmi Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $8,835, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a Consent Order of Prohibition against Richard N. DeLong, a former chief lending officer, director, and institution-affiliated party of Mid America Bank and Trust Company, Dixon, Missouri. Mr. DeLong, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order which was based on his alleged participation in unsafe and unsound practices and breaches of fiduciary duty to the Bank involving the Bank’s granting of loans to alleged nominee borrowers and the granting of loans based on allegedly false purpose statements, to the alleged misapplication of loan proceeds, and to the alleged submission of false and misleading information to the Bank’s board of directors. A copy of the Order is attached.
Governor Randall S. Kroszner Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate During the last quarter century, the Federal Reserve has achieved much success in reducing and stabilizing inflation and inflation expectations. This success has helped to contribute to a tendency for the fluctuations in employment and output to be lower than in the past and a reduction in the frequency and severity of recessions. If confirmed, I would continue to work with Chairman Bernanke and the other members of the Federal Open Market Committee to continue to underscore the role of long-term price stability in achieving prosperity and maximum employment. The Federal Reserve also has a fundamental responsibility to consumers and users of the banking and financial system. Discriminatory or abusive lending practices should not be tolerated, and the privacy of individuals and their financial data must be protected. Since I joined the Federal Reserve, we have undertaken a number of initiatives to better protect and to better inform consumers. These include: issuing guidance onnon-traditional mortgage productsand onsubprime mortgagesand improving our collaboration with the state banking supervisors; launching apilot projectin collaboration with other federal agencies and state regulators to examine non-depository lenders for compliance with consumer regulations; improving disclosures for privacy notices andcredit cards; improving thehandbook on adjustable-rate mortgages(ARM) that creditors are required to give to all ARM applicants, and committing to propose new rules before the end of the year to require that lenders provide other mortgage disclosures more quickly and to improve mortgage loan advertisements; undertaking a series of hearings, includingone I chairedin June, to assess the impact of specific practices in the mortgage market, and committing to propose new rules exercising our authority to ban unfair or deceptive practices under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act. If I am confirmed, I will continue to place the highest priority on protecting consumers while ensuring that creditors continue to provide credit responsibly. An important part of my research as an economics professor at the University of Chicago, and my practical policy work as a member of the Council of Economic Advisers, was devoted to banking and financial regulation as well as banking and financial crises. The safety and soundness of the U.S. banking and payments systems is critical to achieving economic growth, maximum employment, and general economic stability, and the Federal Reserve works closely with other regulators to achieve this goal. The Federal Reserve also has an important role to play in responding to and mitigating the impact of financial crises and shocks. If confirmed, I would continue to work vigorously to protect and promote the safety and soundness of the system. Thank you once again for holding this hearing, and I look forward to your questions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced amendments to Appendix A of Regulation CC that reflect the restructuring of the Federal Reserve's check processing operations in the Ninth and Tenth Districts. These amendments are part of a series of amendments to Appendix A associated with the previously-announced restructuring of the Reserve Banks’ check processing operations. Appendix A provides a routing number guide that helps depository institutions determine the maximum permissible hold periods for most deposited checks. As of October 20, 2007, the Helena branch office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis no longer will process checks, and banks currently served by that office will be reassigned to the Denver branch office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. The Reserve Banks intend, however, for the Helena branch to continue serving as a site at which substitute checks are printed for delivery to paying banks. To ensure that the information in Appendix A accurately describes the structure of check processing operations within the Federal Reserve System, the final rule deletes the reference in Appendix A to the Helena branch office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and reassigns the routing numbers listed thereunder to the Denver branch office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. To coincide with the effective date of the underlying check processing changes, the amendments are effective October 20, 2007. As a result of these changes, some checks deposited in the affected regions that currently are nonlocal checks will become local checks that are subject to shorter permissible hold periods. The Board’s notice is attached. Federal Register Notice53 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Anadarko Bank & Trust Company, Anadarko, Oklahoma, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. A copy of the 2007 Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Marco Community Bank, Marco Island, Florida, the Florida Office of Financial Regulation, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.A copy of the Written Agreement is attached. The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Marco Community Bank, Marco Island, Florida, the Florida Office of Financial Regulation, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Marshall BankFirst Corp., Minneapolis, Minnesota, BANKFIRST, Sioux Falls, South Dakota, the South Dakota Department of Revenue and Regulation, Division of Banking, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. The Federal Reserve Board simultaneously announced the termination of the April 22, 2003, Written Agreement between BANKFIRST, Sioux Falls, South Dakota and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the 2007 Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Premier Bank, Denver, Colorado, the State of Colorado Division of Banking, Denver, Colorado, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. The Federal Reserve Board simultaneously announced the termination of the March 24, 2003, Written Agreement between Premier Bank, Denver, Colorado, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. A copy of the 2007 Written Agreement is attached.