The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced the annual adjustment to the asset-size thresholds used to define "small bank," "small savings association," "intermediate small bank," and "intermediate small savings association" under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations. The annual adjustments for banks are required by the 2005 CRA regulatory amendments and for savings associations by the Office of Thrift Supervision's 2007 CRA regulatory amendments. Annual adjustments to these asset-size thresholds are based on the year-to-year change in the average of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers, not seasonally adjusted, for each 12-month period ending in November, with rounding to the nearest million. As a result of the 2.7 percent increase in the CPI for the period ending in November 2007, the definitions of small and intermediate small institutions for CRA examinations will change as follows: These asset-size threshold adjustments are effective January 1, 2008. The agencies will publish the adjustments in theFederal Register. In addition, the agencies will post a list of the current and historical asset-size thresholds on the web site of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (www.ffiec.gov/cra).
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday published its annual notice of the asset-size exemption threshold for depository institutions under Regulation C, which implements the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). The asset-size exemption for depository institutions will increase from $36 million to $37 million based on the annual percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers for the twelve-month period ending in November 2007. As a result, depository institutions with assets of $37 million or less as of December 31, 2007, are exempt from collecting data in 2008. An institution’s exemption from collecting data in 2008 does not affect its responsibility to report the data it was required to collect in 2007. The adjustment is effective January 1, 2008. HMDA and the Board’s Regulation C require most mortgage lenders located in metropolitan areas to collect, report, and disclose data about applications for, and originations and purchases of, home purchase loans, home improvement loans, and refinancings. Data reported include the type, purpose, and amount of the loan; the race, ethnicity, sex, and income of the loan applicant; the location of the property; and loan price information for some loans. The purposes of HMDA include helping to determine whether financial institutions are serving the housing needs of their communities and assisting in fair lending enforcement. The Board’s notice is attached. Federal Register Notice50 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the notice under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Fortis S.A./N.V., Fortis, N.V., Fortis Brussels S.A./N.V., and Fortis Bank S.A./N.V., all of Brussels, Belgium, to engage in energy management activities, on a limited basis, as an activity that is complementary to the financial activities of engaging regularly as a principal in commodity derivatives and providing financial and investment advisory services for derivatives transactions. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday approved an action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City decreasing the discount rate at the Bank from 5 percent to 4-3/4 percent, effective immediately.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Minneapolis, and Dallas decreasing the discount rate at the Banks from 5 percent to 4-3/4 percent, effective immediately. The Board has also approved an action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, decreasing the discount rate at the Bank from 5 percent to 4-3/4 percent, effective December 11, 2007.
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., will be closed on Monday, December 24, 2007.The twelve regional Reserve Banks will be open and operating during normal business hours and will provide all financial services as usual.
Today, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank are announcing measures designed to address elevated pressures in short-term funding markets.Federal Reserve ActionsActions taken by the Federal Reserve include the establishment of a temporary Term Auction Facility (approved by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System) and the establishment of foreign exchange swap lines with the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank (approved by the Federal Open Market Committee).Under the Term Auction Facility (TAF) program, the Federal Reserve will auction term funds to depository institutions against the wide variety of collateral that can be used to secure loans at the discount window. All depository institutions that are judged to be in generally sound financial condition by their local Reserve Bank and that are eligible to borrow under the primary credit discount window program will be eligible to participate in TAF auctions. All advances must be fully collateralized. By allowing the Federal Reserve to inject term funds through a broader range of counterparties and against a broader range of collateral than open market operations, this facility could help promote the efficient dissemination of liquidity when the unsecured interbank markets are under stress.Each TAF auction will be for a fixed amount, with the rate determined by the auction process (subject to a minimum bid rate). The first TAF auction of $20 billion is scheduled for Monday, December 17, with settlement on Thursday, December 20; this auction will provide 28-day term funds, maturing Thursday, January 17, 2008. The second auction of up to $20 billion is scheduled for Thursday, December 20, with settlement on Thursday, December 27; this auction will provide 35-day funds, maturing Thursday, January 31, 2008. The third and fourth auctions will be held on January 14 and 28, with settlement on the following Thursdays. The amounts of those auctions will be determined in January. The Federal Reserve may conduct additional auctions in subsequent months, depending in part on evolving market conditions.Depositories will submit bids through their local Reserve Banks. The minimum bid rate for the auctions will be established at the overnight indexed swap (OIS) rate corresponding to the maturity of the credit being auctioned. The OIS rate is a measure of market participants’ expected average federal funds rate over the relevant term.The minimum rate for the December 17 auction along with other auction details will be announced on Friday, December 14. Noncompetitive tenders may be accepted beginning with the third auction. The results of the first auction will be announced at 10 a.m. Eastern Time on December 19. The schedule for releasing the results of later auctions will be determined subsequently. Detailed terms of the auction and summary auction results will be available athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm.Experience gained under this temporary program will be helpful in assessing the potential usefulness of augmenting the Federal Reserve’s current monetary policy tools--open market operations and the primary credit facility--with a permanent facility for auctioning term discount window credit. The Board anticipates that it would seek public comment on any proposal for a permanent term auction facility.The Federal Open Market Committee has authorized temporary reciprocal currency arrangements (swap lines) with the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Swiss National Bank (SNB). These arrangements will provide dollars in amounts of up to $20 billion and $4 billion to the ECB and the SNB, respectively, for use in their jurisdictions. The FOMC approved these swap lines for a period of up to six months.Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central BanksInformation on the actions that will be taken by other central banks is available at the following websites.Bank of CanadaBank of EnglandEuropean Central BankSwiss National Bank (61 KB PDF)Statements by Other Central BanksBank of JapanSwedish RiksbankFederal Register Notice51 KB PDF|TEXT Today, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank are announcing measures designed to address elevated pressures in short-term funding markets. Federal Reserve ActionsActions taken by the Federal Reserve include the establishment of a temporary Term Auction Facility (approved by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System) and the establishment of foreign exchange swap lines with the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank (approved by the Federal Open Market Committee). Under the Term Auction Facility (TAF) program, the Federal Reserve will auction term funds to depository institutions against the wide variety of collateral that can be used to secure loans at the discount window. All depository institutions that are judged to be in generally sound financial condition by their local Reserve Bank and that are eligible to borrow under the primary credit discount window program will be eligible to participate in TAF auctions. All advances must be fully collateralized. By allowing the Federal Reserve to inject term funds through a broader range of counterparties and against a broader range of collateral than open market operations, this facility could help promote the efficient dissemination of liquidity when the unsecured interbank markets are under stress. Each TAF auction will be for a fixed amount, with the rate determined by the auction process (subject to a minimum bid rate). The first TAF auction of $20 billion is scheduled for Monday, December 17, with settlement on Thursday, December 20; this auction will provide 28-day term funds, maturing Thursday, January 17, 2008. The second auction of up to $20 billion is scheduled for Thursday, December 20, with settlement on Thursday, December 27; this auction will provide 35-day funds, maturing Thursday, January 31, 2008. The third and fourth auctions will be held on January 14 and 28, with settlement on the following Thursdays. The amounts of those auctions will be determined in January. The Federal Reserve may conduct additional auctions in subsequent months, depending in part on evolving market conditions. Depositories will submit bids through their local Reserve Banks. The minimum bid rate for the auctions will be established at the overnight indexed swap (OIS) rate corresponding to the maturity of the credit being auctioned. The OIS rate is a measure of market participants’ expected average federal funds rate over the relevant term.The minimum rate for the December 17 auction along with other auction details will be announced on Friday, December 14. Noncompetitive tenders may be accepted beginning with the third auction. The results of the first auction will be announced at 10 a.m. Eastern Time on December 19. The schedule for releasing the results of later auctions will be determined subsequently. Detailed terms of the auction and summary auction results will be available athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm. Experience gained under this temporary program will be helpful in assessing the potential usefulness of augmenting the Federal Reserve’s current monetary policy tools--open market operations and the primary credit facility--with a permanent facility for auctioning term discount window credit. The Board anticipates that it would seek public comment on any proposal for a permanent term auction facility. The Federal Open Market Committee has authorized temporary reciprocal currency arrangements (swap lines) with the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Swiss National Bank (SNB). These arrangements will provide dollars in amounts of up to $20 billion and $4 billion to the ECB and the SNB, respectively, for use in their jurisdictions. The FOMC approved these swap lines for a period of up to six months. Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central BanksInformation on the actions that will be taken by other central banks is available at the following websites. Bank of CanadaBank of EnglandEuropean Central BankSwiss National Bank (61 KB PDF) Statements by Other Central BanksBank of JapanSwedish Riksbank Federal Register Notice51 KB PDF|TEXT
On December 17, 2007, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $20 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Stop-out rate:4.65 percentTotal propositions submitted:$61.553 billionTotal propositions accepted:$20.000 billionBid/cover ratio:3.08Number of bidders:93 Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 1.96% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on December 20, 2007, and will mature on January 17, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by Noon EST on December 19, 2007. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EST on December 19, 2007, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On December 20, 2007, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $20 billion in 35-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Stop-out rate:4.67 percentTotal propositions submitted:$57.664 billionTotal propositions accepted:$20.000 billionBid/cover ratio:2.88Number of bidders:73 Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 73.40% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on December 27, 2007, and will mature on January 31, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by Noon EST on December 21, 2007. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EST on December 21, 2007, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
The Federal Reserve intends to conduct biweekly Term Auction Facility (TAF) auctions for as long as necessary to address elevated pressures in short-term funding markets. The Board of Governors will announce the sizes of the January 14 and January 28 TAF auctions at noon on January 4.
The Federal Reserve intends to conduct biweekly Term Auction Facility (TAF) auctions for as long as necessary to address elevated pressures in short-term funding markets. The Board of Governors will announce the sizes of the January 14 and January 28 TAF auctions at noon on January 4.
The Federal Reserve intends to conduct biweekly Term Auction Facility (TAF) auctions for as long as necessary to address elevated pressures in short-term funding markets. The Board of Governors will announce the sizes of the January 14 and January 28 TAF auctions at noon on January 4.
David FettigFSPC Spokesman(612) 204-5274 Minneapolis, Minn. About 19 billion more electronic payments were made in 2006 than in 2003. In contrast, the number of checks paid fell by about 7 billion over the same period. Of the 93 billion noncash payments in 2006, about 63 billion were electronic and around 30 billion were checks. Among the three main types of electronic payments, the annual use of debit cards increased by about 10 billion payments over the survey period to 25.3 billion payments in 2006. Debit cards now surpass credit cards as the most frequently used electronic payment type. Over the same period, automated clearinghouse (ACH) payments grew to 14.6 billion, an increase of almost 6 billion payments. Credit cards grew by almost 3 billion payments to 21.7 billion in 2006. The highest rate of growth from 2003 to 2006 was in ACH payments, which grew about 19 percent per year, followed closely by debit card payments at almost 18 percent. Meanwhile, checks declined by an average of 6.4 percent per year since 2003, indicating the pace at which check payments has been decreasing since the mid-1990s has picked up in recent years. One of the most significant changes of the past three years has been the increasing proportion of checks processed electronically. Such changes have improved the efficiency of the check clearing system for interbank checks--those drawn on a different depository institution than the one at which they were deposited. At the time of the survey, about 40 percent of all interbank checks paid were replaced with electronic information at some point in the collection process. In addition to the 30 billion checks paid, some payments that started out as checks became electronic payments. During 2006, almost 3 billion consumer checks--including checks sent to billers or used as source documents to initiate electronic payments at the point of sale--were converted and cleared as ACH payments rather than check payments, an eight-fold increase since 2003. A total of 33 billion checks were written in 2006. “The results of our study underscore the ongoing importance of check electronification and other innovations that improve the efficiency of the U.S. payments system,” said Richard Oliver, executive vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and the Federal Reserve Banks’ product manager for retail payments. “With around 33 billion checks written in 2006, we expect checks to be around for some time.” The2007 Federal Reserve Payments Studyconsists of three research efforts commissioned to estimate the annual number, dollar value, and composition of noncash retail payments in the United States. TheDepository Institutions Payments Studyincluded responses from approximately 1,400 financial institutions (commercial banks, savings institutions and credit unions). TheElectronic Payments Study, included responses from 65 of the largest payment networks and card issuers. A third study, which will categorize the use of checks by payer, payee, and purpose, is expected to be published during the first quarter of 2008. “The Fed’s2007 Payments Studyis part of an ongoing effort by the Federal Reserve System to measure trends in noncash payments in the United States,” Oliver said. “This year’s study repeats critical aspects of our previous studies, providing additional point-in-time estimates from which inferences can be drawn about the rate and nature of change of the U.S. payments system. We appreciate the efforts of all the institutions that provided the information needed to conduct these studies.” A summary report of the2007 Federal Reserve Payments Studyis available athttp://www.frbservices.org/files/communications/pdf/research/2007_payments_study.pdf. Detail reports on the individual studies will be available in early 2008. Fact Sheet Background The2007 Federal Reserve Payments Studyincludes three research efforts to estimate the annual number, dollar value, and composition of noncash payments in the United States. For this study, noncash payments included check, automated clearinghouse (ACH), credit card, debit card (both signature and PIN) and electronic benefits transfer (EBT) transactions. The study also estimated the number and value of ATM withdrawals. TheDepository Institutions Payments Studyestimated the number and value of checks and other types of payments from deposit accounts based on responses from approximately 1,400 financial institutions in the United States. TheElectronic Payments Studyestimated the number and value of electronic payments based on responses from 65 of the largest payment networks and card issuers in the United States. TheCheck Sample Study, which looks at check usage, is expected to be published by the Federal Reserve Banks during the first quarter of 2008. Assisting the Federal Reserve with the 2007 Payments Study were Global Concepts, a subsidiary of McKinsey & Company, and its subcontractor ICR (International Communications Research), and Dove Consulting, a division of Hitachi Consulting. Findings (All are annual estimates based on survey data)Check Payments Electronic Payments ATM Withdrawals
On December 17, 2007, the Federal Reserve will offer $20 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction ParametersOffering Amount:$20 billionTerm:28-day loanBid Submission Date:December 17, 2007Opening Time:10 a.m. ESTClosing Time:1 p.m. ESTNotification Date:December 19, 2007Settlement Date:December 20, 2007Maturity Date:January 17, 2008Minimum Bid Amount (per bid):$10 millionBid Increment$100,000Maximum Bid Amount (per institution):$2 billion (10% of Offering Amount)Minimum Bid Rate:4.17 percentIncremental Bid Rate:0.001 percentMinimum Award:$10,000Maximum Award:$2 billion (10% of Offering Amount) Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the Opening Time and Closing Time on the Bid Submission Date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EST on the Notification Date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EST on the Notification Date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EST on the Notification Date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
On December 20, 2007, the Federal Reserve will offer $20 billion in 35-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this Announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction ParametersOffering Amount:$20 billionTerm:35-day loanBid Submission Date:December 20, 2007Opening Time:10 a.m. ESTClosing Time:1 p.m. ESTNotification Date:December 21, 2007Settlement Date:December 27, 2007Maturity Date:January 31, 2008Minimum Bid Amount (per bid):$10 millionBid Increment$100,000Maximum Bid Amount (per institution):$2 billion (10% of Offering Amount)Minimum Bid Rate:4.15 percentIncremental Bid Rate:0.001 percentMinimum Award:$10,000Maximum Award:$2 billion (10% of Offering Amount) Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the Opening Time and Closing Time on the Bid Submission Date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EST on the Notification Date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EST on the Notification Date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EST on the Notification Date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate 25 basis points to 4-1/4 percent. Incoming information suggests that economic growth is slowing, reflecting the intensification of the housing correction and some softening in business and consumer spending. Moreover, strains in financial markets have increased in recent weeks. Today’s action, combined with the policy actions taken earlier, should help promote moderate growth over time. Readings on core inflation have improved modestly this year, but elevated energy and commodity prices, among other factors, may put upward pressure on inflation. In this context, the Committee judges that some inflation risks remain, and it will continue to monitor inflation developments carefully. Recent developments, including the deterioration in financial market conditions, have increased the uncertainty surrounding the outlook for economic growth and inflation. The Committee will continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act as needed to foster price stability and sustainable economic growth. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Charles L. Evans; Thomas M. Hoenig; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Frederic S. Mishkin; William Poole; and Kevin M. Warsh. Voting against was Eric S. Rosengren, who preferred to lower the target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points at this meeting. In a related action, the Board of Governors unanimously approved a 25-basis-point decrease in the discount rate to 4-3/4 percent. In taking this action, the Board approved the requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, and St. Louis.
The late Edward M. Gramlich, who served as a Federal Reserve Board Governor from 1997 to 2005, was honored Wednesday with the Opportunity Finance Network’s Lifetime Achievement Award for Responsible Finance. The award recognizes extraordinary contributions in the area of community development finance--a cause that Dr. Gramlich championed during a long career as a policymaker and academic. “Ned was a strong advocate for those who live outside the financial mainstream and worked tirelessly to promote policies and programs that expand economic opportunities for families and communities,” said Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. The award, which going forward will be known as the “Ned Gramlich Lifetime Achievement Award for Responsible Finance,” was presented at the Opportunity Finance Network’s 2007 conference in Miami, Florida. Ruth Gramlich accepted the award on behalf of her husband. Former U.S. Senator Paul Sarbanes of Maryland is among the past recipients of the award. The Opportunity Finance Network is comprised of private financial institutions that work to create opportunities for low-income and low-wealth individuals in the United States by originating financing in markets that are often overlooked by conventional lenders.
Governor Randall S. Kroszner Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives BackgroundIn recent years, the subprime market has grown dramatically, enabling more and more borrowers to obtain credit who traditionally would have been unable to access it. Increasing numbers of lenders entered this market, with underwriting standards, industry practices, and risk-based pricing evolving along with the subprime market. The growth of this market is well recognized. Also well recognized are the problems that have arisen with these changes. The Board believes that responsible subprime lending has an important role to play in expanding credit to traditionally underserved borrowers. It also recognizes, however, that some of the lending undertaken in recent years was neither responsible nor prudent. Mortgage delinquency and foreclosure rates have increased substantially over the past few months. Over 17 percent of subprime adjustable-rate mortgages were in serious delinquency at the end of September, a rate over three times higher than that in mid-2005. Serious delinquencies also increased among near-prime and prime mortgages, although these delinquencies remain much lower than among subprime mortgages. Lenders initiated foreclosure proceedings for an average of 320,000 loans per quarter in the first half of this year, up from 240,000 loans per quarter in the preceding two years. One significant factor in the increase in delinquency rates has been the slowing of house prices. Prices decreased slightly for the nation as a whole in the third quarter of 2007, and declined more dramatically in some regions. Over a quarter of homeowners report that their houses decreased in value over the past year, just a bit above the level last seen in the early 1990s.1These price changes will affect homeowners' abilities to resolve financial troubles by refinancing their mortgages or pulling equity out of their homes, and may lead to increased defaults. In addition, some borrowers whose mortgage balances exceed their house values may be tempted to walk away from their loans. Borrowers who purchased properties solely for investment purposes may be more likely to default in this situation; indeed, the Mortgage Bankers' Association has found a disproportionate share of serious delinquencies are associated with non-owner-occupied properties in some of the states with the highest increases in delinquencies. A recently released study by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston attributes most of the recent rise in foreclosures in Massachusetts to declining house prices.2 Borrowers who have lost their jobs, not surprisingly, may have difficulty meeting their mortgage payments. Thus, increases in unemployment in certain areas, such as states in the Midwest struggling with job cuts in the auto industry, are another major factor contributing to higher delinquency rates. The final major factor explaining the current increase in delinquency rates is the apparent deterioration in underwriting standards beginning in late 2005. An increasing number of subprime loans were made with layers of additional risk factors, such as a lack of full documentation or very high loan-to-value ratios. Much of this weakening in underwriting standards happened outside of institutions regulated by the federal banking agencies. For instance, in 2006, over 45 percent of high-cost first mortgages were originated by independent mortgage companies.3In addition, prior to late 2005, high demand for housing and rising house prices allowed borrowers to recover from these risks through profitable home sales and refinancings, hiding the weakened underwriting standards from view. The slowdown in house prices, coupled with shifts in underwriting standards, are the most likely explanation for the pronounced rise we have seen in defaults occurring within a few months of origination, before most borrowers would have experienced significant changes in their payment obligations or in their financial situations. Looking forward, we expect the substantial payment increases often experienced at the first interest-rate reset to result in higher delinquencies. From now until the end of next year, each quarter roughly one out of ten borrowers with an adjustable-rate subprime mortgage is scheduled to experience the first rate reset.4In addition, tightening credit conditions as reported in the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Surveys suggest that refinancing may become more difficult. In the past, many borrowers experiencing these resets were able to avoid the payment increases by refinancing their mortgages. The recent declines in house prices and the current tighter credit conditions, however, reduced the viability of this option for significant numbers of borrowers. The Federal Reserve's Response to Problems in the Subprime MarketAs I testified before this Committee in October, the Federal Reserve is actively working to respond to these challenges. If the benefits of homeownership are to be realized, we believe that homeownership must be sustainable and that access to responsible lending be available for consumers. To achieve this, the Board believes that there must be appropriate consumer protection and responsible lending to traditionally underserved borrowers. Accordingly, we continue to coordinate with other federal and state agencies, and consult with consumer advocates, lenders, investors, and others. We take these issues very seriously, and, along with the other federal banking regulators, began issuing guidance on subprime lending in 1999 for the institutions we regulate. We significantly expanded that guidance in 2001, issued guidance on non-traditional mortgage products (such as payment-option and interest-only loans) in 2006, and issued guidance on adjustable-rate subprime mortgages earlier this year. I would like to take this opportunity to share a brief update on some of the work that the Federal Reserve is undertaking on these issues. Coordinated enforcement of consumer protection laws First, the enforcement of consumer protection laws and regulations is critical and the Federal Reserve enforces these measures through oversight of the institutions it examines. As the mortgage industry has diversified, increasing coordination among regulators has been helpful. In particular, our need to cooperate with state bank regulators has increased in importance, and we have responded to that need. In that vein, we launched a cooperative pilot project with other federal and state agencies to conduct reviews of certain non-depository lenders involved in the subprime market. The reviews will evaluate underwriting standards, risk-management strategies, and compliance with certain consumer protection laws and regulations. This initiative brings together the Federal Reserve, the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal Trade Commission, and state agencies represented by the Conference of State Banking Supervisors (CSBS) and the American Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators (AARMR). The companies being reviewed include those that are supervised by the federal agencies, as well as independent entities that are licensed by the states. Loss mitigation efforts Second, the Board, along with the other federal financial agencies, has worked to guide federally supervised institutions as they deal with mortgage defaults and delinquencies. The federal financial institution agencies issued aStatement on Working with Mortgage Borrowers in April 2007, and, in cooperation with the CSBS, aStatement on Loss Mitigation Strategies for Servicers of Residential Mortgagesin September 2007. Together, these statements encourage institutions to work proactively with borrowers who may be facing delinquency or foreclosure, and encourage servicers of securitized residential mortgages to determine the full extent of their authority to restructure failing loans and to pursue appropriate loss mitigation strategies. The Board continues to encourage servicers and investors to make every effort to keep troubled borrowers in their homes. I, and other members of the Board, have had numerous meetings in recent months with a wide array of market participants and consumer advocates to understand the complexity of the issues and to encourage appropriate responses. Each of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks has been working with financial institutions and community groups around the country to address challenges posed by loan performance problems. And the Federal Reserve Board's staff has been working with consumer and community affairs groups throughout the Federal Reserve System to help identify localities that are most at risk of high foreclosures, with the intent to help local groups better focus their outreach efforts to borrowers. We have also been talking with lenders, servicers and investors, independently as well as through the Hope Now alliance, to support prudent efforts to reach out to as many borrowers as possible. Many servicers have established procedures to identify segments of borrowers who are current but could face trouble at reset, to contact these borrowers ahead of the reset, and to systematically evaluate the ability of borrowers to make higher payments. On the basis of this analysis, they can sometimes present prudent refinancing or loan modification alternatives to the borrower. Other efforts, such as the FHASecure product and various state and local efforts, can play a role in avoiding foreclosure. As I will discuss further in a moment, we support these efforts because foreclosure is generally the worst possible option for consumers, investors,andcommunities, and should be avoided whenever other viable options exist. Changes to existing terms, however, should not be made lightly, should be consistent with safe and sound lending practices, and should not be made when they are only delaying losses to investors and consumers. In short, we should pursue sustainable solutions. Consumer protection regulations Finally, the Board continues to work toward more effective consumer protection rules. We will soon begin extensive consumer testing to ensure that new disclosures are effective and comprehensible. Later this month, we will propose changes to the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) rules to require earlier disclosures by lenders and to address concerns about misleading mortgage loan advertisements. The Board recognizes, however, that improved disclosures are necessary but not sufficient to address the problems. In addition to these actions, therefore, the Federal Reserve will exercise its rulemaking authority under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) to address unfair or deceptive mortgage lending practices. At the same time we propose the TILA rule changes on advertising and timing of disclosures, we will issue, for public comment, significant new rules that would apply to subprime loans offered by all mortgage lenders. In formulating our proposal, we are looking closely at practices in the subprime mortgage market, such as prepayment penalties, failure to offer escrow accounts for taxes and insurance, stated-income and low-documentation lending, and the failure to give adequate consideration to a borrower's ability to repay. I can assure you that our proposed rules will be based on detailed analyses of the issues and our statutory authority to address them, extraordinary outreach efforts to gather a wide range of information and opinions, and attempts to balance the needs of adequately protecting consumers and maintaining responsible lending markets. The rules will reflect input obtained through public meetings in 2006 and a hearing that dealt specifically with these issues that I chaired this past June. We also considered nearly 100 comment letters, following the June meeting, and consulted with other federal and state agencies and our own Consumer Advisory Council. Finally, we have continued to meet with, and listen to informed opinions from, consumer groups, the financial services industry, lawmakers, and others to ensure that our proposed rules are likely to achieve the goal of adequate consumer protection without shutting off access to responsible credit. Legislative ResponsesCongress has expressed understandable and appropriate concern about subprime lending and the challenges in the mortgage market more generally. We commend leaders in Congress who are looking into these problems and wrestling with the challenges of addressing abusive lending while encouraging responsible lending. The Mortgage Reform and Anti-Predatory Lending Act of 2007, which was passed by the House of Representatives last month, would extend additional oversight and consumer protections to the market. We were asked in today's testimony to comment on two issues, not addressed in the current version of the Act, that could be addressed through amendments or other actions. Loan modifications One issue is the possible legal exposure of servicers of mortgages who enter into loan modifications or workout plans. Because loan servicers play a critical role in implementing possible loss mitigation strategies, this is a timely and important question. We believe that investors and servicers generally want to work with borrowers to avoid foreclosure. Prudent loss mitigation techniques that avoid foreclosure not only help homeowners, they are usually cost-effective for investors. Borrowers who have been current in their payments but could default after reset, for instance, may be able to work with their lender or servicer to adjust their payments or otherwise change their loans to make them more manageable. Working with borrowers before they experience payment problems has other benefits; for instance, late payments will not have affected such borrowers' credit scores, preserving a wider range of options including refinancing. Such proactive outreach by servicers may mean the difference between loan payment and default, particularly for lower-income families who may have little financial cushion. Given the substantial number of resets expected from now through the end of 2008, it is in the interest of the industry to go further than it has historically to join together and explore collaborative, creative efforts to develop prudent loan modification programs and other assistance to help large groups of borrowers systematically. Such programs can streamline and speed the process of anticipating and addressing delinquent loans, reduce transaction costs, and provide guidance to borrowers and to mortgage counselors. Many servicers are, in fact, working with counselors who can play a crucial role in helping homeowners, many of whom do not even communicate with their servicers out of fear, embarrassment, or misinformation about their options. Loan modification programs should be a bottom-up approach designed to balance the needs of all parties, and we are encouraged by the progress being made by the industry in advancing such programs. Because systematic approaches to dealing with troubled loans are often likely to lead to better aggregate investor returns than foreclosures, we are encouraged by industry efforts to pursue these approaches. When servicers modify loans, however, they may face potential litigation risk from investors because of their contractual obligations under the servicing agreements. One particular source of litigation risk, we understand, may be that different asset classes have conflicting interests. Therefore, we encourage ongoing industry efforts to agree to standards for addressing these issues. We are hopeful that the industry can resolve these conflicts on a consensual basis so that they do not preclude servicers from taking actions that are in the overall best interests of consumers and the industry. More generally, the Board supports efforts by the industry and others to develop reasonable and standardized approaches to dealing with these challenges. Such approaches, when applied consistently and predictably, can reduce uncertainty and ultimately help the markets function. Prudent workout arrangements that are consistent with safe and sound lending practices are generally in the long-term best interest of both the financial institution and the borrower, but there may be instances when such arrangements are not prudent or appropriate. In trying to help homeowners, we must also be careful to recognize the existing legal rights of investors, avoid actions that may have the unintended consequence of disrupting the orderly functioning of the market, or unnecessarily reducing future access to credit. Provisions intended to immunize servicers from liability should be crafted to avoid creating moral hazard of parties disregarding their contractual obligations, which would ultimately have negative impacts for markets and consumers. Sustainable solutions, and not those that simply hide for the short term real repayment challenges, should be our goal. Patterns or practices of violations A second issue is the possible imposition of civil money penalties when the enforcement agencies find that there is a pattern or practice of violations. Penalties collected would be used to establish a trust fund for those consumers whose interests had been harmed but who lack a remedy in the event, for instance, that the responsible party has gone out of business. The proper magnitude for any such penalties, or under what circumstances they should be imposed, is Congress' decision to make. As a general rule, the Board believes that penalties for any violation of law should be sufficient to deter the prohibited conduct, and also reasonably related to the injury caused by the violation. Penalties that are clearly articulated, and that reasonably match the magnitude of the violation, are the most appropriate and effective forms of deterrence. We would recommend that the amount of such civil money penalties, if imposed, be given a ceiling as well as a floor because of the market uncertainty that can be introduced by open-ended liability. We would also suggest that some discretion in the actual amount of the penalty, within such a range, be given to the enforcing agencies. This sort of flexibility in enforcement would help the agencies adjust the punishment to fit the infraction. The proposed increase in civil money penalties draws attention to the critical role that enforcement plays in ensuring compliance with the new responsibilities enacted by Congress. But the effectiveness of increased penalties can be diminished by a lack of enforcement resources. As Congress weighs the merits of the bill and possible amendments, we would encourage you to also look at the resource needs of the agencies that are authorized to take enforcement actions to ensure that sufficient resources for this important role are available. ConclusionThe Board recognizes the magnitude of the challenges facing mortgage borrowers today. We understand the uncertainty and harm being experienced by consumers across the country as the housing market challenges continue. We are engaged in an array of activities to respond to these concerns. In coming weeks, we will propose new rules regarding advertising, the timing of disclosures, and practices that we find to be unfair or deceptive under our HOEPA authority, all of which we believe will offer increasing protection to consumers. We look forward to continuing to work with Congress to achieve sustainable solutions to challenges in the mortgage market. Footnotes 1.Reuters/University of Michigan Survey of Consumers, November 2007.Return to text 2.Kristopher Gerardi, Adam Hale Shapiro, and Paul Willen,"Subprime Outcomes: Risky Mortgages, Homeownership Experiences, and Foreclosures,”Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper 07-15, 2007.Return to text 3.2006 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data.Return to text 4.Federal Reserve Board staff calculations based on data from First American LoanPerformance.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday proposed and asked for public comment on changes to Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) to protect consumers from unfair or deceptive home mortgage lending and advertising practices. The rule, which would be adopted under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA), would restrict certain practices and would also require certain mortgage disclosures to be provided earlier in the transaction. The Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act amended the Truth in Lending Act (TILA). Under HOEPA, the Board has the responsibility to prohibit acts and practices in connection with mortgage loans that it finds to be unfair or deceptive. "Our goal is to promote responsible mortgage lending, for the benefit of individual consumers and the economy," said Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. "We want consumers to make decisions about home mortgage options confidently, with assurance that unscrupulous home mortgage practices will not be tolerated." The proposal includes four key protections for "higher-priced mortgage loans" secured by a consumer's principal dwelling: The rule would define "higher-priced mortgage loan" to capture loans in the subprime market but generally exclude loans in the prime market. A loan would be covered if it is a first-lien mortgage and has an annual percentage rate (APR) that is three percentage points or more above the yield on comparable Treasury notes, or if it is a subordinate-lien mortgage with an APR exceeding the comparable Treasury rate by five points or more. "Unfair and deceptive practices have harmed consumers and the integrity of the home mortgage market," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Randall S. Kroszner. "We have listened closely and developed a response to abuses that we believe will facilitate responsible lending." The following protections would apply to all loans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling, regardless of the loan's APR: The proposed revisions to TILA's advertising rules require additional information about rates, monthly payments, and other loan features. The amendments also would ban seven deceptive or misleading advertising practices, including representing that a rate or payment is "fixed" when it can change. Under the proposal, creditors would have to provide a good faith estimate of the loan costs, including a schedule of payments, within three days after a consumer applies for any mortgage loan secured by a consumer's principal dwelling, such as a home improvement loan or a loan to refinance an existing loan. Currently, early cost estimates are only required for home-purchase loans. In addition, consumers could not be charged any fee until after they receive the early disclosures, except a reasonable fee for obtaining the consumer's credit history. The Federal Reserve has engaged in extensive outreach efforts with consumer groups, the financial services industry, lawmakers, and others to ensure that the proposed rules are likely to achieve the goal of protecting consumers from unfair practices without shutting off access to responsible credit. The proposal takes into consideration testimony given at four public hearings the Board held in the summer of 2006, and a hearing held in June 2007, as well as public comment letters received in connection with those hearings. The Board also consulted with other federal and state agencies and its own Consumer Advisory Council. TheFederal Registernotice is attached. The comment period ends ninety days after publication of the proposal in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. Highlights of Proposed Rule to Amend Home Mortgage Provisions of Regulation Z Statement by Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Statement by Governor Randall S. Kroszner Federal Register Notice425 KB PDF|TEXT Board meeting materials View comments
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the names of seven new members of its Thrift Institutions Advisory Council (TIAC) and designated a new President and Vice President of the council for 2008. TIAC is an advisory group made up of twelve representatives from thrift institutions. The council was established by the Board in 1980 and includes members from savings and loan associations, savings banks, and credit unions. It meets three times each year with the Board of Governors to discuss developments relating to thrift institutions, the housing industry, mortgage finance, and regulatory issues. F. Weller Meyer, Chairman, President, and CEO, Acacia Federal Savings Bank, Falls Church, Virginia, will serve as President of TIAC in 2008. Kerry Killinger, Chairman and CEO, Washington Mutual Inc., Seattle, Washington, will serve as Vice President. The seven new members, named for two-year terms beginning January 1, 2008, are: F. Edward Broadwell, Jr.Chairman and CEOHomeTrust BankAsheville, North Carolina Christopher T. JillsonPresident and CEOSandia Laboratory Federal Credit UnionAlbuquerque, New Mexico Michael W. PerryChairman and CEOIndyMac Bank, F.S.B.Pasadena, California Joseph R. FicaloraChairman, President and CEONew York Community BancorpWestbury, New York Curtis L. HageChairman and CEOHome Federal BankSioux Falls, South Dakota Peter L. JudkinsPresident and CEOFranklin Savings BankFarmington, Maine William A. DoniusChairman and CEOPulaski BankSt. Louis, Missouri TIAC members whose terms continue through 2008 are: F. Weller MeyerChairman, President, and CEOAcacia Federal Savings BankFalls Church, Virginia Robert M. ClementsChairman and CEOEverBank Financial Corp.Jacksonville, Florida Kerry KillingerChairman and CEOWashington Mutual, Inc.Seattle, Washington Harriet MayPresident and CEOGovernment Employees Credit UnionEl Paso, Texas Thomas C. MeuserChairman and CEOEl Dorado Savings BankPlacerville, California
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Biggert, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the recently introduced "Financial Consumer Hotline Act of 2007." I am the Director of the Federal Reserve Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs. In addition to its responsibilities for rulewriting and enforcing many federal consumer financial protection laws, the Federal Reserve administers a nationwide consumer complaint and inquiry program with respect to the banks we supervise and general consumer financial issues. My division has responsibility for that program. My testimony today will comment on the proposed legislation, and discuss recent Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC)1and Federal Reserve initiatives that address the purpose of the proposed legislation. The Financial Consumer Hotline Act of 2007 would amend the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council Act by requiring the FFIEC to establish a single telephone number that consumers with complaints and inquiries concerning financial institutions or issues could call and be routed to the appropriate federal supervisory agency or state bank supervisor for assistance. Under the legislation, transfers of calls to state bank supervisors would be subject to the state's capacity to receive calls and its satisfaction of any conditions established by the FFIEC. The legislation would also require the federal financial institution regulatory agencies to submit a report to the Congress on efforts to establish a public interagency website for directing and referring consumer complaints and inquiries to appropriate agencies, and to establish a system for expediting the routing of misdirected consumer complaint or inquiry documents between appropriate agencies. The Federal Reserve concurs with the intent of the proposed bill and strongly supports the current efforts by the FFIEC agencies to improve the consumer's experience with getting complaints involving banking services and transactions addressed promptly and accurately. However, given that the FFIEC agencies are collaborating and cooperating on how to facilitate the consumer complaint handling and resolution process in ways that are consistent with the proposed bill, and the considerable progress being made already on both an interagency basis as well as through our own efforts, legislation does not appear to be needed to ensure continued momentum. Additionally, it is important that the agencies maintain flexibility so they may benefit from recommendations that will result from the current FFIEC initiatives and future technological advances. Interagency InitiativesBefore highlighting current interagency initiatives, it is important to mention that the FFIEC agencies have been coordinating on consumer complaint processing since the 1970s. For example, the agencies have had fully operational procedures in place for decades to promptly refer misdirected consumer telephone calls and misdirected consumer complaints and inquiries to the appropriate federal or state regulator. Recently, the agencies have started using new technology to further speed-up and improve the referral process, including the use of encrypted email and electronic scanning of complaints, which has significantly reduced the paper flow between other FFIEC agencies and the Federal Reserve. Moreover, the agencies meet periodically to share complaint data and to discuss emerging issues identified through the complaint process. Most recently, the federal banking agencies held national conferences in April 2006 and October 2007 to share information about trends and issues evident in consumer complaint processing, and to share best practices in investigating and analyzing complaints. The agencies also discussed ways to improve their service and potential ways complaint data might be used to aid in the development of consumer education materials. Another interagency conference, which will be sponsored by the Federal Reserve, is scheduled for April 2009 at our central consumer help site located at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. To build upon the efforts of the agencies to enhance their ability to investigate and respond to consumer complaints, in September of this year the FFIEC formed an interagency working group to identify ways to collectively improve the consumer complaint programs of the agencies with the goal of making those programs even more consumer-friendly. This working group also includes representatives from the Conference of State Bank Supervisors. The group met several times to identify appropriate best practices and areas of common approach related to the consumer complaint process; and, determine whether the use of a third party vendor would be appropriate to assist in this effort, and if so, to determine the scope of the vendor's engagement. A number of promising initiatives that would enhance consumers' experience with the agencies' complaint processes surfaced during these discussions, including: The group also put forth some ideas that might leverage agency resources, including unified complaint coding to facilitate the sharing of information between the agencies about emerging trends and issues identified from consumer complaints, an electronic process for forwarding complaints to the appropriate agency, and a uniform case management system. These initiatives have much in common with those identified in the proposed legislation. The FFIEC working group recommended to the FFIEC that a third party vendor be engaged to address the ideas for enhancing the consumers' experience in dealing with the agencies and to explore the feasibility of pursuing the initiatives related to leveraging the agencies' resources. The group further recommended that the vendor use consumer focus groups to identify consumers' preferences for filing complaints and contacting a regulator about their banking problems. On December 4, 2007, the FFIEC approved the working group's recommendations and is beginning the process of hiring a vendor, which includes developing a statement of work, soliciting bids from interested parties, and selecting a vendor. We believe the vendor's work will provide the FFIEC with insight needed to develop a comprehensive strategy to further enhance the consumer complaint process and consumers' overall satisfaction with the process. Federal Reserve InitiativesThrough the Federal Reserve's consumer complaint program, which was established in 1976, we address complaints about the banks under our supervision (state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System and certain foreign banking organizations) and promptly refer complaints we receive regarding other financial services firms to the appropriate federal or state agency, including the Federal Trade Commission. The Board has uniform policies and procedures for investigating and responding to consumer complaints, which are implemented by specially trained analysts at the twelve Federal Reserve Banks. Board staff oversees the implementation of these policies by the Federal Reserve Banks. In each of the last two calendar years, the Federal Reserve System has received about 1,900 complaints concerning the roughly 900 state member banks for which we have supervisory responsibility. The Board maintains a database that enables us to track each complaint and how it is resolved. Consistent with the intent of the proposed legislation and the Federal Reserve's long-standing consumer protection program, we recently announced additional enhancements to our own consumer complaint handling procedures that show great promise for improving consumers' experience in dealing with our program and in streamlining our processes. On November 19, we launched "Federal Reserve Consumer Help,"which is a new centralized resource that consolidates and streamlines the Federal Reserve's consumer complaint and inquiry program. Trained customer service professionals are available to answer questions and assist with a wide range of issues relating to financial products and services, and consumer protection laws. Simply put, it serves as a one-stop complaint and inquiry site where consumers can go to get help from the Federal Reserve. Consumers calling our new toll-free number (888-851-1920) between the weekday hours of 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. Central Time can speak directly to a customer service professional. After hours, callers may leave a message andFederal Reserve Consumer Helpstaff will return their calls the next business day. The website,http://www.federalreserveconsumerhelp.gov/was designed for easy access allowing consumers to submit a complaint or inquiry electronically. The website provides answers to commonly asked banking questions and links to many consumer protection materials and resources. Consumers will also find an updated version of the brochure"How to File a Consumer Complaint Against a Bank"on the website. This brochure explains, step-by-step, the Federal Reserve's complaint process and tells consumers what to expect during a complaint investigation. An electronic complaint form is also provided. Consumers do not have to know which federal bank regulator supervises the bank or financial institution that they are concerned about in order to file a complaint or inquiry, or to get assistance from the Federal Reserve. Further, consumers are not limited in how they can contact the Federal Reserve for help--complaints and inquiries can be filed with us by mail, fax, telephone, or email. When a complaint or inquiry is filed with us, our customer service representatives query a national database maintained by the Federal Reserve Board in order to determine the appropriate regulator responsible for the financial institution that is the subject of the complaint or inquiry.Federal Reserve Consumer Helpthen directs the complaint or inquiry to the appropriate regulator. For example, with regard to complaints and inquiries filed by telephone, we have arrangements with several other banking regulators to transfer callers directly to a representative at the appropriate agency. Any misdirected written or electronically submitted complaints or inquiries are forwarded to the appropriate agency, and for agencies with the capability, these complaints and inquiries are passed on to them electronically. ConclusionWe are keenly aware of the congressional interest in the administration of the agencies' consumer complaint and inquiry programs, and are moving ahead with the implementation of both interagency and Federal Reserve System measures to address the needs of consumers and improve these programs. As underscored by recent enhancements to our consumer complaint program, and our support for interagency initiatives, the Federal Reserve remains strongly committed to ensuring that issues consumers have with their financial institutions are handled promptly, courteously, and thoroughly, and that consumers have access to an effective and efficient means for resolving complaints. Moreover, the Federal Reserve believes the consumer should not be burdened with having to know the regulator to file a complaint or make an inquiry. As such, the Federal Reserve provides the same level of commitment and service to all consumers and uses highly trained, professional staff and customized tools to direct consumers or send misdirected complaints to the appropriate regulator or agency. I would be pleased to answer any questions you may have about the Federal Reserve's consumer complaint program, our recent initiatives, or ongoing interagency efforts to enhance consumer complaint handling and resolution. Footnotes1.The FFIEC is a formal interagency body empowered to prescribe uniform principles, standards, and report forms for the federal examination of financial institutions by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision, and to make recommendations to promote uniformity in the supervision of financial institutions. In 2006, the State Liaison Committee (SLC) was added to the FFIEC as a voting member. The SLC includes representatives from the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, the American Council of State Savings Supervisors, and the National Association of State Credit Union Supervisors.Return to text
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Biggert, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the recently introduced "Financial Consumer Hotline Act of 2007." I am the Director of the Federal Reserve Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs. In addition to its responsibilities for rulewriting and enforcing many federal consumer financial protection laws, the Federal Reserve administers a nationwide consumer complaint and inquiry program with respect to the banks we supervise and general consumer financial issues. My division has responsibility for that program. My testimony today will comment on the proposed legislation, and discuss recent Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC)1and Federal Reserve initiatives that address the purpose of the proposed legislation. The Financial Consumer Hotline Act of 2007 would amend the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council Act by requiring the FFIEC to establish a single telephone number that consumers with complaints and inquiries concerning financial institutions or issues could call and be routed to the appropriate federal supervisory agency or state bank supervisor for assistance. Under the legislation, transfers of calls to state bank supervisors would be subject to the state's capacity to receive calls and its satisfaction of any conditions established by the FFIEC. The legislation would also require the federal financial institution regulatory agencies to submit a report to the Congress on efforts to establish a public interagency website for directing and referring consumer complaints and inquiries to appropriate agencies, and to establish a system for expediting the routing of misdirected consumer complaint or inquiry documents between appropriate agencies. The Federal Reserve concurs with the intent of the proposed bill and strongly supports the current efforts by the FFIEC agencies to improve the consumer's experience with getting complaints involving banking services and transactions addressed promptly and accurately. However, given that the FFIEC agencies are collaborating and cooperating on how to facilitate the consumer complaint handling and resolution process in ways that are consistent with the proposed bill, and the considerable progress being made already on both an interagency basis as well as through our own efforts, legislation does not appear to be needed to ensure continued momentum. Additionally, it is important that the agencies maintain flexibility so they may benefit from recommendations that will result from the current FFIEC initiatives and future technological advances. Interagency InitiativesBefore highlighting current interagency initiatives, it is important to mention that the FFIEC agencies have been coordinating on consumer complaint processing since the 1970s. For example, the agencies have had fully operational procedures in place for decades to promptly refer misdirected consumer telephone calls and misdirected consumer complaints and inquiries to the appropriate federal or state regulator. Recently, the agencies have started using new technology to further speed-up and improve the referral process, including the use of encrypted email and electronic scanning of complaints, which has significantly reduced the paper flow between other FFIEC agencies and the Federal Reserve. Moreover, the agencies meet periodically to share complaint data and to discuss emerging issues identified through the complaint process. Most recently, the federal banking agencies held national conferences in April 2006 and October 2007 to share information about trends and issues evident in consumer complaint processing, and to share best practices in investigating and analyzing complaints. The agencies also discussed ways to improve their service and potential ways complaint data might be used to aid in the development of consumer education materials. Another interagency conference, which will be sponsored by the Federal Reserve, is scheduled for April 2009 at our central consumer help site located at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. To build upon the efforts of the agencies to enhance their ability to investigate and respond to consumer complaints, in September of this year the FFIEC formed an interagency working group to identify ways to collectively improve the consumer complaint programs of the agencies with the goal of making those programs even more consumer-friendly. This working group also includes representatives from the Conference of State Bank Supervisors. The group met several times to identify appropriate best practices and areas of common approach related to the consumer complaint process; and, determine whether the use of a third party vendor would be appropriate to assist in this effort, and if so, to determine the scope of the vendor's engagement. A number of promising initiatives that would enhance consumers' experience with the agencies' complaint processes surfaced during these discussions, including: The group also put forth some ideas that might leverage agency resources, including unified complaint coding to facilitate the sharing of information between the agencies about emerging trends and issues identified from consumer complaints, an electronic process for forwarding complaints to the appropriate agency, and a uniform case management system. These initiatives have much in common with those identified in the proposed legislation. The FFIEC working group recommended to the FFIEC that a third party vendor be engaged to address the ideas for enhancing the consumers' experience in dealing with the agencies and to explore the feasibility of pursuing the initiatives related to leveraging the agencies' resources. The group further recommended that the vendor use consumer focus groups to identify consumers' preferences for filing complaints and contacting a regulator about their banking problems. On December 4, 2007, the FFIEC approved the working group's recommendations and is beginning the process of hiring a vendor, which includes developing a statement of work, soliciting bids from interested parties, and selecting a vendor. We believe the vendor's work will provide the FFIEC with insight needed to develop a comprehensive strategy to further enhance the consumer complaint process and consumers' overall satisfaction with the process. Federal Reserve InitiativesThrough the Federal Reserve's consumer complaint program, which was established in 1976, we address complaints about the banks under our supervision (state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System and certain foreign banking organizations) and promptly refer complaints we receive regarding other financial services firms to the appropriate federal or state agency, including the Federal Trade Commission. The Board has uniform policies and procedures for investigating and responding to consumer complaints, which are implemented by specially trained analysts at the twelve Federal Reserve Banks. Board staff oversees the implementation of these policies by the Federal Reserve Banks. In each of the last two calendar years, the Federal Reserve System has received about 1,900 complaints concerning the roughly 900 state member banks for which we have supervisory responsibility. The Board maintains a database that enables us to track each complaint and how it is resolved. Consistent with the intent of the proposed legislation and the Federal Reserve's long-standing consumer protection program, we recently announced additional enhancements to our own consumer complaint handling procedures that show great promise for improving consumers' experience in dealing with our program and in streamlining our processes. On November 19, we launched "Federal Reserve Consumer Help,"which is a new centralized resource that consolidates and streamlines the Federal Reserve's consumer complaint and inquiry program. Trained customer service professionals are available to answer questions and assist with a wide range of issues relating to financial products and services, and consumer protection laws. Simply put, it serves as a one-stop complaint and inquiry site where consumers can go to get help from the Federal Reserve. Consumers calling our new toll-free number (888-851-1920) between the weekday hours of 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. Central Time can speak directly to a customer service professional. After hours, callers may leave a message andFederal Reserve Consumer Helpstaff will return their calls the next business day. The website,http://www.federalreserveconsumerhelp.gov/was designed for easy access allowing consumers to submit a complaint or inquiry electronically. The website provides answers to commonly asked banking questions and links to many consumer protection materials and resources. Consumers will also find an updated version of the brochure"How to File a Consumer Complaint Against a Bank"on the website. This brochure explains, step-by-step, the Federal Reserve's complaint process and tells consumers what to expect during a complaint investigation. An electronic complaint form is also provided. Consumers do not have to know which federal bank regulator supervises the bank or financial institution that they are concerned about in order to file a complaint or inquiry, or to get assistance from the Federal Reserve. Further, consumers are not limited in how they can contact the Federal Reserve for help--complaints and inquiries can be filed with us by mail, fax, telephone, or email. When a complaint or inquiry is filed with us, our customer service representatives query a national database maintained by the Federal Reserve Board in order to determine the appropriate regulator responsible for the financial institution that is the subject of the complaint or inquiry.Federal Reserve Consumer Helpthen directs the complaint or inquiry to the appropriate regulator. For example, with regard to complaints and inquiries filed by telephone, we have arrangements with several other banking regulators to transfer callers directly to a representative at the appropriate agency. Any misdirected written or electronically submitted complaints or inquiries are forwarded to the appropriate agency, and for agencies with the capability, these complaints and inquiries are passed on to them electronically. ConclusionWe are keenly aware of the congressional interest in the administration of the agencies' consumer complaint and inquiry programs, and are moving ahead with the implementation of both interagency and Federal Reserve System measures to address the needs of consumers and improve these programs. As underscored by recent enhancements to our consumer complaint program, and our support for interagency initiatives, the Federal Reserve remains strongly committed to ensuring that issues consumers have with their financial institutions are handled promptly, courteously, and thoroughly, and that consumers have access to an effective and efficient means for resolving complaints. Moreover, the Federal Reserve believes the consumer should not be burdened with having to know the regulator to file a complaint or make an inquiry. As such, the Federal Reserve provides the same level of commitment and service to all consumers and uses highly trained, professional staff and customized tools to direct consumers or send misdirected complaints to the appropriate regulator or agency. I would be pleased to answer any questions you may have about the Federal Reserve's consumer complaint program, our recent initiatives, or ongoing interagency efforts to enhance consumer complaint handling and resolution. Footnotes1.The FFIEC is a formal interagency body empowered to prescribe uniform principles, standards, and report forms for the federal examination of financial institutions by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision, and to make recommendations to promote uniformity in the supervision of financial institutions. In 2006, the State Liaison Committee (SLC) was added to the FFIEC as a voting member. The SLC includes representatives from the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, the American Council of State Savings Supervisors, and the National Association of State Credit Union Supervisors.Return to text
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Biggert, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the recently introduced "Financial Consumer Hotline Act of 2007." I am the Director of the Federal Reserve Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs. In addition to its responsibilities for rulewriting and enforcing many federal consumer financial protection laws, the Federal Reserve administers a nationwide consumer complaint and inquiry program with respect to the banks we supervise and general consumer financial issues. My division has responsibility for that program. My testimony today will comment on the proposed legislation, and discuss recent Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC)1and Federal Reserve initiatives that address the purpose of the proposed legislation. The Financial Consumer Hotline Act of 2007 would amend the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council Act by requiring the FFIEC to establish a single telephone number that consumers with complaints and inquiries concerning financial institutions or issues could call and be routed to the appropriate federal supervisory agency or state bank supervisor for assistance. Under the legislation, transfers of calls to state bank supervisors would be subject to the state's capacity to receive calls and its satisfaction of any conditions established by the FFIEC. The legislation would also require the federal financial institution regulatory agencies to submit a report to the Congress on efforts to establish a public interagency website for directing and referring consumer complaints and inquiries to appropriate agencies, and to establish a system for expediting the routing of misdirected consumer complaint or inquiry documents between appropriate agencies. The Federal Reserve concurs with the intent of the proposed bill and strongly supports the current efforts by the FFIEC agencies to improve the consumer's experience with getting complaints involving banking services and transactions addressed promptly and accurately. However, given that the FFIEC agencies are collaborating and cooperating on how to facilitate the consumer complaint handling and resolution process in ways that are consistent with the proposed bill, and the considerable progress being made already on both an interagency basis as well as through our own efforts, legislation does not appear to be needed to ensure continued momentum. Additionally, it is important that the agencies maintain flexibility so they may benefit from recommendations that will result from the current FFIEC initiatives and future technological advances. Interagency InitiativesBefore highlighting current interagency initiatives, it is important to mention that the FFIEC agencies have been coordinating on consumer complaint processing since the 1970s. For example, the agencies have had fully operational procedures in place for decades to promptly refer misdirected consumer telephone calls and misdirected consumer complaints and inquiries to the appropriate federal or state regulator. Recently, the agencies have started using new technology to further speed-up and improve the referral process, including the use of encrypted email and electronic scanning of complaints, which has significantly reduced the paper flow between other FFIEC agencies and the Federal Reserve. Moreover, the agencies meet periodically to share complaint data and to discuss emerging issues identified through the complaint process. Most recently, the federal banking agencies held national conferences in April 2006 and October 2007 to share information about trends and issues evident in consumer complaint processing, and to share best practices in investigating and analyzing complaints. The agencies also discussed ways to improve their service and potential ways complaint data might be used to aid in the development of consumer education materials. Another interagency conference, which will be sponsored by the Federal Reserve, is scheduled for April 2009 at our central consumer help site located at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. To build upon the efforts of the agencies to enhance their ability to investigate and respond to consumer complaints, in September of this year the FFIEC formed an interagency working group to identify ways to collectively improve the consumer complaint programs of the agencies with the goal of making those programs even more consumer-friendly. This working group also includes representatives from the Conference of State Bank Supervisors. The group met several times to identify appropriate best practices and areas of common approach related to the consumer complaint process; and, determine whether the use of a third party vendor would be appropriate to assist in this effort, and if so, to determine the scope of the vendor's engagement. A number of promising initiatives that would enhance consumers' experience with the agencies' complaint processes surfaced during these discussions, including: The group also put forth some ideas that might leverage agency resources, including unified complaint coding to facilitate the sharing of information between the agencies about emerging trends and issues identified from consumer complaints, an electronic process for forwarding complaints to the appropriate agency, and a uniform case management system. These initiatives have much in common with those identified in the proposed legislation. The FFIEC working group recommended to the FFIEC that a third party vendor be engaged to address the ideas for enhancing the consumers' experience in dealing with the agencies and to explore the feasibility of pursuing the initiatives related to leveraging the agencies' resources. The group further recommended that the vendor use consumer focus groups to identify consumers' preferences for filing complaints and contacting a regulator about their banking problems. On December 4, 2007, the FFIEC approved the working group's recommendations and is beginning the process of hiring a vendor, which includes developing a statement of work, soliciting bids from interested parties, and selecting a vendor. We believe the vendor's work will provide the FFIEC with insight needed to develop a comprehensive strategy to further enhance the consumer complaint process and consumers' overall satisfaction with the process. Federal Reserve InitiativesThrough the Federal Reserve's consumer complaint program, which was established in 1976, we address complaints about the banks under our supervision (state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System and certain foreign banking organizations) and promptly refer complaints we receive regarding other financial services firms to the appropriate federal or state agency, including the Federal Trade Commission. The Board has uniform policies and procedures for investigating and responding to consumer complaints, which are implemented by specially trained analysts at the twelve Federal Reserve Banks. Board staff oversees the implementation of these policies by the Federal Reserve Banks. In each of the last two calendar years, the Federal Reserve System has received about 1,900 complaints concerning the roughly 900 state member banks for which we have supervisory responsibility. The Board maintains a database that enables us to track each complaint and how it is resolved. Consistent with the intent of the proposed legislation and the Federal Reserve's long-standing consumer protection program, we recently announced additional enhancements to our own consumer complaint handling procedures that show great promise for improving consumers' experience in dealing with our program and in streamlining our processes. On November 19, we launched "Federal Reserve Consumer Help,"which is a new centralized resource that consolidates and streamlines the Federal Reserve's consumer complaint and inquiry program. Trained customer service professionals are available to answer questions and assist with a wide range of issues relating to financial products and services, and consumer protection laws. Simply put, it serves as a one-stop complaint and inquiry site where consumers can go to get help from the Federal Reserve. Consumers calling our new toll-free number (888-851-1920) between the weekday hours of 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. Central Time can speak directly to a customer service professional. After hours, callers may leave a message andFederal Reserve Consumer Helpstaff will return their calls the next business day. The website,http://www.federalreserveconsumerhelp.gov/was designed for easy access allowing consumers to submit a complaint or inquiry electronically. The website provides answers to commonly asked banking questions and links to many consumer protection materials and resources. Consumers will also find an updated version of the brochure"How to File a Consumer Complaint Against a Bank"on the website. This brochure explains, step-by-step, the Federal Reserve's complaint process and tells consumers what to expect during a complaint investigation. An electronic complaint form is also provided. Consumers do not have to know which federal bank regulator supervises the bank or financial institution that they are concerned about in order to file a complaint or inquiry, or to get assistance from the Federal Reserve. Further, consumers are not limited in how they can contact the Federal Reserve for help--complaints and inquiries can be filed with us by mail, fax, telephone, or email. When a complaint or inquiry is filed with us, our customer service representatives query a national database maintained by the Federal Reserve Board in order to determine the appropriate regulator responsible for the financial institution that is the subject of the complaint or inquiry.Federal Reserve Consumer Helpthen directs the complaint or inquiry to the appropriate regulator. For example, with regard to complaints and inquiries filed by telephone, we have arrangements with several other banking regulators to transfer callers directly to a representative at the appropriate agency. Any misdirected written or electronically submitted complaints or inquiries are forwarded to the appropriate agency, and for agencies with the capability, these complaints and inquiries are passed on to them electronically. ConclusionWe are keenly aware of the congressional interest in the administration of the agencies' consumer complaint and inquiry programs, and are moving ahead with the implementation of both interagency and Federal Reserve System measures to address the needs of consumers and improve these programs. As underscored by recent enhancements to our consumer complaint program, and our support for interagency initiatives, the Federal Reserve remains strongly committed to ensuring that issues consumers have with their financial institutions are handled promptly, courteously, and thoroughly, and that consumers have access to an effective and efficient means for resolving complaints. Moreover, the Federal Reserve believes the consumer should not be burdened with having to know the regulator to file a complaint or make an inquiry. As such, the Federal Reserve provides the same level of commitment and service to all consumers and uses highly trained, professional staff and customized tools to direct consumers or send misdirected complaints to the appropriate regulator or agency. I would be pleased to answer any questions you may have about the Federal Reserve's consumer complaint program, our recent initiatives, or ongoing interagency efforts to enhance consumer complaint handling and resolution. Footnotes1.The FFIEC is a formal interagency body empowered to prescribe uniform principles, standards, and report forms for the federal examination of financial institutions by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision, and to make recommendations to promote uniformity in the supervision of financial institutions. In 2006, the State Liaison Committee (SLC) was added to the FFIEC as a voting member. The SLC includes representatives from the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, the American Council of State Savings Supervisors, and the National Association of State Credit Union Supervisors.Return to text