The federal banking agencies on Friday announced the launch of an improved website to access banks’ quarterly Reports of Condition and Income (Call Report) data. Important Call Report data will now be available faster and in multiple formats through the Central Data Repository (CDR) athttps://cdr.ffiec.gov/public. The CDR is a cooperative venture by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency to collect, store, and distribute certain bank financial data. Banks began submitting their quarterly Call Report data using the CDR in October 2005. Call Report data for any bank can now be downloaded from the CDR in multiple formats. Users can access data in Portable Document Format (PDF), text format, and eXtensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL) format. The new website is also expected to be more cost efficient to maintain as several manual update processes have been eliminated. Call Report data also will now be available sooner on the CDR website. Most banks are required to submit their Call Report data within 30 calendar days of the close of each calendar quarter (March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31). A few larger banks with foreign offices have 35 days to submit their data. Starting about 15 days after the close of each calendar quarter, Call Report data for individual banks will now be available soon after banks submit it. Further details on the release of Call Report data through the CDR can be found in the agencies’Federal Registernotice (72 FR 7121).
The federal financial regulatory agencies today issued for comment a proposed Statement on Subprime Mortgage Lending to address certain risks and emerging issues relating to subprime1mortgage lending practices, specifically, particular adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) lending products. The proposal addresses concerns that subprime borrowers may not fully understand the risks and consequences of obtaining these products, and that the products may pose an elevated credit risk to financial institutions. In particular, the proposed guidance focuses on loans that involve repayment terms that exceed the borrower’s ability to service the debt without refinancing or selling the property. The statement specifies that an institution’s analysis of a borrower’s repayment capacity should include an evaluation of the borrower’s ability to repay the debt by its final maturity at the fully indexed rate, assuming a fully amortizing repayment schedule. The statement also underscores that communications with consumers should provide clear and balanced information about the relative benefits and risks of the products. If adopted, this statement would complement the 2006 Interagency Guidance on Nontraditional Mortgage Product Risks, which did not specifically address the risks of these ARM products. The agencies request comment on all aspects of the proposed statement and are particularly interested in public comment about whether: 1) these arrangements always present inappropriate risks to institutions and consumers, or the extent to which they can be appropriate under some circumstances; 2) the proposed statement would unduly restrict existing subprime borrowers’ ability to refinance their loans; 3) other forms of credit are available that would not present the risk of payment shock; 4) the principles of the proposed statement should be applied beyond the subprime ARM market; and 5) an institution’s limiting of prepayment penalties to the initial fixed-rate period would assist consumers by providing them sufficient time to assess and act on their mortgage needs. Comments are due sixty days after publication in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. The guidance is attached. Attachment (85 KB PDF) Footnotes 1.The term "subprime" is defined in the Expanded Guidance for Subprime Lending Programs, issued by the agencies on January 31, 2001.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the approval of an application by Banco Santander Totta, S.A., Lisbon, Portugal, to establish a representative office in Mineola, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the proposal filed by Bank of America Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina, to acquire U.S. Trust Corporation and its subsidiary bank, United States Trust Company, National Association, both in New York, New York. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the proposal by Community Bankshares, Inc., Greenwood Village, to acquire Citizens Financial Corporation and its subsidiary bank, The Citizens State Bank of Cortez, both of Cortez, all in Colorado. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the approval of an application by The Bank of Nova Scotia, Toronto, Canada, to establish a branch in Houston, Texas. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the proposal by The Industrial Bank of Taiwan Co., Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan, and its wholly owned subsidiary, IBT Holdings Corp., Cerritos, California, to become bank holding companies and to acquire EverTrust Bank, City of Industry, California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Conference on Credit Risk and Credit Derivatives, Washington, D.C. Good afternoon. I am pleased to participate in the Board’s conference on credit risk and credit derivatives. Song Han, Matt Pritsker, and Hao Zhou have worked hard to put together a stimulating program of cutting-edge research in this area.1Your conference focuses on improving our understanding of credit risk and credit derivatives, but I will begin my talk by taking a step back and discussing a wider range of asset markets, in which our understanding is also limited. Then I will examine how the research in this conference can help sharpen our focus on this broader range of asset markets. At the Federal Reserve, we have considerable interest in credit risk and credit derivatives. As these markets develop and become more complete, they facilitate risk transfer and diversification, thereby increasing the resilience of our financial system. With participants coming to rely more on these markets to manage risk, we have focused increasingly on their liquidity and structure. We have worked closely with the private sector to strengthen the clearing and settlement infrastructure and to understand how these markets will function under stress. But my emphasis today will be not the structure or mechanics of credit markets but rather the information contained in the prices we observe in these markets. We at the Federal Reserve use this information in nearly every area of our responsibility. For example, in our roles as bank supervisors and protectors of financial stability, we monitor the credit spreads of financial institutions as early warning signs of possible financial stress. In our role as monetary policy makers, we analyze information from credit-risk markets to get readings on the cost of capital to businesses and on forward-looking indicators of the health of the corporate sector that can have implications for future macroeconomic developments. Extracting Information from Asset PricesAs a consequence, the staff at the Federal Reserve puts considerable effort into research on asset prices and into reporting the results of that research to policymakers. One reason we do so is to try to understand the expectations that households, businesses, and market participants have about the future. Expectations are critical to understanding the economy and developments in the financial system. Of course, we look at a great deal of data from the nonfinancial side of the economy, such as gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and changes in the prices of goods and services. These data certainly reflect expectations but not always in a transparent way. And, these data take some time to compile and so are never available in real time. Because financial asset prices embody expectations about the future, they also contain forward-looking information about prospective developments, and many are available continuously and instantaneously. We pay attention to an extensive range of asset prices, including those of Treasury securities (both nominal and real), corporate debt and equities, and derivatives. Although it is not easy, we use these asset prices to tease out information about expectations that help us to interpret and predict the pace of economic activity and prices. The price of an asset reflects the future cash flows that investors expect to receive from owning that asset. The price also reflects a risk premium, which is the excess expected return over the risk-free rate that investors require for holding risky assets in their portfolios. Each asset’s risk premium depends on the asset’s risk--as measured by the possible variability of its cash flows from their expected level--and on investors' risk aversion, which represents the extent of investors’ appetite for risk. And we try to measure and understand the elements of the risk premium, in addition to the embedded expectations. In equity markets, corporate earnings are the future cash flows that affect equity prices. Given the market’s outlook for corporate earnings--as embodied, for example, in the predictions of market analysts--we make a crude estimate of the risk premium on equities as the difference between the ratio of trend earnings to price and a real long-term Treasury yield. On occasion, we go further and use structural economic models to decompose the risk premium into components related to risk and to investors’ risk appetite. In the credit market, the relevant future cash flows are the coupons on corporate debt, less an allowance for expected losses from future defaults. In one exercise, we forecast future defaults with a simple regression model and estimate the credit-risk premium as the difference between corporate yields and Treasury yields that is in excess of what would be required to compensate investors for their estimates of expected credit losses. We also estimate a term structure of credit-risk premiums by repeating this analysis using debt that has different maturities. To judge what market prices of risk might be telling us, we try to understand how the resulting credit-risk premiums relate to other sources of information, such as the strength of business balance sheets, historical levels of risk premiums, and premiums observed in related markets, like that for equities. This approach helps us to assess the current attitudes and expectations of market participants as well as possible future movements in risk premiums under alternative scenarios. We look to prices in Treasury markets and in markets for interest rate options and futures to infer investors’ expected future path of monetary policy and their uncertainty about that path. To do so, we need to model term premiums to tease out the links between long-term interest rates and investors’ expectations of future short-term rates. We also compare the Treasury yield curve with the prices on Treasury inflation-protected securities to infer expected inflation, a key variable tracked by monetary policy makers. Although we use a variety of techniques for extracting information from asset prices, what we can learn has limits. First, asset prices are tough to work with. They change rapidly and are subject to short-run technical factors--swings in prices that are not related to fundamental and persistent shifts in supply and demand. Second, and perhaps even more important, how asset prices embody risk and investors’ risk attitudes is complicated and varies over time. We must use models to extract information on risk and risk preferences from prices, and because all models are simplifications of reality, we have to recognize that the results are only approximations of the underlying attitudes and circumstances and thus are subject to error. Asset-Pricing PuzzlesResearchers are well aware of the difficulties of decomposing an asset’s required return into components that are related to expected future cash flows, risk aversion, and risk. Moreover, risk preferences that should be related in a predictable way across markets often do not appear to be so. For example, the risk preferences required to fit consumption data from the goods market are inconsistent with the risk preferences implied by prices in the equity market. This problem is well known to most economists and to everyone in this room and is known as the "equity-premium puzzle." The equity premium is defined as the return that an investor expects to earn on a broad equity index in excess of the return on a U.S. Treasury security. Although theory suggests that the equity premium should be related to investors’ risk preferences as well as the fundamental volatility of the corporate sector, it is difficult to find plausible risk preferences that can rationalize the high level of the historical equity premium. Also, we observe that required returns appear to vary over time, but we do not understand all the reasons for the fluctuation. Both of these problems complicate our interpretation of what implications, if any, movements in equity markets have for the macroeconomy. The equity-premium puzzle is not the only aspect of the behavior of financial asset prices that is difficult to reconcile with economic theory or experience in related markets. A second puzzle is the "credit-spread puzzle." The spread between a corporate bond and a similar-maturity Treasury bond compensates an investor for the risk that the bond’s issuer will default and recoveries on the defaulted bond will be low. Credit-risk spreads vary substantially over the cycle, and right now they are on the low side of historical experience. However, over long periods, actual percentage losses on corporate bonds have been well below historical averages of credit spreads at all maturities, especially in the high-grade, short-maturity segment of the market. Again, it is difficult to reconcile this observation with standard models of investor preferences. Other explanatory factors, such as the different tax treatment of corporate and Treasury bonds, appear to explain only part of the puzzle. A third puzzle concerns the behavior of financial market volatility. Volatility and measures of expected volatility derived from options prices vary over time but not in ways that are easy to link to economic fundamentals or to the variation of expected returns in asset markets. Moreover, the relationship between financial market volatility and the volatility of macroeconomic variables such as GDP is not well understood. A fourth puzzle related to the pricing of risk concerns the term premium, which is the additional compensation that investors require to hold longer-term securities. We estimate from the Treasury market that the term premium has declined substantially in recent years to unusually low levels, which has contributed to the inversion of the yield curve. But we do not understand why, and consequently we do not know to what extent we are seeing a permanent decline in the term premium--perhaps due to a general reduction in the volatility of economic activity and inflation over the past twenty-five years. Or we may be seeing a temporary decline due to the influence of recent macroeconomic conditions or special factors affecting the demand for long-term bonds. In addition to these well-known puzzles, are also a large number of puzzles across all asset markets that I will group under the common theme of risk harmonization. Risk-harmonization puzzles concern whether a given risk is priced the same way in all markets in which that risk is traded. In the absence of transaction costs, broadly defined, the law of one price should hold--there should be no risk-free arbitrage--and all risks should be priced the same way in all markets. In fact, risk harmonization is limited because transaction costs, viewed in a broad way, are quite material in many markets. A broad notion of transaction costs includes not only the direct fees paid when transacting and trading but also the full set of risks that are involved when arbitraging among markets. These include various types of basis risk, which is the risk that long and short positions exposed to the same risk in different markets might not offset each other. Another important risk is model risk, which is the risk of misjudging an apparent price anomaly when trading owing to not having the correct model. Some of the conference papers focus on markets in which risk harmonization appears to be incomplete. How the Common Lens of Credit Risk Improves Our UnderstandingPapers in this conference contribute to our overall understanding of how credit risk, as well as other risks such as those associated with volatility and liquidity, are priced in financial markets. One of the contributions of the conference is that it views many of the asset-pricing puzzles through the common lens of credit risk. This approach holds the hope of addressing the various puzzles in an internally consistent way that helps us to understand how the puzzles may be related. One strand of the literature on the equity-premium puzzle attempts to explain the puzzle with a somewhat controversial refinement of standard risk preferences. The first paper in the conference examines the plausibility of these preferences by analyzing whether they can also explain the average pattern of credit spreads in the bond market. The results are mixed. Part of the credit-spread puzzle is explained, lending some credence to these preferences, and suggesting the two puzzles are related, but a part remains unexplained. And the paper identifies better modeling of the situation in which firms are forced into default as one research direction that may help to explain the remaining part of the credit-spread puzzle. This research direction is pursued in a separate paper in the conference. A second paper at the conference also studies the relationship between equity prices and credit risk but does so from a different perspective by asking whether credit risk is appropriately priced in the stock markets. To address this question, it focuses on companies that are heavily exposed to systematic risk of financial distress--that is, they are relatively likely to experience financial distress during future downturns--and then studies whether the stocks earn a positive premium for this risk. The main finding is that investors in those companies do not earn a premium for distress risk in the stock market. This result suggests a possible failure of risk harmonization in the stock market, which in turn raises the deeper question of identifying why this failure in risk harmonization is not arbitraged away. In short, papers in the conference deepen our knowledge of some of the asset-pricing puzzles, but they also highlight new aspects of the puzzles that remain to be explained. How Credit Derivatives Markets Can Improve Our UnderstandingThis leads to my last topic, which is how credit derivatives markets provide new ways for us to uncover market perceptions of risk. Like all derivatives (such as options and swaps), credit derivatives allow for credit risk to be unbundled and traded independently from other types of risk, which makes it easier to price and measure the different types of risk. Here I will focus on two examples. The first involves our ability to infer the market's perception of default risk. In the bad old days, about ten years ago, the best way to infer credit risk was from the prices of corporate bonds, but bond prices are contaminated by differences in coupons, taxes, option-like features, bond covenants, and the illiquidity of the corporate bond market itself. All of these features meant that the modeling error involved in the process resulted in credit-risk measures that were noisy and potentially biased. Now, instead of looking to the bond market to measure default risk, we are increasingly turning to the market for credit default swaps, or CDS. CDS are more standardized than corporate bonds, and, over time, they have also become more liquid. They therefore provide us with new, and in many cases more precise, measures of credit risk. These measures in turn can sharpen our measures of the pricing puzzles. In addition, because the CDS market helps us to strip out the credit-risk component from bond prices, that market also gives us a clearer picture of how important non-credit-risk components of bond prices, such as liquidity, are priced. The second example involves the pricing of default correlation. Default correlation measures the tendency of firms to default at the same time. Suppose a bank makes a set of loans that appear to be safe when looked at individually. Whether the loans are likely to default at nearly the same time can represent the difference between whether the bank remains healthy or has the potential to become insolvent. For this reason, the modeling of default correlations, and how correlations change with economic conditions, is one of the most important inputs into measures of portfolio credit risk at banks. Default correlations and how they are modeled are also important to bank regulators and are heavily emphasized within the Basel II capital standards. Collateralized debt obligations, or CDOs, are one of a number of financial instruments whose prices are sensitive to the pattern of default correlations. As a result, the prices of these instruments provide us with a forward-looking picture of the market’s perception of default correlations and an indication of how the risks of changes in correlation are priced. Of course, as some of the papers in the conference demonstrate, the pricing of correlation-sensitive instruments is, putting it generously, somewhat less than straightforward. For that reason, there is substantial model risk involved in making inferences from these prices. Nevertheless, the prices of these instruments provide a blurry view of default correlations that I expect will improve through time as credit derivatives markets continue to grow and mature. Credit derivatives, like all derivatives, are in zero net supply, and, abstracting from the very important issue of counterparty credit risk, they neither add to nor subtract from the stock of financial risk in the economy. They do, however, provide new and more-efficient ways for sharing and hedging the risks that do exist, and they facilitate the transfer of those risks to those who are most willing to evaluate and bear them. As a consequence, as the credit derivatives market continues to develop and deepen, my guess, and it is just a guess, is that cleaner measures of credit risk will, all else being equal, reduce the costs of arbitraging between markets and will improve the harmonization of risk across markets--one of the asset-pricing puzzles I highlighted. Two of the other puzzles I described earlier are the credit-spread and equity-premium puzzles. At least a part of these puzzles may be due to imperfect risk sharing among active market participants. If this is indeed part of the puzzle, then financial innovations such as credit derivatives may, again, all else being equal, reduce long-run average risk premiums in both the equity and credit markets, over time, by facilitating risk sharing among currently active market participants, provided that participants adequately understand and manage the risk of these products. That said, time will tell whether my speculations on this point are correct. ConclusionMy message to you today has been that the Federal Reserve places a lot of emphasis on understanding financial asset prices to help it meet its public policy objectives. But in doing so, we are handicapped by the extent to which we do not understand important aspects of how financial assets are priced. Your work as researchers in this field--a portion of which is show-cased at this conference--has been helpful in beginning to explain some of the puzzles, and more recent techniques and ideas together with the data series being generated in new markets hold the promise of more progress in the future. So, I will not keep you from your work any longer. Your contributions are important to the nation’s central bank. Please, go solve some puzzles. Footnotes 1.Mike Gibson,Song Han,Matt Pritsker, andHao Zhou, of the Board's staff, contributed to these remarks.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the issuance of a consent Cease and Desist Order against Cache Valley Banking Company and Cache Valley Bank, both of Logan, Utah. The Federal Reserve Board simultaneously announced the termination of the April 19, 2004 Written Agreement by and among Cache Valley Bank Company, Cache Valley Bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, and the Utah State Department of Financial Institutions. The Utah State Department of Financial Institutions has concurrently issued a consent Cease and Desist Order against Cache Valley Banking Company and Cache Valley Bank, and terminated, on its own behalf, the April 19, 2004 Written Agreement. The Utah State Department of Financial Institutions has also terminated the October 13, 2005 Amended Written Agreement by and among Cache Valley Banking Company, Cache Valley Bank, and the Utah State Department of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Federal Reserve Board’s Cease and Desist Order is attached.
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, Washington, D.C. Presented identical remarks This was an interesting paper with an important objective--to contribute to our understanding of inflation dynamics, with a particular focus on the so-called Great Inflation of the 1970s.1The better we understand history, the less likely we are to repeat it, even on a reduced scale. Of course, the basic problem in tackling the inflation of the 1970s is that we have one observation and many competing theories. The authors’ approach is to consider the experiences of other major industrial countries during that period with the hope that cross-country differences will provide a way to discriminate among the potential causes. The authors’ principal empirical finding is that the onset and, to a lesser degree, the end of the Great Inflation were closely synchronized across a number of countries. On the basis of this timing and other findings, they reject many of the theories about why inflation rose in the period from the late 1960s through the end of the 1970s. According to the authors, the Great Inflation did not stem solely from adverse structural changes to the economy, or from policymaker misunderstandings about the nature of the inflation process, or from errors in gauging aggregate resource utilization. Instead, they say, changes in monetary policy preferences, perhaps accentuated by political influences, are the key part of the story. I certainly agree with the authors that high inflation could not have emerged and then persisted without an accommodative policy regime and that a period of tight policy was required to produce the sustained moderation in inflation that followed. However, their conclusions do not fit easily with my premise, which is that policymakers did not seek the result they obtained. In thinking about the story told by the paper, I also wonder why political forces and central-banker preferences would necessarily shift at the same time in so many countries. So I am left with the question of why policy was conducted the way it was. My impulse when it comes to selecting from the list of causative factors in the paper is to say “all of the above.” Policymakers in the 1970s--the Federal Reserve among them--were dealt a very bad hand that, for a variety of reasons, they played poorly. The second half of the 1960s saw rising inflation driven by excess demand--a situation not countered sufficiently by a Federal Reserve that perhaps was more subject to political pressures than it should have been. By the early 1970s, politicians as well as the Federal Reserve recognized that inflation was excessive but seemed worried about the cost of reducing it. Those concerns gave rise to the Nixon wage and price controls (which ran from 1971 to 1974). Into this mix were added some very adverse supply shocks that elevated the costs of disinflation. Productivity growth slowed appreciably in the early 1970s; labor force developments raised the nonaccelerating-inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU); and oil prices spiked. Moreover, as inflation remained elevated, inflation expectations rose and institutions adapted--for example through cost-of-living adjustments in labor contracts--thus further escalating the presumed cost of disinflation. Not only were the output costs of disinflation seen to be high but also the monetary policy needed to bring inflation down was consistently miscalculated--economists during the 1970s persistently overestimated both the speed and magnitude of the slowdown in real activity and inflation that would result from a given rise in the federal funds rate. Part of this miscalculation reflected a judgment that the economy and financial markets were fragile and that small changes in market interest rates would have major effects on aggregate spending (for example, as a result of disintermediation induced by ceilings on the interest rates that banks and thrifts could pay). But, in addition, the size of the output gap was not correctly perceived. I agree with the authors that this misperception could not have been the whole story; surely consistent surprises on inflation should have been a strong clue that something was amiss. But I was not entirely persuaded by the authors’ arguments seeking to minimize this factor, especially those that rely on “new estimates of real-time output gaps,” a bit of an oxymoron given that you cannot really produce anewreal-time estimate of a constructed series like the output gap. Perhaps the gap series produced by the Council of Economic Advisers was viewed skeptically by some contemporary observers, but it was the “official” series published by the Commerce Department, and it was referred to by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in its policy deliberations. It does not surprise me that forecasters took several years to catch up to the adverse developments in trend productivity and the demographic factors that boosted the NAIRU; in the 1990s, we took a while to realize the implications of favorable movements in both variables even though we were aware from the experience of the 1970s that such changes were possible. Moreover, the oil price shocks, analysis of which was not part of the standard tool kit of economists forty years ago, complicated matters considerably. For a variety of reasons, then, forecasters consistently underpredicted the future level of inflation, seeing considerably more disinflation from a particular policy stance than in fact occurred. This underprediction was true for the Board staff’s outlook prepared for each meeting of the FOMC, in which inflation forecast errors persisted for some time, and it was also true for the bond market, as realized real interest rates, even at longer maturities, were very low or negative. These experiences formed the backdrop for the FOMC’s October 6, 1979, adoption of a policy targeting the monetary aggregates, a policy whose particular characteristics can be seen as originating from three observations about the 1970s. First, inflation was far too high; it was corroding the economic system; and it was the central bank’s responsibility to bring it under control. Second, under the circumstances, economic forecasts had proved to be essentially worthless as a basis for setting monetary policy, so the central bank had to try a different approach for re-establishing price stability--namely, targeting the medium-term growth of the money supply. The third observation was that part of the problem with policy had been its excessive gradualism, possibly to some degree a reaction to political and public pressure. Because interest rates would probably have to move quite a bit to bring inflation down and no one at the time knew by how much, rate movements needed to be less discretionary; one way to achieve this was by changing the focus of policy to rates of money growth. The memory of the 1970s and the subsequent disinflation are very much alive at the Federal Reserve and, I suspect, at every other central bank. What major lessons have we drawn from that era? First, low and stable inflation--effective price stability--is a necessary condition for the economy to realize its full potential for sustained increases in living standards. I doubt that high inflation was the proximate cause of the 1973 productivity slowdown, which persisted for a decade after 1983 to 1986, the period the authors give for the end of the Great Inflation. And I agree with them that low inflation was not the only cause of the Great Moderation, but I am confident that we would not have experienced more than two decades of nearly uninterrupted growth if the Federal Reserve had not brought inflation down in the early 1980s and kept it low thereafter. Low inflation reduces distortions from signals in market prices and facilitates longer-term planning. Low and stable inflation also anchors inflation expectations; in turn, anchored expectations make it easier for the central bank to control inflation with smaller variations in real activity. That brings me to my second major lesson: Expectations are critical to policy success. Expectations about future policy help to determine the financial conditions that affect spending and inflation. In most situations, policy will need to be conducted so that expectedrealinterest rates are positive; a policy that pushes expected real rates below zero would be appropriate only in special circumstances, such as when real activity is expected to be persistently weak and inflation undesirably low. Likewise, inflation expectations are critical: Increases in expectations of inflation elevate the cost of returning to price stability, and unanchored expectations make it very difficult to understand where the economy is and where it is going. As a consequence, I do not agree with the authors’ assertion that central banks pay too much attention to inflation expectations. Those expectations may not be as much of a leading indicator of the inflation trend as I would like--although I am not sure that I find the paper’s conclusion, that the trend leads expectations, all that persuasive. Indeed, if I accept the authors’ assertion that post-1984 expectations have been a lagging indicator of the trend, then, when expectations rise and stay elevated, I should weight that observation heavily, not lightly. Policy cannot be conducted based solely on such a lagging or coincident indicator of inflation, but, of course, it is not. We pay close attention to those factors that are influencing the outlook for inflation, as for example, the level of resource utilization highlighted in our recent announcements. But a clear lesson of the 1970s is that a central bank must keep a very close eye on sustained movements in inflation expectations. I think a third lesson is humility--we should always keep in mind how little we know about the economy. Monetary policy operates in an environment of pervasive uncertainty--about the nature of the shocks hitting the economy, about the economy’s structure, and about agents’ reactions. The 1970s provide a sobering lesson in the difficulty of estimating the level and rate of change of potential output; these are quantities we can never observe directly but can only infer from the behavior of other variables. We cannot effectively implement policy without some reference to the likely level of potential, given that demand-supply pressures are an integral part of the monetary transmission mechanism. But we must be realistic about the accuracy of our estimates of potential while always doing our best to improve them. Even today, we face a number of sources of uncertainty about the nature of the inflation process. Interestingly, we can draw several examples from the paper. First, any estimate of the persistent component of inflation is inherently uncertain. Comparing the trend inflation estimates for the gross domestic product of the United States in the current study with related estimates based on Stock and Watson’s recent paper on the topic reveals an important difference: In the latter, the standard deviation to the innovation of the permanent component of inflation from 1997 onward is not zero but rather permits a small but significant amount of drift in the trend from its late-1990s trough.2Other trend-extraction exercises imply either a stable trend or a trend that has drifted up over the past several years; likewise, the behavior of estimated trend inflation over this period differs according to the inflation concept used. Although these differences are small relative to the overall variation in the trend over the past forty years, they are assuredly large enough to be meaningful to a monetary policy maker. In addition, we do not yet have a consensus structural model of inflation dynamics that satisfactorily explains all the important aspects of the empirical data. As the paper demonstrates, a standard workhorse model--a sticky-price business cycle model with a drifting inflation target and a New Keynesian Phillips curve--cannot mimic one important feature of the inflation process. I will leave it to the modelers to debate the seriousness of this deficiency and to propose how it might be rectified. However, it is clear to me that our understanding of the inflation process still has far to go. The issue of expectations illustrates our ignorance. As I have already indicated, inflation expectations are among the most important variables policymakers monitor, but we do not have answers to our most basic questions about them: Are available measures suitable indicators of true inflation expectations by households and businesses? How are expectations formed--and in particular what are the respective roles of central bank talk, central bank actions, and actual inflation outcomes? And how do expectations influence price and wage setting? In short, although I believe that inflation expectations are critical to assessing the inflation outlook, I cannot be sure (particularly in real time) that our expectational measures are accurate and so cannot know what precise role expectations play in wage and price dynamics. In sum, then, I found reading the paper to be useful and instructive because it reminded me not only of what we have learned but also of what we still do not know. Footnotes 1.Alan KackmeisterandJeremy Rudd, of the staff at the Board of Governors, assisted in the preparation of these comments. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of the Board of Governors or its staff.Return to text 2.James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson (2007), "Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,supplement to vol. 39 (February), pp. 3-33.Return to text
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the America’s Community Bankers Government Affairs Conference, Washington, D.C. I am delighted to be with you today to share some of my views on the vital role that community banks play in the U.S. economy. I am particularly pleased to be part of this excellent America’s Community Bankers conference for a very personal reason: one of my first jobs was with a community bank. My experiences at the teller's window provided a useful, in-the-trenches introduction to some of the issues I now face as a Federal Reserve Governor. Community banks play an important role in the United States economy, as they have throughout our history. Indeed, the roots of commercial banking in the United States can be traced to the development of community banks soon after the founding of the republic. The U.S. banking industry has, of course, changed dramatically over the past 200 years with the emergence of large, geographically diversified banking organizations that have the ability to exploit economies of scale and scope and to compete in global markets. More recently, this evolutionary process has accelerated, and the past two decades have witnessed dramatic changes in the structure of the banking industry and the business environment in which banks operate. These changes have brought with them new challenges for community bankers. Nonetheless, many community banks continue to thrive by providing traditional relationship banking services to members of their communities. Their local presence and personal interactions give community bankers an advantage in providing financial services to those customers for whom, despite technological advances, information remains difficult and costly to obtain. These close ties, however, represent a two-edged sword, exposing community banks to risks even as they provide a valuable and profitable market niche. For example, the close ties of community banks to their customers bring not only potential benefits in screening and monitoring borrowers, but also the potential for conflicts of interest. I would like to spend the next few minutes discussing both the benefits of and the challenges facing community banking. The Special Role of Community Banks: Relationship FinanceThe earliest banks in the United States and elsewhere relied on close relationships with their customers to obtain information about creditworthiness and to monitor loan performance. For example, in an analysis of early nineteenth century banking in New England, Naomi Lamoreaux found that many bank directors lent the bulk of the funds under their control to themselves, their relatives, friends, and business partners. At the time, information systems were quite primitive, and it was difficult and costly to obtain data about potential borrowers who were not family members or those with whom they had a close relationship (Lamoreaux, 1994). Relationship finance continues to be at the heart of community banking. I believe that the most significant characteristics of community banks are: 1) their importance in small-business lending; 2) their tendency to lend to individuals and businesses in their local areas; 3) their tendency to rely on retail deposits for funding; and 4) their emphasis on personal service (Critchfield, et. al., 2004; Petersen and Rajan, 1994). Hence, successful community banking today depends importantly on the same characteristics that formed the foundations of the U.S. banking industry two centuries ago--personal interactions among bankers, their customers, and their communities. The conventional paradigm of relationship finance is based on the premise that small businesses and households tend to be informationally opaque--an economist’s term that may be even more opaque than these small businesses and households. What I mean by this phrase is that “hard” systematic data about the creditworthiness of such potential borrowers tend to be quite difficult to obtain. Thus, the efficient supply of credit to these agents depends on “soft” information that may be generated through close interactions with the borrower and knowledge of the community--that is, classic relationship lending. In contrast, larger banks tend to have a comparative advantage with larger, more mature firms for whom quantitative, or “hard,” information, such as longer, more-detailed credit histories, is relatively easy to obtain (Petersen and Rajan, 1994). The distinction between community banks and large banks, however, is clearly changing. Technology has lowered the cost of information processing and facilitated the growth of information bureaus, making information about households and small businesses more readily available. This information has allowed some institutions to substitute credit scoring for more costly traditional techniques in the underwriting of some types of consumer and small-business loans, particularly credit card loans. These products are quite different from traditional unsecured personal or business loans, which rely heavily on information obtained from personal interactions and relationships. Indeed, there can be no doubt that community banks today face considerable challenges. Rapid technological changes in the production of financial services, improved production and dissemination of financial information about consumers and businesses, deregulation, the increasing geographic scope of some banking activities, and the increased importance of nonbank providers of financial services are some of the factors altering the financial marketplace. While many of these changes may have increased financial system efficiency and lowered costs for consumers, they also present new and sometimes difficult challenges for community banks. These changes have coincided with a significant consolidation of the banking industry and a pronounced decline in the number of community banks. If we define a community bank as any bank or thrift organization that has total real assets of less than $1 billion, in 2002 dollars, the number of community banks has declined about a third over the past decade. Most of this consolidation has been due to mergers. A Federal Reserve Board staff study reports that between 1994 and 2003 there were more than 3,500 bank and thrift mergers (Pilloff, 2004). In more than 90 percent of these mergers, the target institution had less than $1 billion in total assets, and in about half of those cases the acquiring organization also had assets of less than $1 billion. Acquiring organizations were typically larger than their targets; about 50 percent of the transactions involved an acquirer that was at least ten times as large as the target institution. Although merger activity has slowed since the 1990s, there were still at least 200 mergers each year between 2000 and 2006. Despite these changes, community banks continue to fill an important niche in banking, providing relationship loans in specific business and economic sectors (most notably small-business and agricultural lending), personalized service, and a local presence. Indeed, we have a considerable body of evidence that points to the value and viability of these institutions. For example, despite the decline in numbers that I just mentioned, there are still more than 7,000 community banking organizations, accounting for about 95 percent of all banks and thrifts in the United States today. Furthermore, new community banks continue to be formed. During the period 2000 through 2005, about 120 new community banks were chartered, on average, each year. And during the first three quarters of 2006, 137 new community banks were chartered. These figures suggest that many people continue to believe that community banks have an important niche to fill and, as a result, are willing to invest in the future of community banking. A variety of indicators suggest that as a whole, today’s community banks are doing well. The average return on equity (ROE) at community banks, for instance, is quite solid and has improved over the past few years. Net interest margins for community banks are, on average, higher than those for larger banks, and recently this difference has been widening. And, as a result of stable interest margins and improved cost controls, the return on assets (ROA) for community banks as a whole has remained well above industry standards for strong performance. Looking at other performance measures, we see that loan quality and capital ratios remain strong at community banks. On average, their nonperforming-loan-to-asset ratios have been low and comparable to those of the largest banking organizations, and their capital ratios have remained high. In addition, community banks continue to demonstrate a healthy ability to attract deposits, with core deposits funding about 70 percent of assets as of year-end 2005. Community Banks and Small BusinessesThe thesis that I have put forward--namely, that relationship finance is important in sustaining the role that community banks play and in accounting for their strong performance--has a number of implications for small businesses’ use of community banks and the proximity of banks and their customers. The Board’s Survey of Small Business Finances gives us a window on the relationship between community banks and small businesses and the evolution of the banks’ role. The survey data are also helpful in contrasting the characteristics of small businesses that use community banks with those of small businesses that use larger depository institutions. By way of background, the Board conducts the small-business survey every five years. Our most recent data are for year-end 2003 and were obtained from interviews conducted during 2004 with more than 4,200 small businesses, a representative sample drawn from more than 6.3 million small enterprises in the United States. The data were made available to the public in June 2006, but to my knowledge no one has yet used them to assess the role that community banks play in small-business finance. Not surprisingly, the vast majority of small businesses obtained some type of financial service from a bank or thrift in both 1998 and 2003. Over that period, the share of small businesses obtaining services from nondepository institutions increased substantially, from about 40 percent of firms in 1998 to about 54 percent in 2003. Nondepository sources typically supply loans and financial management products, including such services as check clearing, provision of letters of credit, cash management, and credit card processing. Although the fraction of small businesses obtaining these types of services from nondepositories has increased, the proportion obtaining them from banks increased as well. Both of these changes reflect the fact that between 1998 and 2003 small businesses substantially increased their demand for these types of services. Our survey data provide evidence that community banks continue to play an important role in providing financial services to small businesses, even in an increasingly competitive marketplace. Among the small businesses that reported using a bank or thrift, in both 1998 and 2003 about a third used a community bank. One of the traditional strengths of community banks--indeed, a practical requirement for successful relationship lending--is local presence. Although our survey results suggest that community banks increasingly face competition from both larger banks and nondepository institutions, they also illustrate the importance of proximity for many small businesses. In 2003, the median distance between a small business’s headquarters and its bank or thrift was three miles, about the same as in 1998. For lending relationships, the median distance was four miles. Clearly, proximity and convenience, two of the characteristics that epitomize relationship finance at community banks, are important factors underlying the choice of financial service providers by small businesses. Comparisons of the characteristics of the community and larger banks used by small businesses reveal differences that are consistent with the idea that community banks specialize in relationship finance. On average, the distances between small businesses and the banks from which they obtained financial services were smaller for community banks than for larger banks. Small businesses were also more likely: 1) to have longer relationships; 2) to obtain a larger number of services; and 3) to conduct business in person with community banks than with larger banks. And when asked why they used a specific institution, business owners using community banks were substantially more likely to mention the importance of relationships. Our survey results also allow us to consider whether small businesses that use community banks have different characteristics than those that use large banks. Of the firms that used banks in 2003, one-fifth used community banks exclusively, two-thirds used large banks exclusively, and the remainder (14 percent) used both. As described above, relationship lending is most important to firms lacking hard information, and those firms, in general, are expected to be the smaller firms. Consistent with this view, our survey indicates that the average firm that used community banks exclusively was smaller in terms of number of employees, sales, and assets than the average firm that used large institutions exclusively or that used both community banks and large banks. In addition, firms that used only community banks used fewer services overall than other types of firms--which is consistent with their smaller size--but at the same time obtained slightly more services from each bank than did firms that used only larger banks. This suggests that community-bank-only firms are more likely to cluster their purchases at a single institution than are other firms, behavior that is consistent with the importance of relationship finance. Overall, in my judgment, our survey data confirm the view that, despite changes in the competitive environment, community banks continue to play an important role in providing relationship finance to small businesses in their local banking markets. Potential Conflicts of InterestThe very relationships that underlie relationship finance, and that constitute the primary source of community bankers’ comparative advantage in meeting the financial needs of small businesses and households, also present challenges. As I mentioned earlier, relationship finance dates back to the very earliest banking institutions in our country. Although the extreme form of relationship lending that characterized early nineteenth century New England banking had the potential to undermine the safety and soundness of these early banking institutions, Naomi Lamoreaux’s research suggests that market forces acted to minimize the adverse effects. In an environment characterized by easy entry into banking, bank directors apparently had strong incentives to monitor lending and minimize risks because their business success depended crucially on maintaining their unsullied reputations. Of course, this salutary outcome was by no means inevitable, as evidenced by experiences in a number of developing countries where this type of lending behavior has had quite pernicious effects; rather, the outcome was the result of the particular circumstances and competitive environment prevailing in New England at the time (Lamoreaux, 1994). When it comes to more recent times, evidence on the extent to which conflicts of interest resulting from close ties between banks and their potential borrowers may have adversely affected bank performance is limited to studies of the largest banking organizations. One example is my own research with Phil Strahan that looked at linkages between the boards of directors of banks and nonfinancial firms. Such board linkages can be beneficial because they improve information flow between the linked firms; however, they can also lead to conflicts of interest because the individual who serves as the link has fiduciary responsibilities to both firms, and those firms’ interests can sometimes diverge. In our research, Phil and I focus on board linkages between large U.S. banks and Fortune 500 nonfinancial firms. This focus is driven largely by data availability. I would be very interested in hearing from you about the extent to which community bankers sit on the boards of nonfinancial firms and your views on the benefits and costs that result from these linkages. Our research finds that board linkages are quite prevalent among the largest banking organizations--more prevalent than among large nonfinancial firms--but that these linkages tend to involve firms in which shareholder-creditor conflicts of interest are least likely to arise. We also find that the connected firms are more likely to borrow from their connected bank, and that when they do, the loan terms are similar to the terms on loans to unconnected firms. Thus, contrary to the results of studies of some other countries, where it has been found that connections were misused, our results suggest that the avoidance of conflicts of interest explains both the allocation and behavior of bankers in the U.S. corporate governance system (Kroszner and Strahan, 2001, 2002). On balance, evidence from both community banks in early nineteenth century New England and larger banks in more recent times suggests that, as a whole, U.S. banks have managed their relationships well and have avoided engaging in systematic conflicts of interest. Nonetheless, the potential for problems is there, and it is important that bankers remain vigilant and regularly review the corporate governance mechanisms they have in place to deal appropriately with challenges that can arise with relationship finance. ConclusionIn sum, it is clear that community banks face many challenges today, as they have in the past. Technological developments in information production and dissemination, changes in the management strategies of larger banks and other institutions, deregulation, and changes in the delivery of financial services have reduced some of the advantages that community banks could once offer their customers. As a result, community banks have lost market share to larger banks and to nondepository institutions. At the same time, a large portion of small businesses and households continue to value and avail themselves of the relationship lending, personal service, and local proximity that community banks offer their customers. Community banks today are generally healthy and profitable, and new ones are being chartered every year. Along with the benefits of relationship finance, however, come some risks, including the potential for conflicts of interest. This particular risk appears to have been mitigated significantly in the United States, although it is important for bankers to remain vigilant and to regularly review the corporate governance mechanisms they have in place. I expect that community banks will continue to exploit their traditional advantages and expertise, to be valuable members of their communities, and to adapt to their changing environment in ways that allow them to remain strong and viable competitors. References Critchfield, Tim, Tyler Davis, Lee Davison, Heather Gratton, George Hanc, and Katherine Samolyk (2004). "The Future of Banking in America--Community Banks: Their Recent Past, Current Performance, and Future Prospects," Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Banking Review, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1-56. Kroszner, Randall S., and Philip E. Strahan (2001). “Bankers on Boards: Monitoring, Conflicts of Interest, and Lender Liability,” Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 62, pp. 415-452. Kroszner, Randall S., and Philip E. Strahan (2002). “Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board Connections and Conflicts in Bank Lending,” Working Paper 02-12, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania. Lamoreaux, Naomi (1994). Insider Lending: Banks, Personal Connections, and Economic Development in Industrial New England, Cambridge University Press. Petersen, Mitchell A., and Raghuram G. Rajan (1994). “The Benefits of Lending Relationships: Evidence from Small Business Data," Journal of Finance, vol. 49, pp. 3-37. Pilloff, Steven J. (2004).Bank Merger Activity in the United States, 1994-2003, Staff Study 176, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Eight federal regulators on Wednesday released a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) requesting comment on a model privacy form that financial institutions can use for their privacy notices to consumers required by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act). The privacy notices must describe an institution’s information sharing practices, and, for certain types of sharing, consumers have the right to opt out. The notices must be provided when a consumer first becomes a customer of a financial institution and then annually for as long as the customer relationship lasts. Last October, President Bush signed into law the Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2006, amending the GLB Act to require the agencies to propose a model form that is succinct and comprehensible to consumers, allows consumers easily to compare privacy practices of financial institutions, and uses easily readable type font. The proposed model privacy form is the “prototype privacy notice” developed by six of these federal agencies after a year-long consumer testing process. A detailed report describing the testing and resulting prototype privacy notice was released by these agencies in March 2006. The NPR proposes that a financial institution that chooses to use the model form would satisfy the disclosure requirements for the notices and so could take advantage of a legal “safe harbor.” The NPR also proposes to remove, after a transition period, the sample clauses now included in some of the agencies’ privacy rules. The NPR was developed jointly by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Trade Commission, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision, and the Securities and Exchange Commission. A copy of the NPR is attached. The NPR seeks comment on all aspects of the model form, including its content and format and whether it provides sufficient flexibility for financial institutions to disclose their sharing practices accurately. Written comments on the proposed rule amendments may be submitted within 60 days after their publication in the Federal Register, which is expected in late March.
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 percent. Recent indicators have been mixed and the adjustment in the housing sector is ongoing. Nevertheless, the economy seems likely to continue to expand at a moderate pace over coming quarters. Recent readings on core inflation have been somewhat elevated. Although inflation pressures seem likely to moderate over time, the high level of resource utilization has the potential to sustain those pressures. In these circumstances, the Committee's predominant policy concern remains the risk that inflation will fail to moderate as expected. Future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Thomas M. Hoenig; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Cathy E. Minehan; Frederic S. Mishkin; Michael H. Moskow; William Poole; and Kevin M. Warsh.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Fourth Economic Summit, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California My topic this evening is the implications of ongoing global economic integration “globalization” for short--for U.S. monetary policy. At the broadest level, globalization influences the conduct of monetary policy through its powerful effects on the economic and financial environment in which monetary policy must operate. As you know, several decades of global economic integration have left a large imprint on the structure of the U.S. economy, including changes in patterns of production, employment, trade, and financial flows. Other than by contributing to general economic and financial stability, monetary policy can do little to affect these structural changes or the powerful economic forces that drive them. However, to make effective policy, the Federal Reserve must have as full an understanding as possible of the factors determining economic growth, employment, and inflation in the U.S. economy, whether those influences originate at home or abroad. Consequently, one direct effect of globalization on Federal Reserve operations has been to increase the time and attention that policymakers and staff must devote to following and understanding developments in other economies, in the world trading system, and in world capital markets. A narrower question, but one that is critical for monetary policy makers, is whether the increased openness of the U.S. economy has in some way affected the ability of the Federal Reserve to meet its congressional mandate to foster price stability and maximum sustainable employment. On this issue, some analysts have argued that globalization hinders monetary policy--for example, by reducing the ability of the Federal Reserve to affect U.S. interest rates and asset prices or by diminishing the role of domestic factors in the inflation process. You will not be surprised to hear that the Federal Reserve System is quite interested in the implications of globalization for the conduct and effectiveness of monetary policy. Members of the Board staff have conducted extensive research on the topic, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco--which is deeply engaged in Asia-Pacific issues--has been a leader in this area as well. The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas has created a Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute, which will support the study of globalization’s effects on policy and the economy, and a number of other Reserve Banks have undertaken similar efforts. In the remainder of my talk I will discuss two channels through which globalization may have affected the transmission and effectiveness of U.S. monetary policy. First, I will consider whether the globalization of finance has weakened or otherwise affected the ability of U.S. monetary policy to influence domestic financial market conditions. Second, I will discuss what we know about the way international factors influence the determination of inflation, a key goal variable for monetary policy. Globalization, Monetary Policy, and Financial MarketsMonetary policy works in the first instance by affecting financial conditions, including the levels of interest rates and asset prices. Changes in financial conditions in turn influence a variety of decisions by households and firms, including choices about how much to consume, to produce, and to invest. Anyone who participates in financial markets these days is aware that these markets transcend national borders and are highly sensitive to economic and political developments anywhere in the world. Does financial globalization significantly reduce the influence of the Federal Reserve on financial conditions in the United States and thereby possibly make U.S. monetary policy less effective? Certainly, the financial environment in which U.S. monetary policy is made has been irrevocably changed by the remarkable increases in the magnitudes of financial flows into and out of the United States. A quarter-century ago, foreign holdings of U.S. financial assets were limited, and therefore, the influence of foreign investors and foreign financial conditions on U.S. financial markets was in most cases relatively modest. As I have already noted, that situation has changed markedly, as global financial markets have become increasingly integrated and both foreign and domestic investors have become more diversified internationally. Today, foreigners hold about one-quarter of the long-term fixed-income securities issued by U.S. entities of all types and more than half of publicly-held U.S. Treasury securities. Cross-border financial flows are enormous and growing: For example, in 2006, foreigners acquired on net more than $1.6 trillion in U.S. assets, while U.S. investors purchased more than $1 trillion in foreign assets. Given their scale, capital inflows and outflows certainly influence long-term U.S. interest rates and other key asset prices, both by affecting the underlying supply-demand balance between saving and capital investment and by helping to determine the premiums that investors receive for holding assets that are risky or illiquid. How does all this affect monetary policy? It is helpful to think about the potential implications of globalized financial markets for monetary policy by beginning with the first stages of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. In particular, as you know, the Federal Reserve influences financial conditions through its ability to control the federal funds rate, the interest rate at which banks lend to each other overnight. Through the use of open-market operations and other techniques, the Federal Reserve can manage the supply of funds in the interbank market as needed to keep the federal funds rate close to its target, a capability that has not been affected by the increased international integration of financial markets. Although the federal funds rate does not itself have a major influence on economic activity, other short-term rates--such as Eurodollar rates--are determined largely by the current and expected future values of the funds rate, reflecting the close substitutability of alternative short-term sources of funding. The Federal Reserve’s ability to control the federal funds rate thus gives it a strong influence over other short-term dollar nominal interest rates and, to the extent that inflation is inertial or sticky in the short run, over short-term real interest rates as well. The Fed’s ability to set the short-term interest rate independently of foreign financial conditions depends critically, of course, on the fact that the dollar is a freely floating currency whose value is continuously determined in open, competitive markets. If the dollar’s value were fixed in terms of another currency or basket of currencies, the Fed would be constrained to set its policy rate at a level consistent with rates in global capital markets. Because the dollar is free to adjust, U.S. interest rates can differ from rates abroad, and, consequently, the Fed retains the autonomy to set its federal funds rate target as needed to respond to domestic economic conditions. Short-term interest rates affect the domestic economy through a number of channels (for example, by affecting the cost of holding inventories), so monetary policy could influence economic activity to some degree even if its control were limited to the short end of the yield curve. Moreover, the pricing of some putatively long-term financial assets may be strongly influenced by shorter-term rates. Thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages provide one example. Because people move or refinance their loans, leading them to prepay their mortgages, and because the pattern of real mortgage payments is more front-loaded than that of nominal payments, the effective duration of a thirty-year mortgage may be closer to five years than to thirty years. Nevertheless, the ability to influence longer-term interest rates and the prices of longer-term assets is an important component of the Fed’s toolkit for managing aggregate demand. What are the implications of increased global financial integration further along the transmission mechanism? The globalization of financial markets does at times make the Fed’s analysis of financial and economic conditions more complex. The behavior of long-term interest rates over the past few years is a case in point. Compared with historical averages, long-term nominal interest rates have remained relatively low in recent years--the phenomenon that the previous Chairman, Alan Greenspan, termed a “conundrum”--even as the Federal Reserve was withdrawing monetary accommodation by raising the target for the federal funds rate by more than 400 basis points. As a consequence, the Treasury yield curve has become inverted--that is, long-term rates have been lower than short-term rates, another historically unusual pattern. Developments in global capital markets have contributed significantly to these outcomes. For example, strong foreign demand for U.S. long-term debt has been one factor tending to reduce the term premium, the extra return that investors demand to hold longer-term bonds. All else equal, a smaller term premium implies a lower level of long-term interest rates. At the same time, increases in the net supply of saving in global capital markets--which, to a significant extent, are a product of the large current account surpluses of some emerging-market economies and of oil-producing nations--have resulted in lower real long-term interest rates both in the United States and abroad. Clearly, to understand and evaluate the behavior of the term structure and to assess the implications of current yields for the domestic economy, the Fed must take into account the various effects of foreign capital flows on U.S. yields and asset prices, a task that can be quite challenging.With globalized financial markets comes increased financial interdependence. One statistical indicator of that interdependence is that the correlations between long-term interest rates in the United States and those in other industrial countries are high and appear to have risen significantly in the last few years. For example, from 1990 to 2006, the daily correlation between changes in ten-year swap rates in the United States and Germany averaged 0.42, a relatively high value. During the last three years of that period, however, that correlation rose to 0.65, an increase that is both economically and statistically significant. Similar results obtain for the correlation of U.S. yields with yields of other industrial countries, including Canada, the United Kingdom, and Japan. That interdependence suggests that monetary policy makers must pay attention to conditions abroad as well as at home.However, the greater analytical complexity and interdependence associated with the globalization of financial markets notwithstanding, both theory and--perhaps more persuasively--recent experience support the view that the Federal Reserve retains considerable leverage over longer-term rates and key asset prices, although the links from monetary policy decisions to longer-term rates are somewhat looser than those to short-term rates. In particular, by employing consistent and predictable policies, the Fed can help to shape market participants’ views of how future nominal short-term rates are likely to evolve and how they are likely to respond to economic developments. Because long-term nominal interest rates can be viewed as the sum of a weighted average of expected future short-term nominal interest rates plus a term premium, Federal Reserve policies and communications substantially influence the behavior of these rates. In analogous fashion, the Fed’s ability to influence real interest rates at shorter horizons provides a lever for affecting longer-term real yields. Like nominal long-term yields, real long-term yields can be viewed as an average of current and future expected short-term real rates, so that the effects of monetary policy on shorter-term real yields feed into longer-term yields as well. Well-anchored inflation expectations are also helpful in this regard: If expectations of long-term inflation are stable, then changes in long-term nominal interest rates translate into similar changes in long-term real rates.The empirical literature supports the view that U.S. monetary policy retains its ability to influence longer-term rates and other asset prices. Indeed, research on U.S. bond yields across the whole spectrum of maturities finds that all yields respond significantly to unanticipated changes in the Fed’s short-term interest-rate target and that the size and pattern of these responses has not changed much over time (Kuttner, 2001; Andersen and others, 2005; and Faust and others, 2006). Empirical studies also find that U.S. monetary policy actions retain a powerful effect on domestic stock prices.1If globalization has not constrained the ability of U.S. monetary policy to influence domestic financial conditions, why are long-term interest rates and key asset prices so correlated across economies? One possibility is that economic integration has increased the extent that economic shocks--to the oil market, for example--have global rather than purely local effects and that most of the world’s central banks are guiding their policy response in similar ways to such shocks. Recent research suggests another possibility, which is that U.S. monetary policy actions may have significant effects on foreign yields and asset prices as well as on domestic financial prices. For example, changes in U.S. short-term interest rates seem to exert a substantial influence on euro area bond yields (Ehrmann, Fratzscher, and Rigobon, 2005; Faust and others, 2006) and appear to have a strong effect on foreign equity indexes as well.2In contrast, the effects of foreign short-term rates on U.S. asset prices appear to be relatively weaker. These cross-border effects of policy, and their asymmetric nature, are somewhat puzzling. One would expect a more symmetric relationship between the United States and the euro area, for example, as the two regions are of comparable economic size. It will be interesting to see if these relationships persist.I draw two conclusions on this issue. First, the globalization of financial markets has not materially reduced the ability of the Federal Reserve to influence financial conditions in the United States. But, second, globalization has added a dimension of complexity to the analysis of financial conditions and their determinants, which monetary policy makers must take into account.Has Globalization Affected the U.S. Inflation Process?Other than through its influence on financial markets, globalization may also have affected the operation of monetary policy by changing the relative importance of the various factors that determine the domestic inflation rate.3As national markets become increasingly integrated and open, sellers of goods, services, and labor may face more competition and have less market power than in the past. In particular, prices and wages may depend on economic conditions abroad as well as on conditions in the local market. These linkages suggest that, at least in the short run, globalization and trade may affect the course of domestic inflation.International factors might affect domestic inflation through several related channels. First, the expansion of trade may cause domestic inflation to depend to a greater extent on the prices of imported goods--not only because imported goods enter the consumer basket or (in the case of imported intermediate goods) affect the costs of domestic production, but because competition with imports affects the pricing power of domestic producers. Second, competitive pressures engendered by globalization could affect the inflation process by increasing productivity growth, thereby reducing costs, or by reducing markups. Third, to the extent that some prices are set in internationally integrated markets, pressures on resource utilization in foreign economies could be relevant to domestic inflation.4Some analysts might object to the proposition that globalization affects the inflation process at all on the grounds that the structural changes that globalization engenders can affect only the relative prices of goods and services; in contrast, inflation--the rate of change of the overall price level--must ultimately be determined solely by monetary policy (Ball, 2006). Certainly, monetary policy determines inflation in the long run, and the central bank must take responsibility for the inflation outcomes generated by its policies. For example, the opening of trade with emerging-market economies that have low labor costs may reduce the relative prices of imported manufactures, but if the long-run inflation objective of the central bank is held constant, then the ultimate effect of the lower import prices on inflation will be nil as changes in other prices offset the effect of import prices.However, the conclusion that inflation is determined only by monetary policy choices need not hold in the short-to-medium run. In the shorter term, central banks do not usually offset completely the effects of shocks to supply or prices--of which a change in the relative price of imports is an example--in part because any monetary action made in response will take time to be effective. Consequently, such shocks may affect domestic inflation for a time. More subtly, a central bank following a strategy of “opportunistic disinflation” might react to a favorable shock to supply or prices by lowering its medium-term objective for inflation (Orphanides and Wilcox, 2002). In the case of a central bank pursuing such a strategy, foreign factors that depress domestic inflation may have a persistent effect so long as inflation exceeds the central bank’s long-term objective.5What, then, is the evidence for the view that globalization is affecting the inflation process in the United States? Of the various channels that have been suggested, probably the most intuitive is the idea that greater openness to trade has increased the influence of import prices on domestic inflation. In the major industrial economies over the past decade or so, import prices--particularly the prices of imported manufactured goods--have generally risen at a slower rate than other consumer prices, slowing overall inflation. The slower growth in import prices reflects to some extent rapid productivity gains in the production of manufactures, an important component of trade.6Increased exports by low-cost emerging-market economies have also helped keep down the prices of imports received by the United States and other industrialized countries. Indeed, the share of U.S. non-oil imports coming from the emerging Asian economies has increased from 27 percent to 34 percent over the past decade or so.Overall, research indicates that trade with developing economies in particular has slowed the rate of growth of import prices faced by industrialized countries, with estimates of the reduction ranging widely from 1/2 to 2 percentage points. One study, for example, estimated that trade with China alone has reduced annual import price inflation in the United States by about 1 percentage point over the period 1993-2002 (Kamin, Marazzi, and Schindler, 2006)7. However, imported goods make up only part of what people consume, and so the effect on overall inflation is less than the deceleration in the prices of imports alone. Typical estimates of the short-term effect on the overall inflation rate of less-rapid increases in the prices of imports stemming from trade with China are in the neighborhood of 0.1 percent or less per year--a discernible but certainly not a large effect.This result requires several qualifications. First, the direct effect of lower import prices on overall consumer price inflation could understate the overall effect, if lower import prices force competing domestic firms to restrain their prices as well. Research has generally found that import prices do affect the prices charged by domestic producers.8For example, the International Monetary Fund found that, in a range of industrial economies, the prices of domestic products were restrained by competition from imports, the effect being larger with greater penetration (IMF, 2006). To the extent that import competition slows the rate of increase of domestic prices, the tendency of lower-cost imports to reduce domestic inflation will be enhanced.On the other hand, not all aspects of globalization and trade reduce inflation. For example, globalization has been associated with strong growth in some large emerging-market economies, notably China and India, and this growth likely has contributed to recent increases in the prices of energy and other commodities. During 2003-05, for example, China alone accounted for nearly one-third of the growth in both global real gross domestic product (GDP) and oil consumption. It is difficult to assess the exact extent to which increased demand by developing countries has contributed to the run-ups in commodity prices in recent years, as these prices are also affected by supply conditions and other factors. However, one study estimated that, if the share of world trade and world GDP enjoyed by non-industrial countries had remained at its 2000 levels, then by 2005 real oil prices would have been as much as 40 percent lower, and real metals prices 10 percent lower, than they actually were (Pain, Koske, and Sollie, 2006). Accordingly, in the past several years, the effect of growth in developing economies on commodity prices has been a source of upward pressure on inflation in the United States and other industrial economies.When the offsetting effects of globalization on the prices of manufactured imports and on energy and commodity prices are considered together, there seems to be little basis for concluding that globalization overall has significantly reduced inflation in the United States in recent years; indeed, the opposite may be true. That said, the integration of rapidly industrializing economies into the global trading system clearly has had important effects on the prices of both manufactures and commodities, reinforcing the need to monitor international influences on the inflation process.Globalization also may affect the inflation process through other channels. Some researchers, for example, have suggested greater openness to trade and the resulting increase in competition may have led to reduced markups of price over cost (Chen, Imbs, and Scott, 2004). However, the rise in profit rates in recent years seems inconsistent with the view that markups have declined (Bowman, 2003; Kohn, 2006).9The competition fostered by trade should also promote productivity growth, reducing growth in costs and making the attainment of low inflation easier. That productivity growth is linked to the intensity of competition is plausible, and more-rapid productivity growth seems to help to explain the slowing of inflation in the United States in the mid-1990s. However, the fact that most other industrial countries did not experience the same increase in productivity growth as the United States during that period, even as they became more open to trade, suggests that the relationship between productivity and trade may be complex.In a globalized economy, the level of resource utilization in the world economy is another potential influence on domestic inflation. Standard analyses of inflation based on the concept of a Phillips curve assign a role in inflation determination to the domestic output gap--the difference between the economy’s potential output and its actual production. According to this theory, the existence of slack in the economy makes it more difficult for producers to raise prices and for workers to win higher wages, with the result that inflation slows. These conventional analyses have considered only the possible link between domestic inflation and the domestic output gap. But in an increasingly integrated world economy, one may well ask whether a global output gap can be meaningfully defined and measured and, if it can, whether it affects domestic inflation. In other words, all else being equal, would a booming world economy increase the potential for inflationary pressures within the United States?In principle, with the domestic determinants of inflation held constant, reduced slack in the global economy could increase domestic inflation for a time if it led to higher prices for some traded goods and services relative to the prices of goods and services that are not usually traded. For example, suppose that the United States produces personal computers both for export and for domestic use, and that more-rapid growth abroad increases the world demand for computers. Stronger global demand for computers raises the prices that U.S. producers can charge their foreign customers. Moreover, because all computer producers are facing a stronger global market, U.S. producers can charge more for their output at home as well. If producers of many goods face increases in worldwide demand, the net effect could be higher inflation in the United States, even though there may be no measurable effect on the prices of U.S. imports.The idea is intriguing but again, unfortunately, the evidence is so far inconclusive. Early work, including some done at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, found no effect of global demand conditions on U.S. inflation, as did most of the subsequent research.10Recently, however, several researchers affiliated with the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) have reported results favorable to the global output gap hypothesis (Borio and Filardo, 2006). Using data for sixteen industrialized countries (plus the euro area) for 1985-2005, they found significant effects of the global output gap on domestic inflation rates--indeed, effects that were generally larger than those of domestic output gaps and that were rising over time. This provocative result has in turn been challenged by Federal Reserve Board researchers, who find that the empirical support for a role for the global output gap does not survive modest changes in the way the data are analyzed. As domestic output gaps are difficult to measure, even with the benefit of hindsight, it is perhaps not surprising that measuring and assessing the effects of a global output gap have proved contentious. A clear resolution of the question of how global economic conditions affect domestic inflation may continue to elude us.Overall, global factors do seem to influence domestic inflation. Most directly, increasing trade with China and other developing countries has led to slower growth in the prices of imported manufactured goods. However, this effect has been offset in the most recent period by the increases in the prices for energy and commodities associated with the rapid growth in these emerging market economies. Other, more indirect channels may exist, including the possibilities that trade promotes productivity growth and thus lower costs and that global demand conditions influence domestic pricing decisions. However, more research is needed to pin down the significance of these indirect influences.ConclusionI have foreshadowed my conclusions. Without doubt, ongoing global economic integration is a phenomenon of the greatest importance, one that will help shape the U.S. economy for decades. Globalization has not materially affected the ability of the Federal Reserve to influence financial conditions in the United States, nor has it led to significant changes in the process which determines the U.S. inflation rate. However, effective monetary policy making now requires taking into account a diverse set of global influences, many of which are not yet fully understood. The Federal Reserve will continue to place a high priority on understanding the effects of globalization on the U.S. economy in general and on the conduct and transmission of U.S. monetary policy in particular.ReferencesAndersen, T.G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F.X., Vega, C., (2005). “Real-Time Price Discovery in Stock, Bond and Foreign Exchange Markets,” unpublished paper, University of Pennsylvania.Ball, Lawrence (2006). “Has Globalization Changed Inflation?” NBER Working Paper No. 12687 (November).http://www.nber.org/papers/w12687Bernanke, Ben and Kenneth N. Kuttner (2005). “What Explains the Stock Market’s Reaction to Federal Reserve Policy?” Journal of Finance, vol. 60, pp. 1221-1257. www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/FEDS/2004/200416/200416abs.htmlBowman, David (2003). “Market Power and Inflation,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 783. www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ifdp/2003/783/default.htmBorio, Claudio and Andrew Filardo (2006). “Globalisation and Inflation: New Cross-Country Evidence on the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation,” unpublished paper, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland (March).Chen, Natalie, Jean Imbs, and Andrew Scott (2004). “Competition, Globalization, and the Decline in Inflation,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4695.www.cepr.org/pubs/dps/DP4695.aspEhrmann, Michael and Marcel Fratzscher (2006). “Global Financial Transmission of Monetary Policy Shocks,” working paper no. 616, European Central Bank.http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp616.pdf(683 KB PDF)Ehrmann, Michael, Marcel Fratzscher and Roberto Rigobon (2005). “Stocks, Bonds, Money Markets, and Exchange Rates: Measuring International Financial Transmission,” working paper no. 452, European Central Bank.http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp452.pdf(953 KB PDF)European Central Bank (2006), “Effects of the Rising Trade Integration of Low-Cost Countries on Euro Area Import Prices,” ECB Monthly Bulletin, Frankfurt, Germany (August), pp. 56-57.http://www.ecb.int/pub/mb/html/index.en.htmlFaust, Jon, John H. Rogers, Shing-Yi B. Wang, and Jonathan Wright (forthcoming). “The High-Frequency Response of Exchange Rates and Interest Rates to Macroeconomic Announcements,” Journal of Monetary Economics.Gamber, Eduard N. and Juann H. Hung (2001). “Has the Rise in Globalization Reduced U.S. Inflation in the 1990s,” Economic Inquiry, vol. 39 (January), pp. 58-73.Hausman, Joshua and Jon Wongswan (2006). “Global Asset Prices and FOMC Announcements,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 886. www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ifdp/2006/886/default.htmHooper, Peter, Torsten Slok, and Christine Dobridge (2006). “Understanding U.S. Inflation,” Global Markets Research, Deutsche Bank (July 26).Ihrig, Jane, Steven Kamin, Deborah Lindner, Jaime Marquez (forthcoming). “Some Simple Tests of the Globalization and Inflation Hypothesis,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Papers.International Monetary Fund (2006). “How Has Globalization Changed Inflation?” World Economic Outlook, Washington, D.C.: IMF, April, pp. 97-134.www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2006/01/index.htm.Kamin, Steven B., Mario Marazzi, and John W. Schindler (2006). “The Impact of Chinese Exports on Global Import Prices,” Review of International Economics, vol. 14 (May), pp. 179-201.Kohn, Donald (2006). “The Effects of Globalization on Inflation and their Implications for Monetary Policy,” speech delivered at the 51st Economic Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Chatham, Mass., June 16. www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/kohn20060616a.htm.Kuttner, Kenneth N. (2001). “Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from the Fed Funds Futures Market,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 47 (June), pp. 523-44.Nickell, Stephen (2005). “Why Has Inflation Been So Low Since 1999?” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, London, vol. 45, pp. 92-107.Orphanides, Athanasios, and David Wilcox (2002). "The Opportunistic Approach to Disinflation," International Finance, vol. 5 (Spring), pp. 47-71.Pain, Nigel, Isabell Koske, and Marte Sollie (2006). “Globalisation and Inflation in the OECD Economies,” Economics Department Working Paper No. 524, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris (November).Rigobon, Roberto and Brian Sack (2004). “The Impact of Monetary Policy on Asset Prices,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 51 (November), pp. 1553-75.Rogoff, Kenneth (2003). “Globalization and Global Disinflation,” Paper prepared for the Conference on Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 28-30.http://www.kansascityfed.org/PUBLICAT/SYMPOS/2003/pdf/Rogoff2003.pdf(237 KB PDF)Tootell, Geoffrey M.B. (1998). “Globalization and U.S. Inflation,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, New England Economic Review (July/August), pp. 21-33.http://www.bos.frb.org/economic/neer/neer1998/neer498b.htmYellen, Janet (2006), “Monetary Policy in a Global Environment,” speech delivered at the conference “The Euro and the Dollar in a Globalized Economy,” University of California at Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California, May 27.http://www.frbsf.org/news/speeches/2006/060527.pdf(346 KB PDF)Footnotes1.The decline of U.S. stock markets to a hypothetical 100 basis point tightening in the federal funds target rate is estimated to be 5.3 percent by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), 5.5 percent by Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2006), and 6.2 percent by Rigobon and Sack (2004). Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega (2005) find similar results.Return to text2.Ehrmann, Fratzscher and Rigobon (2005) find that euro area stock markets drop by nearly 2 percent in response to a hypothetical 100 basis point tightening in the United States on the same day. The estimated effect of euro area monetary policy on U.S. stock markets is much smaller, about 0.5 percent. Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2006) and Hausman and Wongswan (2006) examine the effect of U.S. monetary policy announcement surprises on equity indexes of fifty countries. These studies find that, on average, a hypothetical 25 basis point rise in the federal funds rate is associated with a drop of about 1 percent in foreign equity indexes. Equity indexes in countries with a less flexible exchange rate regime respond more to U.S. monetary policy surprises.Return to text3.Some material in this section reflects research described in Ihrig, Kamin, Lindner, and Marquez (forthcoming). For additional perspective on these issues, see Kohn (2006) and Yellen (2006).Return to text4.This list is not exhaustive. For example, if domestic pricing power is affected by international competition, globalization could affect the relationship between inflation and resource utilization at home.Return to text5.Rogoff (2003) provides an alternative theory of how globalization may affect the central bank’s inflation objective. He argues that deregulation and international integration have led to more flexible prices, so that any attempt by a central bank to stimulate the real economy by allowing inflation to rise unexpectedly will be less effective than it would have been in the past. Because central banks have less incentive to create unexpected inflation, their promises to keep inflation low are more credible, which in turn reduces the cost of keeping inflation low. Accordingly, in Rogoff’s analysis, globalization has led monetary authorities to maintain lower long-term inflation rates. A criticism of this story is that it implies that the Phillips curve is steeper today than in the past (that is, that inflation is more sensitive to slack in the economy), a prediction that does not accord with most empirical studies.Return to text6.The dollar prices of imports are also affected by changes in the value of the exchange rate. However, the effects of exchange-rate changes on the domestic prices of imported goods have been quite low in recent years.Return to text7.The share of imports coming from China is relatively high for the United States, and so the effect of trade with China may be lower for other industrialized countries. For example, one analysis of trade between the United Kingdom and both China and India found that, over the period 1999-2002, the effect on import-price inflation was only about minus 0.5 percentage point annually (Nickell, 2005). Research by the European Central Bank, however, found that the euro area’s trade with a wide range of developing economies had reduced the rate of increase in import prices to the area about 2 percentage points annually over 1996-2005 (European Central Bank, 2006).Return to text8.An exception is Kamin, Marazzi, and Schindler (2006), who find little effect on the prices of domestic U.S. producers of similar goods.Return to text9.Bowman (2003) finds little evidence that competition has increased or that markups declined in industrial economies.Return to text10.Work finding no role or, at best, a marginal one for a global output gap includes Tootell (1998), Hooper, Slok, and Dobridge (2006), Pain, Koske, and Sallie (2006), and Ball (2006). In contrast, Gamber and Hung (2001) find that, over 1976-99, a trade-weighted average of capacity utilization for thirty-five U.S. trading partners is a significant determinant of U.S. inflation.Return to text With globalized financial markets comes increased financial interdependence. One statistical indicator of that interdependence is that the correlations between long-term interest rates in the United States and those in other industrial countries are high and appear to have risen significantly in the last few years. For example, from 1990 to 2006, the daily correlation between changes in ten-year swap rates in the United States and Germany averaged 0.42, a relatively high value. During the last three years of that period, however, that correlation rose to 0.65, an increase that is both economically and statistically significant. Similar results obtain for the correlation of U.S. yields with yields of other industrial countries, including Canada, the United Kingdom, and Japan. That interdependence suggests that monetary policy makers must pay attention to conditions abroad as well as at home. However, the greater analytical complexity and interdependence associated with the globalization of financial markets notwithstanding, both theory and--perhaps more persuasively--recent experience support the view that the Federal Reserve retains considerable leverage over longer-term rates and key asset prices, although the links from monetary policy decisions to longer-term rates are somewhat looser than those to short-term rates. In particular, by employing consistent and predictable policies, the Fed can help to shape market participants’ views of how future nominal short-term rates are likely to evolve and how they are likely to respond to economic developments. Because long-term nominal interest rates can be viewed as the sum of a weighted average of expected future short-term nominal interest rates plus a term premium, Federal Reserve policies and communications substantially influence the behavior of these rates. In analogous fashion, the Fed’s ability to influence real interest rates at shorter horizons provides a lever for affecting longer-term real yields. Like nominal long-term yields, real long-term yields can be viewed as an average of current and future expected short-term real rates, so that the effects of monetary policy on shorter-term real yields feed into longer-term yields as well. Well-anchored inflation expectations are also helpful in this regard: If expectations of long-term inflation are stable, then changes in long-term nominal interest rates translate into similar changes in long-term real rates. The empirical literature supports the view that U.S. monetary policy retains its ability to influence longer-term rates and other asset prices. Indeed, research on U.S. bond yields across the whole spectrum of maturities finds that all yields respond significantly to unanticipated changes in the Fed’s short-term interest-rate target and that the size and pattern of these responses has not changed much over time (Kuttner, 2001; Andersen and others, 2005; and Faust and others, 2006). Empirical studies also find that U.S. monetary policy actions retain a powerful effect on domestic stock prices.1 If globalization has not constrained the ability of U.S. monetary policy to influence domestic financial conditions, why are long-term interest rates and key asset prices so correlated across economies? One possibility is that economic integration has increased the extent that economic shocks--to the oil market, for example--have global rather than purely local effects and that most of the world’s central banks are guiding their policy response in similar ways to such shocks. Recent research suggests another possibility, which is that U.S. monetary policy actions may have significant effects on foreign yields and asset prices as well as on domestic financial prices. For example, changes in U.S. short-term interest rates seem to exert a substantial influence on euro area bond yields (Ehrmann, Fratzscher, and Rigobon, 2005; Faust and others, 2006) and appear to have a strong effect on foreign equity indexes as well.2In contrast, the effects of foreign short-term rates on U.S. asset prices appear to be relatively weaker. These cross-border effects of policy, and their asymmetric nature, are somewhat puzzling. One would expect a more symmetric relationship between the United States and the euro area, for example, as the two regions are of comparable economic size. It will be interesting to see if these relationships persist. I draw two conclusions on this issue. First, the globalization of financial markets has not materially reduced the ability of the Federal Reserve to influence financial conditions in the United States. But, second, globalization has added a dimension of complexity to the analysis of financial conditions and their determinants, which monetary policy makers must take into account. Has Globalization Affected the U.S. Inflation Process?Other than through its influence on financial markets, globalization may also have affected the operation of monetary policy by changing the relative importance of the various factors that determine the domestic inflation rate.3As national markets become increasingly integrated and open, sellers of goods, services, and labor may face more competition and have less market power than in the past. In particular, prices and wages may depend on economic conditions abroad as well as on conditions in the local market. These linkages suggest that, at least in the short run, globalization and trade may affect the course of domestic inflation. International factors might affect domestic inflation through several related channels. First, the expansion of trade may cause domestic inflation to depend to a greater extent on the prices of imported goods--not only because imported goods enter the consumer basket or (in the case of imported intermediate goods) affect the costs of domestic production, but because competition with imports affects the pricing power of domestic producers. Second, competitive pressures engendered by globalization could affect the inflation process by increasing productivity growth, thereby reducing costs, or by reducing markups. Third, to the extent that some prices are set in internationally integrated markets, pressures on resource utilization in foreign economies could be relevant to domestic inflation.4 Some analysts might object to the proposition that globalization affects the inflation process at all on the grounds that the structural changes that globalization engenders can affect only the relative prices of goods and services; in contrast, inflation--the rate of change of the overall price level--must ultimately be determined solely by monetary policy (Ball, 2006). Certainly, monetary policy determines inflation in the long run, and the central bank must take responsibility for the inflation outcomes generated by its policies. For example, the opening of trade with emerging-market economies that have low labor costs may reduce the relative prices of imported manufactures, but if the long-run inflation objective of the central bank is held constant, then the ultimate effect of the lower import prices on inflation will be nil as changes in other prices offset the effect of import prices. However, the conclusion that inflation is determined only by monetary policy choices need not hold in the short-to-medium run. In the shorter term, central banks do not usually offset completely the effects of shocks to supply or prices--of which a change in the relative price of imports is an example--in part because any monetary action made in response will take time to be effective. Consequently, such shocks may affect domestic inflation for a time. More subtly, a central bank following a strategy of “opportunistic disinflation” might react to a favorable shock to supply or prices by lowering its medium-term objective for inflation (Orphanides and Wilcox, 2002). In the case of a central bank pursuing such a strategy, foreign factors that depress domestic inflation may have a persistent effect so long as inflation exceeds the central bank’s long-term objective.5 What, then, is the evidence for the view that globalization is affecting the inflation process in the United States? Of the various channels that have been suggested, probably the most intuitive is the idea that greater openness to trade has increased the influence of import prices on domestic inflation. In the major industrial economies over the past decade or so, import prices--particularly the prices of imported manufactured goods--have generally risen at a slower rate than other consumer prices, slowing overall inflation. The slower growth in import prices reflects to some extent rapid productivity gains in the production of manufactures, an important component of trade.6Increased exports by low-cost emerging-market economies have also helped keep down the prices of imports received by the United States and other industrialized countries. Indeed, the share of U.S. non-oil imports coming from the emerging Asian economies has increased from 27 percent to 34 percent over the past decade or so. Overall, research indicates that trade with developing economies in particular has slowed the rate of growth of import prices faced by industrialized countries, with estimates of the reduction ranging widely from 1/2 to 2 percentage points. One study, for example, estimated that trade with China alone has reduced annual import price inflation in the United States by about 1 percentage point over the period 1993-2002 (Kamin, Marazzi, and Schindler, 2006)7. However, imported goods make up only part of what people consume, and so the effect on overall inflation is less than the deceleration in the prices of imports alone. Typical estimates of the short-term effect on the overall inflation rate of less-rapid increases in the prices of imports stemming from trade with China are in the neighborhood of 0.1 percent or less per year--a discernible but certainly not a large effect. This result requires several qualifications. First, the direct effect of lower import prices on overall consumer price inflation could understate the overall effect, if lower import prices force competing domestic firms to restrain their prices as well. Research has generally found that import prices do affect the prices charged by domestic producers.8For example, the International Monetary Fund found that, in a range of industrial economies, the prices of domestic products were restrained by competition from imports, the effect being larger with greater penetration (IMF, 2006). To the extent that import competition slows the rate of increase of domestic prices, the tendency of lower-cost imports to reduce domestic inflation will be enhanced. On the other hand, not all aspects of globalization and trade reduce inflation. For example, globalization has been associated with strong growth in some large emerging-market economies, notably China and India, and this growth likely has contributed to recent increases in the prices of energy and other commodities. During 2003-05, for example, China alone accounted for nearly one-third of the growth in both global real gross domestic product (GDP) and oil consumption. It is difficult to assess the exact extent to which increased demand by developing countries has contributed to the run-ups in commodity prices in recent years, as these prices are also affected by supply conditions and other factors. However, one study estimated that, if the share of world trade and world GDP enjoyed by non-industrial countries had remained at its 2000 levels, then by 2005 real oil prices would have been as much as 40 percent lower, and real metals prices 10 percent lower, than they actually were (Pain, Koske, and Sollie, 2006). Accordingly, in the past several years, the effect of growth in developing economies on commodity prices has been a source of upward pressure on inflation in the United States and other industrial economies. When the offsetting effects of globalization on the prices of manufactured imports and on energy and commodity prices are considered together, there seems to be little basis for concluding that globalization overall has significantly reduced inflation in the United States in recent years; indeed, the opposite may be true. That said, the integration of rapidly industrializing economies into the global trading system clearly has had important effects on the prices of both manufactures and commodities, reinforcing the need to monitor international influences on the inflation process. Globalization also may affect the inflation process through other channels. Some researchers, for example, have suggested greater openness to trade and the resulting increase in competition may have led to reduced markups of price over cost (Chen, Imbs, and Scott, 2004). However, the rise in profit rates in recent years seems inconsistent with the view that markups have declined (Bowman, 2003; Kohn, 2006).9The competition fostered by trade should also promote productivity growth, reducing growth in costs and making the attainment of low inflation easier. That productivity growth is linked to the intensity of competition is plausible, and more-rapid productivity growth seems to help to explain the slowing of inflation in the United States in the mid-1990s. However, the fact that most other industrial countries did not experience the same increase in productivity growth as the United States during that period, even as they became more open to trade, suggests that the relationship between productivity and trade may be complex. In a globalized economy, the level of resource utilization in the world economy is another potential influence on domestic inflation. Standard analyses of inflation based on the concept of a Phillips curve assign a role in inflation determination to the domestic output gap--the difference between the economy’s potential output and its actual production. According to this theory, the existence of slack in the economy makes it more difficult for producers to raise prices and for workers to win higher wages, with the result that inflation slows. These conventional analyses have considered only the possible link between domestic inflation and the domestic output gap. But in an increasingly integrated world economy, one may well ask whether a global output gap can be meaningfully defined and measured and, if it can, whether it affects domestic inflation. In other words, all else being equal, would a booming world economy increase the potential for inflationary pressures within the United States? In principle, with the domestic determinants of inflation held constant, reduced slack in the global economy could increase domestic inflation for a time if it led to higher prices for some traded goods and services relative to the prices of goods and services that are not usually traded. For example, suppose that the United States produces personal computers both for export and for domestic use, and that more-rapid growth abroad increases the world demand for computers. Stronger global demand for computers raises the prices that U.S. producers can charge their foreign customers. Moreover, because all computer producers are facing a stronger global market, U.S. producers can charge more for their output at home as well. If producers of many goods face increases in worldwide demand, the net effect could be higher inflation in the United States, even though there may be no measurable effect on the prices of U.S. imports. The idea is intriguing but again, unfortunately, the evidence is so far inconclusive. Early work, including some done at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, found no effect of global demand conditions on U.S. inflation, as did most of the subsequent research.10Recently, however, several researchers affiliated with the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) have reported results favorable to the global output gap hypothesis (Borio and Filardo, 2006). Using data for sixteen industrialized countries (plus the euro area) for 1985-2005, they found significant effects of the global output gap on domestic inflation rates--indeed, effects that were generally larger than those of domestic output gaps and that were rising over time. This provocative result has in turn been challenged by Federal Reserve Board researchers, who find that the empirical support for a role for the global output gap does not survive modest changes in the way the data are analyzed. As domestic output gaps are difficult to measure, even with the benefit of hindsight, it is perhaps not surprising that measuring and assessing the effects of a global output gap have proved contentious. A clear resolution of the question of how global economic conditions affect domestic inflation may continue to elude us.Overall, global factors do seem to influence domestic inflation. Most directly, increasing trade with China and other developing countries has led to slower growth in the prices of imported manufactured goods. However, this effect has been offset in the most recent period by the increases in the prices for energy and commodities associated with the rapid growth in these emerging market economies. Other, more indirect channels may exist, including the possibilities that trade promotes productivity growth and thus lower costs and that global demand conditions influence domestic pricing decisions. However, more research is needed to pin down the significance of these indirect influences.ConclusionI have foreshadowed my conclusions. Without doubt, ongoing global economic integration is a phenomenon of the greatest importance, one that will help shape the U.S. economy for decades. Globalization has not materially affected the ability of the Federal Reserve to influence financial conditions in the United States, nor has it led to significant changes in the process which determines the U.S. inflation rate. However, effective monetary policy making now requires taking into account a diverse set of global influences, many of which are not yet fully understood. The Federal Reserve will continue to place a high priority on understanding the effects of globalization on the U.S. economy in general and on the conduct and transmission of U.S. monetary policy in particular.ReferencesAndersen, T.G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F.X., Vega, C., (2005). “Real-Time Price Discovery in Stock, Bond and Foreign Exchange Markets,” unpublished paper, University of Pennsylvania.Ball, Lawrence (2006). “Has Globalization Changed Inflation?” NBER Working Paper No. 12687 (November).http://www.nber.org/papers/w12687Bernanke, Ben and Kenneth N. Kuttner (2005). “What Explains the Stock Market’s Reaction to Federal Reserve Policy?” Journal of Finance, vol. 60, pp. 1221-1257. www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/FEDS/2004/200416/200416abs.htmlBowman, David (2003). “Market Power and Inflation,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 783. www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ifdp/2003/783/default.htmBorio, Claudio and Andrew Filardo (2006). “Globalisation and Inflation: New Cross-Country Evidence on the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation,” unpublished paper, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland (March).Chen, Natalie, Jean Imbs, and Andrew Scott (2004). “Competition, Globalization, and the Decline in Inflation,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4695.www.cepr.org/pubs/dps/DP4695.aspEhrmann, Michael and Marcel Fratzscher (2006). “Global Financial Transmission of Monetary Policy Shocks,” working paper no. 616, European Central Bank.http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp616.pdf(683 KB PDF)Ehrmann, Michael, Marcel Fratzscher and Roberto Rigobon (2005). “Stocks, Bonds, Money Markets, and Exchange Rates: Measuring International Financial Transmission,” working paper no. 452, European Central Bank.http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp452.pdf(953 KB PDF)European Central Bank (2006), “Effects of the Rising Trade Integration of Low-Cost Countries on Euro Area Import Prices,” ECB Monthly Bulletin, Frankfurt, Germany (August), pp. 56-57.http://www.ecb.int/pub/mb/html/index.en.htmlFaust, Jon, John H. Rogers, Shing-Yi B. Wang, and Jonathan Wright (forthcoming). “The High-Frequency Response of Exchange Rates and Interest Rates to Macroeconomic Announcements,” Journal of Monetary Economics.Gamber, Eduard N. and Juann H. Hung (2001). “Has the Rise in Globalization Reduced U.S. Inflation in the 1990s,” Economic Inquiry, vol. 39 (January), pp. 58-73.Hausman, Joshua and Jon Wongswan (2006). “Global Asset Prices and FOMC Announcements,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 886. www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ifdp/2006/886/default.htmHooper, Peter, Torsten Slok, and Christine Dobridge (2006). “Understanding U.S. Inflation,” Global Markets Research, Deutsche Bank (July 26).Ihrig, Jane, Steven Kamin, Deborah Lindner, Jaime Marquez (forthcoming). “Some Simple Tests of the Globalization and Inflation Hypothesis,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Papers.International Monetary Fund (2006). “How Has Globalization Changed Inflation?” World Economic Outlook, Washington, D.C.: IMF, April, pp. 97-134.www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2006/01/index.htm.Kamin, Steven B., Mario Marazzi, and John W. Schindler (2006). “The Impact of Chinese Exports on Global Import Prices,” Review of International Economics, vol. 14 (May), pp. 179-201.Kohn, Donald (2006). “The Effects of Globalization on Inflation and their Implications for Monetary Policy,” speech delivered at the 51st Economic Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Chatham, Mass., June 16. www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/kohn20060616a.htm.Kuttner, Kenneth N. (2001). “Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from the Fed Funds Futures Market,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 47 (June), pp. 523-44.Nickell, Stephen (2005). “Why Has Inflation Been So Low Since 1999?” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, London, vol. 45, pp. 92-107.Orphanides, Athanasios, and David Wilcox (2002). "The Opportunistic Approach to Disinflation," International Finance, vol. 5 (Spring), pp. 47-71.Pain, Nigel, Isabell Koske, and Marte Sollie (2006). “Globalisation and Inflation in the OECD Economies,” Economics Department Working Paper No. 524, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris (November).Rigobon, Roberto and Brian Sack (2004). “The Impact of Monetary Policy on Asset Prices,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 51 (November), pp. 1553-75.Rogoff, Kenneth (2003). “Globalization and Global Disinflation,” Paper prepared for the Conference on Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 28-30.http://www.kansascityfed.org/PUBLICAT/SYMPOS/2003/pdf/Rogoff2003.pdf(237 KB PDF)Tootell, Geoffrey M.B. (1998). “Globalization and U.S. Inflation,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, New England Economic Review (July/August), pp. 21-33.http://www.bos.frb.org/economic/neer/neer1998/neer498b.htmYellen, Janet (2006), “Monetary Policy in a Global Environment,” speech delivered at the conference “The Euro and the Dollar in a Globalized Economy,” University of California at Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California, May 27.http://www.frbsf.org/news/speeches/2006/060527.pdf(346 KB PDF)Footnotes1.The decline of U.S. stock markets to a hypothetical 100 basis point tightening in the federal funds target rate is estimated to be 5.3 percent by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), 5.5 percent by Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2006), and 6.2 percent by Rigobon and Sack (2004). Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega (2005) find similar results.Return to text2.Ehrmann, Fratzscher and Rigobon (2005) find that euro area stock markets drop by nearly 2 percent in response to a hypothetical 100 basis point tightening in the United States on the same day. The estimated effect of euro area monetary policy on U.S. stock markets is much smaller, about 0.5 percent. Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2006) and Hausman and Wongswan (2006) examine the effect of U.S. monetary policy announcement surprises on equity indexes of fifty countries. These studies find that, on average, a hypothetical 25 basis point rise in the federal funds rate is associated with a drop of about 1 percent in foreign equity indexes. Equity indexes in countries with a less flexible exchange rate regime respond more to U.S. monetary policy surprises.Return to text3.Some material in this section reflects research described in Ihrig, Kamin, Lindner, and Marquez (forthcoming). For additional perspective on these issues, see Kohn (2006) and Yellen (2006).Return to text4.This list is not exhaustive. For example, if domestic pricing power is affected by international competition, globalization could affect the relationship between inflation and resource utilization at home.Return to text5.Rogoff (2003) provides an alternative theory of how globalization may affect the central bank’s inflation objective. He argues that deregulation and international integration have led to more flexible prices, so that any attempt by a central bank to stimulate the real economy by allowing inflation to rise unexpectedly will be less effective than it would have been in the past. Because central banks have less incentive to create unexpected inflation, their promises to keep inflation low are more credible, which in turn reduces the cost of keeping inflation low. Accordingly, in Rogoff’s analysis, globalization has led monetary authorities to maintain lower long-term inflation rates. A criticism of this story is that it implies that the Phillips curve is steeper today than in the past (that is, that inflation is more sensitive to slack in the economy), a prediction that does not accord with most empirical studies.Return to text6.The dollar prices of imports are also affected by changes in the value of the exchange rate. However, the effects of exchange-rate changes on the domestic prices of imported goods have been quite low in recent years.Return to text7.The share of imports coming from China is relatively high for the United States, and so the effect of trade with China may be lower for other industrialized countries. For example, one analysis of trade between the United Kingdom and both China and India found that, over the period 1999-2002, the effect on import-price inflation was only about minus 0.5 percentage point annually (Nickell, 2005). Research by the European Central Bank, however, found that the euro area’s trade with a wide range of developing economies had reduced the rate of increase in import prices to the area about 2 percentage points annually over 1996-2005 (European Central Bank, 2006).Return to text8.An exception is Kamin, Marazzi, and Schindler (2006), who find little effect on the prices of domestic U.S. producers of similar goods.Return to text9.Bowman (2003) finds little evidence that competition has increased or that markups declined in industrial economies.Return to text10.Work finding no role or, at best, a marginal one for a global output gap includes Tootell (1998), Hooper, Slok, and Dobridge (2006), Pain, Koske, and Sallie (2006), and Ball (2006). In contrast, Gamber and Hung (2001) find that, over 1976-99, a trade-weighted average of capacity utilization for thirty-five U.S. trading partners is a significant determinant of U.S. inflation.Return to text Overall, global factors do seem to influence domestic inflation. Most directly, increasing trade with China and other developing countries has led to slower growth in the prices of imported manufactured goods. However, this effect has been offset in the most recent period by the increases in the prices for energy and commodities associated with the rapid growth in these emerging market economies. Other, more indirect channels may exist, including the possibilities that trade promotes productivity growth and thus lower costs and that global demand conditions influence domestic pricing decisions. However, more research is needed to pin down the significance of these indirect influences. ConclusionI have foreshadowed my conclusions. Without doubt, ongoing global economic integration is a phenomenon of the greatest importance, one that will help shape the U.S. economy for decades. Globalization has not materially affected the ability of the Federal Reserve to influence financial conditions in the United States, nor has it led to significant changes in the process which determines the U.S. inflation rate. However, effective monetary policy making now requires taking into account a diverse set of global influences, many of which are not yet fully understood. The Federal Reserve will continue to place a high priority on understanding the effects of globalization on the U.S. economy in general and on the conduct and transmission of U.S. monetary policy in particular. References Andersen, T.G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F.X., Vega, C., (2005). “Real-Time Price Discovery in Stock, Bond and Foreign Exchange Markets,” unpublished paper, University of Pennsylvania. Ball, Lawrence (2006). “Has Globalization Changed Inflation?” NBER Working Paper No. 12687 (November).http://www.nber.org/papers/w12687 Bernanke, Ben and Kenneth N. Kuttner (2005). “What Explains the Stock Market’s Reaction to Federal Reserve Policy?” Journal of Finance, vol. 60, pp. 1221-1257. www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/FEDS/2004/200416/200416abs.html Bowman, David (2003). “Market Power and Inflation,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 783. www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ifdp/2003/783/default.htm Borio, Claudio and Andrew Filardo (2006). “Globalisation and Inflation: New Cross-Country Evidence on the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation,” unpublished paper, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland (March). Chen, Natalie, Jean Imbs, and Andrew Scott (2004). “Competition, Globalization, and the Decline in Inflation,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4695.www.cepr.org/pubs/dps/DP4695.asp Ehrmann, Michael and Marcel Fratzscher (2006). “Global Financial Transmission of Monetary Policy Shocks,” working paper no. 616, European Central Bank.http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp616.pdf(683 KB PDF) Ehrmann, Michael, Marcel Fratzscher and Roberto Rigobon (2005). “Stocks, Bonds, Money Markets, and Exchange Rates: Measuring International Financial Transmission,” working paper no. 452, European Central Bank.http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp452.pdf(953 KB PDF) European Central Bank (2006), “Effects of the Rising Trade Integration of Low-Cost Countries on Euro Area Import Prices,” ECB Monthly Bulletin, Frankfurt, Germany (August), pp. 56-57.http://www.ecb.int/pub/mb/html/index.en.html Faust, Jon, John H. Rogers, Shing-Yi B. Wang, and Jonathan Wright (forthcoming). “The High-Frequency Response of Exchange Rates and Interest Rates to Macroeconomic Announcements,” Journal of Monetary Economics. Gamber, Eduard N. and Juann H. Hung (2001). “Has the Rise in Globalization Reduced U.S. Inflation in the 1990s,” Economic Inquiry, vol. 39 (January), pp. 58-73. Hausman, Joshua and Jon Wongswan (2006). “Global Asset Prices and FOMC Announcements,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 886. www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ifdp/2006/886/default.htm Hooper, Peter, Torsten Slok, and Christine Dobridge (2006). “Understanding U.S. Inflation,” Global Markets Research, Deutsche Bank (July 26). Ihrig, Jane, Steven Kamin, Deborah Lindner, Jaime Marquez (forthcoming). “Some Simple Tests of the Globalization and Inflation Hypothesis,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Papers. International Monetary Fund (2006). “How Has Globalization Changed Inflation?” World Economic Outlook, Washington, D.C.: IMF, April, pp. 97-134.www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2006/01/index.htm. Kamin, Steven B., Mario Marazzi, and John W. Schindler (2006). “The Impact of Chinese Exports on Global Import Prices,” Review of International Economics, vol. 14 (May), pp. 179-201. Kohn, Donald (2006). “The Effects of Globalization on Inflation and their Implications for Monetary Policy,” speech delivered at the 51st Economic Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Chatham, Mass., June 16. www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/kohn20060616a.htm. Kuttner, Kenneth N. (2001). “Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from the Fed Funds Futures Market,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 47 (June), pp. 523-44. Nickell, Stephen (2005). “Why Has Inflation Been So Low Since 1999?” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, London, vol. 45, pp. 92-107. Orphanides, Athanasios, and David Wilcox (2002). "The Opportunistic Approach to Disinflation," International Finance, vol. 5 (Spring), pp. 47-71. Pain, Nigel, Isabell Koske, and Marte Sollie (2006). “Globalisation and Inflation in the OECD Economies,” Economics Department Working Paper No. 524, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris (November). Rigobon, Roberto and Brian Sack (2004). “The Impact of Monetary Policy on Asset Prices,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 51 (November), pp. 1553-75. Rogoff, Kenneth (2003). “Globalization and Global Disinflation,” Paper prepared for the Conference on Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 28-30.http://www.kansascityfed.org/PUBLICAT/SYMPOS/2003/pdf/Rogoff2003.pdf(237 KB PDF) Tootell, Geoffrey M.B. (1998). “Globalization and U.S. Inflation,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, New England Economic Review (July/August), pp. 21-33.http://www.bos.frb.org/economic/neer/neer1998/neer498b.htm Yellen, Janet (2006), “Monetary Policy in a Global Environment,” speech delivered at the conference “The Euro and the Dollar in a Globalized Economy,” University of California at Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California, May 27.http://www.frbsf.org/news/speeches/2006/060527.pdf(346 KB PDF) Footnotes 1.The decline of U.S. stock markets to a hypothetical 100 basis point tightening in the federal funds target rate is estimated to be 5.3 percent by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), 5.5 percent by Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2006), and 6.2 percent by Rigobon and Sack (2004). Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega (2005) find similar results.Return to text 2.Ehrmann, Fratzscher and Rigobon (2005) find that euro area stock markets drop by nearly 2 percent in response to a hypothetical 100 basis point tightening in the United States on the same day. The estimated effect of euro area monetary policy on U.S. stock markets is much smaller, about 0.5 percent. Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2006) and Hausman and Wongswan (2006) examine the effect of U.S. monetary policy announcement surprises on equity indexes of fifty countries. These studies find that, on average, a hypothetical 25 basis point rise in the federal funds rate is associated with a drop of about 1 percent in foreign equity indexes. Equity indexes in countries with a less flexible exchange rate regime respond more to U.S. monetary policy surprises.Return to text 3.Some material in this section reflects research described in Ihrig, Kamin, Lindner, and Marquez (forthcoming). For additional perspective on these issues, see Kohn (2006) and Yellen (2006).Return to text 4.This list is not exhaustive. For example, if domestic pricing power is affected by international competition, globalization could affect the relationship between inflation and resource utilization at home.Return to text 5.Rogoff (2003) provides an alternative theory of how globalization may affect the central bank’s inflation objective. He argues that deregulation and international integration have led to more flexible prices, so that any attempt by a central bank to stimulate the real economy by allowing inflation to rise unexpectedly will be less effective than it would have been in the past. Because central banks have less incentive to create unexpected inflation, their promises to keep inflation low are more credible, which in turn reduces the cost of keeping inflation low. Accordingly, in Rogoff’s analysis, globalization has led monetary authorities to maintain lower long-term inflation rates. A criticism of this story is that it implies that the Phillips curve is steeper today than in the past (that is, that inflation is more sensitive to slack in the economy), a prediction that does not accord with most empirical studies.Return to text 6.The dollar prices of imports are also affected by changes in the value of the exchange rate. However, the effects of exchange-rate changes on the domestic prices of imported goods have been quite low in recent years.Return to text 7.The share of imports coming from China is relatively high for the United States, and so the effect of trade with China may be lower for other industrialized countries. For example, one analysis of trade between the United Kingdom and both China and India found that, over the period 1999-2002, the effect on import-price inflation was only about minus 0.5 percentage point annually (Nickell, 2005). Research by the European Central Bank, however, found that the euro area’s trade with a wide range of developing economies had reduced the rate of increase in import prices to the area about 2 percentage points annually over 1996-2005 (European Central Bank, 2006).Return to text 8.An exception is Kamin, Marazzi, and Schindler (2006), who find little effect on the prices of domestic U.S. producers of similar goods.Return to text 9.Bowman (2003) finds little evidence that competition has increased or that markups declined in industrial economies.Return to text 10.Work finding no role or, at best, a marginal one for a global output gap includes Tootell (1998), Hooper, Slok, and Dobridge (2006), Pain, Koske, and Sallie (2006), and Ball (2006). In contrast, Gamber and Hung (2001) find that, over 1976-99, a trade-weighted average of capacity utilization for thirty-five U.S. trading partners is a significant determinant of U.S. inflation.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Independent Community Bankers of America's Annual Convention and Techworld, Honolulu, Hawaii(via satellite) The subject of my remarks today is the regulation and supervision of two large financial companies: the Federal National Mortgage Association (known familiarly as Fannie Mae) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (or Freddie Mac). Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were created by acts of the Congress and are thus known as government-sponsored enterprises, or GSEs. The Congress chartered these two companies with the goal of expanding the amount of capital available to the residential mortgage market, thereby promoting homeownership, particularly among low- and middle-income households. Although they retain their government charters, Fannie and Freddie were converted (in 1968 and 1989, respectively) to private, publicly traded, for-profit companies.1 Fannie and Freddie are regulated by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO), with additional oversight by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). The regulatory framework under which the GSEs operate has two principal objectives: first, to support the GSEs’ mission of promoting homeownership, especially access to affordable housing; and second, to ensure that these two companies operate in a financially prudent manner. For various reasons, including recent problems with accounting and internal controls at the GSEs, a consensus appears to exist that the regulatory and supervisory framework needs to be strengthened, and the leaders of the banking committees in the Congress have expressed optimism that agreement on legislation can be reached this year. The Federal Reserve Board concurs that a stronger regulatory framework for the GSEs is needed, and we hope to see a bill passed this year that addresses the important public policy issues raised by the operations of these entities. Because of its responsibility to help ensure financial and economic stability, the Federal Reserve Board must be concerned with any potential financial difficulties at the GSEs that might have broader systemic implications. In addition, the Federal Reserve Board recognizes the great value that the Congress attaches to the GSEs’ affordable-housing mission. In my remarks today, I will offer some thoughts on how GSE regulatory reform could reduce the systemic risks posed by these organizations while increasing their institutional focus on promoting access to affordable housing. Public Policy Issues Raised by GSE OperationsI will begin by discussing GSE operations and some issues of public policy raised by these activities. Broadly speaking, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac each run two lines of business. Their first line of business involves purchasing mortgages from primary mortgage originators, such as community bankers; packaging them into securities known as mortgage-backed securities (MBS); enhancing these MBS with credit guarantees; and then selling the guaranteed securities. Through this process, securities that trade readily in public debt markets are created. This activity, known as securitization, increases the liquidity of the residential mortgage market. In particular, the securitization of mortgages extended to low- and middle-income home purchasers likely has made mortgage credit more widely available. The GSEs’ second line of business is the main focus of my remarks today. It involves the purchase of mortgage-backed securities and other types of assets for their own investment portfolios. This line of business has raised public concern because its fundamental source of profitability is the widespread perception by investors that the U.S. government would not allow a GSE to fail, notwithstanding the fact that--as numerous government officials have asserted--the government has given no such guarantees. The perception of government backing allows Fannie and Freddie to borrow in open capital markets at an interest rate only slightly above that paid by the U.S. Treasury and below that paid by other private participants in mortgage markets. By borrowing at this preferential rate and purchasing assets (including MBS) that pay returns considerably greater than the Treasury rate, the GSEs can enjoy profits of an effectively unlimited scale. Consequently, the GSEs’ ability to borrow at a preferential rate provides them with strong incentives both to expand the range of assets that they acquire and to increase the size of their portfolios to the greatest extent possible. The GSE portfolios have been the subject of much controversy. First, analysts disagree about whether the GSE portfolios serve any public purpose. The GSEs themselves argue that their purchases of MBS provide additional support to the mortgage market, particularly during periods of financial stress. In contrast, research at the Federal Reserve Board and elsewhere has found that the GSE portfolios appear to have no material effect on the cost or availability of residential mortgages.2At the margin, the GSEs finance their purchases of MBS by issuing equal amounts of debt, and thus the net supply to the market of housing-related debt is unchanged by GSE purchases. Thus, standard economic reasoning does not predict large effects from these purchases on the mortgage market.3Indeed, contrary to what would be expected if GSE portfolios lowered the funding costs of mortgages, over the past decade or so the spread between yields on thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages and Treasuries of similar duration has tended torisein periods in which the GSEs have increased the share of the single-family residential mortgages held in their portfolios and tofallwhen the GSE share has fallen.4All that being said, for the purpose of the policy recommendations that I will make today, I will stipulate that GSE portfolios may serve to enhance liquidity and reduce costs in the mortgage market in some circumstances. In particular, the GSE portfolio purchases may create benefits for home purchase mortgages extended to lower-income households, to low- and moderate-income first-time homebuyers, and to buyers of homes in lower-income neighborhoods. These are all mortgage markets in which the private sector might have greater difficulties making mortgage credit more widely available and thus for which the case for government support may be stronger. A second element of the controversy surrounding the GSE portfolios arises from the fact that they are not only large but also potentially subject to significant volatility and financial risk (including credit risk, interest-rate risk, and prepayment risk) and operational risk. Many observers, including the Federal Reserve Board, have expressed concern about the potential danger that these portfolios may pose to the broader financial system; that is, the GSE portfolios may be a source ofsystemic risk(Greenspan, 2005a). Systemic risk is the risk that disruptions occurring in one firm or financial market may spread to other parts of the financial system, with possibly serious implications for the performance of the broader economy. Financial crises are extremely difficult to anticipate, and each episode of financial instability seems to have unique aspects, but two conditions are common to most such events. First, major crises usually involve financial institutions or markets that are either very large or play some critical role in the financial system. Second, the origins of most financial crises (excluding, perhaps, those attributable to natural disasters, war, and other nonfinancial events) can be traced to failures of due diligence or "market discipline" by an important group of market participants. Both of these conditions apply to the current situation of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (Eisenbeis, Frame, and Wall, forthcoming). The two GSEs are certainly large, having a dominant presence in U.S. mortgage markets and a substantial role in other financial markets, particularly in public debt and derivatives markets. Beginning in the mid-1990s, the GSEs began to rapidly increase the quantity of mortgages and other assets that they purchased and retained in their portfolios. From the end of 1990 until the end of 2003, the combined portfolios of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac grew more than tenfold, from $135 billion to $1.56 trillion, and the share they hold of outstanding residential mortgages increased from less than 5 percent to more than 20 percent.5Moreover, to finance their own holdings of MBS and other assets, in 2005 the two GSEs together issued almost $3 trillion in debt. Today, the two companies have $5.2 trillion of debt and MBS obligations outstanding, exceeding the $4.9 trillion of publicly held debt of the U.S. government (Lockhart, 2007). The activities of the GSEs are not confined to debt markets; because the GSEs engage in extensive hedging activities, these companies are among the most active users of derivative instruments. Thus, by any measure, the GSEs have a significant presence in U.S. financial markets.6 In most situations, policymakers can rely on market forces to constrain the risk-taking behavior of privately owned financial organizations. Market discipline is effective because, normally, the creditors of private firms have powerful incentives to monitor the risk-taking and risk-management activities conducted by these organizations. In particular, if creditors believe that an organization is taking on increased risk, they will reduce their exposure to the organization or demand greater compensation for bearing the additional risk. These market responses act as a brake on an organization’s risk-taking behavior and consequently reduce the likelihood that the company will fail. Unlike other private firms, however, the GSEs face little or no market discipline from their senior debt holders because of the belief among market participants that the U.S. government will back these institutions under almost any circumstances. As a result, increased risk-taking by the GSEs does not significantly increase their cost of funding or reduce their access to credit, as it would for other private firms. Indeed, as I have already noted, GSE debt trades at a narrow spread over U.S. Treasury debt and at spreads below those of other highly rated financial institutions, including the largest U.S. bank holding companies.7Moreover, the spread of GSE debt over Treasuries has been remarkably unresponsive to the recent problems of the GSEs (including the turnover of senior management and the inability of either company to provide current financial statements), suggesting that investors’ faith in an implicit government guarantee remains unshaken. As I have also noted, their low cost of borrowing gives GSEs an advantage over market participants in profitably financing the acquisition of just about any market-priced asset (other than U.S. Treasuries), and it creates a strong incentive for these companies to look for new types of assets to acquire and to find new lines of business to enter.8These ingredients--the large presence of the GSEs in financial markets, the lack of market discipline exercised by investors in GSE senior debt, and the incentives for continued portfolio growth--led the Federal Reserve Board to conclude that while the GSEs do not seem to pose an immediate risk of financial difficulty, their portfolios continue to represent a potentially significant source of systemic risk. Some observers have suggested that the systemic risks raised by GSEs are not qualitatively different from those posed by the largest bank holding companies, which are also a sizable presence in financial markets and enjoy some government guarantees (notably deposit insurance). However, this comparison is invalid for several reasons. First, uninsured deposits and other uninsured debt of bank holding companies--which are the marginal sources of funding for these organizations--pay rates of interest that are higher than both Treasury and GSE rates and that are sensitive to the financial condition of the firm. This behavior of banks’ cost of funds suggests that debt holders do not believe that their investments will be fully protected if the bank gets into trouble, and consequently these debt holders exert market discipline on the firm.9 Second, because of both regulatory requirements and the force of market discipline, banks hold much more capital than GSEs hold. The very largest bank holding companies generally hold equity capital equal to 6 percent or more of assets, and the largest regional banks generally have capital ratios of about 8 percent. (As I am sure you are keenly aware, community banks often have a capital-to-assets ratio exceeding 10 percent.) In comparison, the GSEs hold capital equal to roughly 3.5 percent of assets.10The justification for the low capital holdings of GSEs relative to banks is unclear. The largest banks are more diversified than the GSEs; and although banks likely assume greater credit risks, they probably are less subject to interest-rate risk than are GSEs.11Moreover, the recent experience of the GSEs suggests that they are subject to at least as much operational risk as the large banks. Measures to Reduce the Systemic Risk of GSE PortfoliosI have argued today that the size and the potentially rapid growth of GSE portfolios, combined with the lack of market discipline faced by GSEs, raise substantial systemic risk concerns. How should this issue be addressed? In recent years, the Federal Reserve Board has laid out three essential elements for the effective regulation of the GSEs that we believe would mitigate those concerns while promoting more effectively the important public purposes that they serve (Greenspan 2004; 2005b; 2006). First, the GSE regulator should have the broad authority necessary to set and adjust GSE capital requirements in line with the risks posed by the GSEs. Second, the GSEs should be subject to a clear and credible receivership process, a process that would establish that both shareholders and debt holders of a failed GSE would suffer financial losses. Third, the GSEs’ portfolios should be anchored firmly to a well-understood public purpose approved by the Congress. The concentrated and potentially volatile nature of the GSEs’ portfolios, together with the lack of market discipline on GSE activities, makes ensuring adequate capital--the first element--especially important. To ensure the safety and soundness of the GSEs and to reduce systemic risks, the GSE regulator should have capital authority that is on a par with that of the bank regulators. For example, the GSE regulator should have clear authority to establish and modify both the minimum and the risk-based capital standards for the GSEs. Moreover, the GSE regulator should be able to adjust capital requirements quickly and as needed to address developing or foreseeable concerns, rather than being required by cumbersome procedures to wait until after the damage has been done. A strong capital base would significantly reduce the implicit subsidy and incentive problems that now distort GSE investment decisions (Lucas and McDonald, 2006), while also increasing their safety and soundness. The establishment of a clear and credible GSE receivership process, the second element, is needed to create market discipline for these companies. Reform legislation should establish (1) a well-defined and mandatory process for placing a GSE in receivership and (2) a method for resolving a GSE once it is placed in receivership. Both parts are necessary for the receivership process to be meaningful and credible. Market participants should clearly understand that, once certain conditions arise, regulatory forbearance will be impermissible and a GSE receivership will be established. Importantly, the GSE receivership process should include a mechanism for ensuring that both the shareholders and creditors of a failed GSE will bear financial losses. Only if GSE debt holders are persuaded that the failure of a GSE will subject them to losses will they have an incentive to exert market discipline. Third, the GSE portfolios should be anchored to a clear and well-defined public purpose. Tying the portfolios to a purpose that provides measurable benefits to the public would help to ensure that society in general--not just GSE shareholders--receives a meaningful return in exchange for accepting the risks inherent in the portfolios. Moreover, defining the scope and purpose of the portfolios in this way would reduce the potential for unbridled growth in those portfolios while avoiding the imposition of arbitrary limits or caps. Affordable Housing and the GSE PortfoliosWhat public purpose should be served by the GSE portfolios? An obvious and worthy candidate is the promotion of affordable housing.12The Congress has frequently expressed the priority it attaches to affordable housing through, for example, the provision of various housing programs and tax incentives aimed at increasing the availability of moderately priced homes and rental housing. The Congress has also determined that financial institutions have a role in providing credit to low- and moderate-income households. Most notably, the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) obligates insured depository institutions to help meet the credit needs of their entire local communities, including low- and moderate-income borrowers and neighborhoods, consistent with the institutions’ safe and sound operation.13 Along similar lines, in 1992 the Congress established an affordable housing mission for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac by directing HUD to create specific mortgage purchase goals for these GSEs. However, evidence that Fannie and Freddie have had beneficial effects on the supply of affordable housing (over and above the benefits of their securitization activities for the mortgage market as a whole) has been difficult to find.14After conducting several studies of the effects of GSEs on the mortgage market and establishing the GSEs’ disappointing results, HUD in 2004 raised the numerical goals that these institutions must reach to fulfill their affordable housing mission. As noted by HUD, "With respect to these public purposes, Congress does not simply expect the GSEs to strive toward achievement of these purposes but ratherto lead the mortgage finance industryand toensure that citizens throughout the country enjoy access to the public benefits provided by these federal entities."15 Thus, a standard for determining the public benefit of Fannie’s and Freddie’s portfolios seems readily available: Do the GSE portfolios support affordable housing? At the present time, Fannie and Freddie appear to fail this test. Indeed, by OFHEO’s estimation, less than 30 percent of the GSEs’ current portfolio holdings are oriented toward affordable housing (Lockhart, 2007). A straightforward means of anchoring the GSE portfolios to a clear public mission would be to require Fannie and Freddie to focus their portfolios almost exclusively on holdings of mortgages or mortgage-backed securities that support affordable housing. The evolution of mortgage markets since the GSEs were created strongly suggests that a concentration on affordable-housing products would provide the greatest public benefit. Markets for highly rated assets--including most residential mortgages and the pools of MBS backed by such mortgages--have become extremely deep and liquid, with more than $25 trillion in outstanding instruments. These markets are international in scope, and market participants include thousands of banking organizations, insurance companies, pooled investment vehicles, institutional investors and, increasingly, foreign governmental authorities. Given the size and depth of the secondary market for most residential mortgages, the GSEs’ purchase and retention of highly rated mortgages and of their own MBS are unlikely to do much to enhance liquidity in the secondary markets for these assets or to promote affordable housing. On the other hand, the vast size of the market for highly rated assets greatly increases the potential for rapid growth of GSE portfolios and, consequently, systemic risk. In contrast, the market for affordable-housing products--particularly mortgages extended to households with below-median-income--is less deep and liquid than the broader market for residential mortgages. GSE portfolio purchases might add significant liquidity to the secondary markets for such assets, thereby reducing costs and increasing credit availability to prospective home purchasers. In addition, increasing the presence of the GSEs in the market for affordable housing could help banks fulfill their CRA obligations by providing them with greater opportunities for securitizing such loans. In all, from a social perspective, focusing the GSE portfolios on affordable housing could provide benefits that might offset some of the risks that these more-targeted portfolios might pose to financial markets and to taxpayers. The key principle here is that the GSEs’ senior debt--which investors view as government-backed--should be used only to finance assets (such as affordable-housing mortgages) that have, in the view of the Congress, a clear and measurable public benefit.16Such an approach would set some functional limits on the size of the portfolios and on the range of assets that GSEs would be allowed to purchase, while preserving the ability of these companies to operate profitably. To be clear, I am not advocating a change in the exposure of GSEs to subprime loans.17Orienting the GSEs’ portfolios more toward affordable housing is an approach which can succeed under the current GSE credit standards. Indeed, the credit risks associated with an affordable-housing portfolio need not be any greater than mortgage portfolios generally, so long as the GSEs continue to adhere to sound underwriting practices. Moreover, a renewal of the GSE affordable-housing mission might stimulate the development of innovative approaches to measuring and managing the credit risks associated with such mortgages. ConclusionLegislation to strengthen the regulation and supervision of GSEs is highly desirable, both to ensure that these companies pose fewer risks to the financial system and to direct them toward activities that provide important social benefits. Financial safety and soundness can be enhanced by giving the GSE regulator capital powers comparable to those of bank supervisors and by creating a clear and credible receivership process that leads debt holders to recognize that they would suffer financial losses should a GSE fail. Finally, the Federal Reserve Board believes that the GSEs’ investment portfolios should be firmly anchored to a measurable public purpose, such as the promotion of affordable housing. I believe that this approach provides a reasonable balance of social costs and benefits for the GSE portfolios. In particular, this approach would re-focus the GSEs on the affordable housing objectives given to them by the Congress. References Ambrose, Brent W., Michael LaCour-Little, and Anthony B. Sanders (2004). "The Effect of Conforming Loan Status on Mortgage Yield Spreads: A Loan Level Analysis,"Real Estate Economics,vol. 32 (Winter), pp.541-69. Department of Housing and Urban Development (2004a). "HUD’s Housing Goals for the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac) for the Years 2005-2008 and Amendments to HUD’s Regulation of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac," 24 CFR Part 81 (Docket No. FR 4790-F-03),Federal Register, vol. 69 (November 2), pp. 63579-628. Department of Housing and Urban Development (2004b). "Regulatory Analysis for the Secretary of HUD’s Final Rule on HUD’s Regulation of the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac)," HUD, Office of Policy Development and Research, October 2004. Eisenbeis, Robert A., W. Scott Frame, and Larry D. Wall (forthcoming). "An Analysis of the Systemic Risks Posed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and an Evaluation of the Policy Options for Reducing Those Risks,"Journal of Financial Services Research. Frame, W. Scott, and Lawrence J. White (2005). "Fussing and Fuming over Fannie and Freddie: How Much Smoke, How Much Fire?"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 19 (Spring), pp. 159-84. Gerardi, Kristopher, Harvey S. Rosen, and Paul Willen (2006). "Do Households Benefit from Financial Deregulation and Innovation? The Case of the Mortgage Market," Public Policy Discussion Papers 06-6. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, June. Greenspan, Alan (2006). Letter to Senators Elizabeth Dole, Chuck Hagel, and John Sununu, January 3. Greenspan, Alan (2005a). "Government-Sponsored Enterprises," remarks delivered at the Conference on Housing, Mortgage Finance, and the Macroeconomy, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, May 19, www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2005/default.htm. Greenspan, Alan (2005b). "Regulatory Reform of the Government-Sponsored Enterprises," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, April 6, www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/testimony/2005/default.htm. Greenspan, Alan (2004). "Government-Sponsored Enterprises," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 24, www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/testimony/2004/default.htm. Inside Mortgage Finance Publications (2006).The Housing-Related GSEs: Data on Their Business, Market, Investments, & Expenditures.Bethesda, Md.: IMFP. Jaffe, Dwight M., and John M. Quigley (2007). Housing Subsidies and Homeowners: What Role for Government-Sponsored Enterprises?" paper presented at the NBER/Kellogg School of Management Conference on Measuring and Managing Federal Financial Risk, held at Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., February 8 and 9. Lehnert, Andreas, Wayne Passmore, and Shane Sherlund (forthcoming)."GSEs, Mortgage Rates, and Secondary Market Activities," Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics. Lockhart, James B. III (2007). "GSE Reform: A Priority for 2007," paper presented at the National Association of Affordable Housing Lenders Legislative Conference, Washington, D.C., February 1. Lucas, Deborah, and Robert McDonald (2006). "An Options-based Approach to Evaluating the Risk of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 53 (January), pp. 155-76. Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO) 2006. "Mortgage Markets and the Enterprises in 2005,"www.ofheo.gov/Research.asp. Passmore, Wayne, Gillian Burgess, Diana Hancock, Andreas Lehnert, and Shane Sherlund (2006). "Federal Reserve Research on Government-Sponsored Enterprises," inProceedings of the 42nd Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition on"Innovations in Real Estate Markets: Risks, Rewards, and the Role of Regulation"(Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, May 17-19), pp. 90-101. Passmore, Wayne, Shane Sherlund, and Gillian Burgess (2005). "The Effects of Housing Government-Sponsored Enterprises on Mortgages Rates,"Real Estate Finance,vol. 33 (Fall), pp. 427-83. Footnotes 1.Frame and White (2005) provide a general description of GSEs and the associated policy debates.Return to text 2.See Lehnert, Passmore, and Sherlund (forthcoming). There is also much debate about whether GSE activities more generally lower the cost of mortgage credit, with estimates of the GSEs’ overall effect on fixed-rate mortgages ranging from zero to around 25 basis points (see Ambrose, LaCour-Little, and Sanders, 2004; Geradi, Rosen and Willen , 2006, Passmore, Sherlund, and Burgess, 2005; and Passmore, Burgess, Hancock, Lehnert, and Sherlund, 2006).Return to text 3.The corporate debt issued by the GSEs has somewhat different risk characteristics than MBS--less exposure to prepayment risk, for example. However, the GSEs attempt to hedge most of the risks of MBS that they hold through callable debt and the use of derivatives, so those risks ultimately end up in the broader market as well.Return to text 4.As discussed later, the combined portfolios of the GSEs grew more than tenfold between 1990 and 2003; their market shares peaked in 2003 at slightly more than 22 percent. GSE market shares have fallen over the past three years to about 14 percent, partly as the result of the companies’ accounting and internal control problems, which resulted in agreements with OFHEO to limit portfolio growth (presumably on a temporary basis). The spread between mortgage rates and Treasury yields rose during the second half of the 1990s, peaked in late 2002 and 2003, and has declined since, implying that higher mortgage spreads are associated with higher GSE market shares. Lehnert, Passmore, and Sherlund (forthcoming) find that a similar result obtains over shorter periods; using monthly data, they show that the mortgage spread appears to rise when GSE purchases rise and contract when GSE purchases contract.Return to text 5.Data on the GSEs’ portfolios can be found atwww.ofheo.gov/Research.asp.Return to text 6.See OFHEO (2006) and Inside Mortgage Finance Publications (2006). I should also note that in 2003, Fannie and Freddie together accounted for almost 70 percent of all mortgage securitizations and about 75 percent of all mortgage-backed securities outstanding. The GSEs’ market shares of mortgage securitizations and outstanding MBS have fallen since 2003, reflecting the growth of private securitizations.Return to text 7.The funding advantage of the GSEs relative to large bank holding companies has varied significantly over time, ranging from 20 to 45 basis points. Much of this variation reflects changes in the credit risk premiums embedded in the debt of large bank holding companies, which mainly reflect systematic credit risks. In the past several years, this credit premium has narrowed substantially.Return to text 8.Under normal market conditions, the substantial profits of the GSEs would attract competitors. But competitors, which are subject to market scrutiny when conducting their business, cannot provide a check on the GSEs because they cannot compete with the GSEs’ low cost of funds.Return to text 9.Legal provisions such as prompt corrective action and the least-cost-resolution requirement probably contribute to the perception of bank debt holders that their investments are not guaranteed if the bank gets into financial trouble. Recently, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) has proposed to require that large banks maintain depositor records in a common format to help ensure that those creditors do not escape losses in the event of a bank failure. Also, the ability of bank holding companies to increase their government-backed funding is limited. By law, banks cannot make additional banking acquisitions if the resulting firm would control more than 10 percent of U.S. insured deposits.Return to text 10.This comparison excludes the temporary 30 percent additional capital currently required by OFHEO because of the operational risks posed by the GSEs’ recent accounting problems.Return to text 11.Interest rate risk depends on the degree of hedging, which is at the discretion of firm management. However, because the GSEs’ portfolios are concentrated in the mortgage-backed securities market and thus are subject to rapid changes in market value, the risk profile of the GSEs can change rapidly in response to unexpected movements in interest rates. In contrast, banks hold a more diversified mix of liabilities and assets, many of which are less sensitive to unexpected changes in interest rates, suggesting that banks as a general matter are less prone to interest rate risk. Regardless, little social benefit is gained by encouraging the concentration of the substantial interest rate risks associated with long-term mortgages into only two government-sponsored organizations, when such risk could be easily distributed across tens of thousands of entities, both domestic and foreign, through the process of mortgage securitization.Return to text 12.According to the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), "The generally accepted definition of affordability is for a household to pay no more than 30 percent of its annual income on housing" (www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing). Presumably, this definition would apply only for low- and moderate-income households. One difficulty of discussing GSE reform and affordable housing is that there is no straightforward link between this definition of affordable housing and the activities of the GSEs. Better data and methods are needed to measure accurately the GSEs’ contributions to affordable housing.Return to text 13.In addition, the Congress in 1934 established the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and gave it the mission of helping to increase the availability of affordable housing by extending the provision of mortgage insurance to many lower-income and liquidity-constrained households. More recently, the Congress required the Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs) to establish an affordable housing fund.Return to text 14.As one recent study stated: "A substantial literature has now developed analyzing the efficacy of HUD housing goals for promoting home ownership among lower-income families. The consensus conclusion is that the affordable housing goals (AHGs) have achieved very little in terms of increasing homeownership among low-income families" (Jaffe and Quigley, 2007, p. 12).Return to text 15.Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), (2004a), p. 63581. Italics are quotes taken by HUD from Senate Report, No. 102-282, at 34 (1992). For reviews of HUD’s studies comparing the GSEs to the primary mortgage market, see HUD (2004a and 2004b).Return to text 16.Subordinated debt might be used to fund any assets allowed by Congress and held by Fannie and Freddie that did not have a strong and easily measurable link to making housing more affordable. In principle, subordinated-debt spreads should be more responsive to market developments than senior-debt spreads, particularly if issuance was mandatory and the Congress establishes a clear and credible receivership process for the GSEs. Fannie and Freddie took a step in the direction of enhancing GSE market discipline when they issued subordinated debt in 2000. But during the recent period of accounting problems, neither GSE has chosen to issue subordinated debt, likely because doing so would have been too costly. Only recently has Freddie Mac resolved its problems sufficiently so that subordinated debt could be issued.Return to text 17.The role of the GSEs in subprime lending and whether to increase or decrease their exposure to such lending are important questions for Congress. The GSEs have been only indirect players in the subprime market, purchasing mainly AAA-debt that has been collateralized with subprime mortgages and leaving the higher risk components of the subprime mortgages to be funded by other market participants.Return to text
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the Annual Macro Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California Under its dual mandate, the Federal Reserve seeks to promote both price stability and maximum sustainable employment.1For this reason, we at the Federal Reserve are acutely interested in the inflation process, both to better understand the past and--given the inherent lags with which monetary policy affects the economy--to try to forecast the future. We economists have made some important strides in our understanding of inflation dynamics in recent years. To be sure, substantial gaps in our knowledge remain, and forecasting is still a famously imprecise task, but our increased understanding offers the hope that central banks will be able to continue and perhaps even improve upon their successful performance of recent years. Today, I will outline what I see as the key stylized facts that research has in recent years uncovered about changes in the dynamics of inflation and will present my view of how to interpret these findings. The interpretation has important implications for how we should think about the conduct of monetary policy and what we think might happen to inflation over the next couple of years. I will address these two issues in the final part of the talk. Before I continue, however, I should stress that the views I will express here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The Empirical Evidence on Changes in Inflation DynamicsTo see what research has discovered about the evolution of inflation dynamics in recent years, let’s explore the following questions: (1) What is the available evidence on changes in inflation persistence in recent years? (2) What is the available evidence on changes in the slope of the Phillips curve? (3) What role do other variables play in the inflation process? Inflation PersistenceTo answer the first question, we need to measure how long the effects of a shock to inflation will last. Specifically, we need to know whether inflation tends to revert quickly to its initial level, or whether the effects of the shock persist--that is, lead to a changed level of inflation for an extended period. The most obvious way of measuring inflation persistence is to regress inflation on several of its own lags and then calculate the sum of the coefficients on lagged inflation. If the sum of the coefficients is close to 1.0, then shocks to inflation have long-lived effects on inflation. In other words, inflation behaves like a random walk, so that when inflation goes up, it stays up. If the sum of the coefficients drops well below 1.0, then a shock to inflation has only a temporary effect on inflation, and inflation soon reverts back to its trend level. The evidence from these so-called autoregressions with U.S. data suggests that inflation may have grown less persistent over time. In particular, when autoregressions are run using rolling samples with a fixed width of, say, twelve years, the sum of the lagged coefficients often falls noticeably below unity as the sample advances to include the most recent data.Figure 1illustrates this tendency, with the core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index as the measure of inflation. As you can see, the coefficient sum has declined to about 0.6 or so since the late 1990s, although the dotted lines indicate that the confidence interval for this estimate is wide and still includes 1.0. This result appears robust to the addition of other explanatory variables to the regression, although making such a modification does tend to reduce the extent of the estimated decline.2Finally, it’s worth noting that this is not just a U.S. phenomenon, as some studies have found similar results for a number of other countries.3 (I might proudly note in passing that the staff of the Federal Reserve System is responsible for much of this research.) Recent work by Jim Stock and Mark Watson (2007) provides an alternative and, to me, a quite intuitive way of thinking about inflation persistence. They estimate a model that decomposes inflation into two components. The first component, which can be thought of as the underlying trend, follows a random walk, so that shocks to this component persist indefinitely and thus affect the trend inflation rate going forward. The second component is a serially uncorrelated shock, meaning that such shocks are temporary and lead to only transitory fluctuations around the trend. Stock and Watson then allow the volatility of these two kinds of shocks, trend and temporary, to vary over time. Stock and Watson find that the importance of the trend shocks relative to that of the temporary shocks started to rise at the end of the 1960s in the United States, peaked in the mid-1970s, stayed elevated over the next ten years, and then declined to a historical low (upper panel offigure 2). When the relative importance of the trend shocks became high, as it did in the 1970s and early 1980s, inflation became highly persistent. Under such conditions, if inflation went up, the trend component typically rose in tandem so that inflation stayed up. In contrast, when the temporary shocks were relatively more important, as was true before the 1970s and after the mid-1980s, a change in inflation tended to reflect a change in the temporary component, not the trend. As a result, fluctuations in inflation tended to fade away, implying that inflation persistence was much lower. In the context of the Stock-Watson model, then, when inflation rose to double-digit levels during the "Great Inflation" period of the 1970s and early 1980s, persistence became very high because the trend rate of inflation moved around a lot--that is, trend inflation became unanchored. Although the importance of the trend component has fallen markedly since the 1970s, the estimates produced by Stock and Watson suggest that it is still large enough to be economically meaningful. The bottom panel of figure 2 illustrates this point; as you can see, the estimated trend (the solid line) has drifted up a bit since the mid-1990s. Of course, such estimates are inevitably imprecise to some degree. For example, Cecchettiet al(2007) employ a slightly modified version of the Stock-Watson procedure in a recent paper and find that inflation persistence has fallen so low that their estimated trend for gross domestic product (GDP) price inflation has been almost perfectly flat at about 2.2 percent over the past few years. In contrast, Cogley and Sargent (2005), using a different modification of the procedure, obtain results more in line with the original Stock and Watson paper. Finally, follow-up work by staff members at the Federal Reserve Board suggests that the degree of persistence found with these techniques varies across different measures of inflation. Thus, the empirical evidence on this question can vary. Nonetheless, I think it fair to say that inflation has become less persistent over the past two decades but that the underlying trend may not yet be perfectly stable. When Cecchetti and his co-authors apply this type of analysis to other countries, the results are remarkably similar. In particular, in Canada, Italy, and the United Kingdom, the importance of the trend shocks began to rise in the late 1960s and early 1970s and then declined only in the mid-1980s. France followed a similar pattern, although there the rise began a bit earlier, in 1963. In short, all these countries experienced a similar "Great Inflation," when trend inflation became unanchored. Germany and Japan had shorter periods of high persistence of inflation, with persistence beginning to decline around 1969 in Germany and around 1979 in Japan. Cecchetti and his co-authors conclude that the rise and subsequent decline of inflation persistence has thus been a worldwide phenomenon. Slope of the Phillips CurveIn traditional Phillips-curve equations, inflation depends on past values of inflation, an unemployment gap (the difference between the unemployment rate and an estimate of its natural rate), and variables such as the relative price of energy and import prices. When researchers estimate these equations, they typically find that the coefficient on the unemployment gap has declined (in absolute value) since the 1980s, often by a marked amount.4In other words, the evidence suggests that the Phillips curve has flattened. The finding that inflation is less responsive to the unemployment gap, if taken at face value, suggests that fluctuations in resource utilization will have smaller implications for inflation than used to be the case. From the point of view of policymakers, this development is a two-edged sword: On the plus side, it implies that an overheating economy will tend to generate a smaller increase in inflation. On the negative side, however, a flatter Phillips curve also implies that a given increase in inflation will be more costly to wring out of the system. We can quantify this latter consideration using the so-called sacrifice ratio--the number of years that unemployment has to be 1.0 percentage point greater than its natural rate to reduce the inflation rate 1.0 percentage point. Averaging estimates obtained from a comprehensive battery of equation specifications suggests that the sacrifice ratio may be 40 percent larger--that is, it may be 40 percent more costly to reduce inflation than it was two decades ago. Is this really bad news? I will return to this question later. Role of Other Variables in the Inflation ProcessEmpirical evidence suggests that inflation has also become less responsive to other shocks. The two oil price shocks in the 1970s were associated with large jumps in core inflation, whereas recent surges in energy prices have not had a similar effect. This reduced sensitivity manifests itself in traditional Phillips-curve models as a substantial decline in the estimated coefficient on the energy price term in these equations. Because this term equals the change in relative energy prices multiplied by the share of energy in aggregate output, energy price effects on inflation appear to have fallen by more than can be accounted for by the greater energy efficiency of the economy.5 In contrast, unpublished empirical work by the staff at the Federal Reserve Board suggests that, once we take the rising share of imports into account, the influence of import prices on core inflation in the United States has not changed much in the context of reduced-form forecasting models.6At the same time, the influence of exchange rate movements on import prices--the so-called pass-through effect--may have fallen substantially, at least according to some studies.7If so, then the influence of exchange rate fluctuations on domestic inflation may now be less than it once was, when one controls for changes in the volume of our foreign trade. What Interpretation Can We Give to Changes in Inflation Dynamics?In interpreting these stylized facts about changes in inflation dynamics, we must first recognize that all of them are based onreduced-form relationships, and thus they are about correlations and not necessarily about true structural relationships. Because the explanatory variables in inflation regressions are themselves influenced by changes in economic conditions, changes in the underlying monetary policy regime are likely to be a source of changes in reduced-form inflation dynamics. This problem is especially acute for structural relationships involving expectations or other factors that are not directly observable and so cannot be included in reduced-form regressions. In such cases, we cannot use the reduced-form equations to disentangle the effects of such unobserved factors--which themselves may be driven by changes in monetary policy--from that of other influences. The most important development in monetary economics that I have witnessed over my now-long career has been the recognition that expectations are central to our understanding of the behavior of the aggregate economy. Theory tells us that inflation expectations must be a key driving force behind inflation. This dependence has long been implicit in traditional Phillips-curve analysis, but expectations--now in explicit form--are also a central feature of the increasingly popular New Keynesian Phillips curves, in which current-period inflation is a function of expectations of next period’s inflation and resource utilization. Therefore, a natural first place to look for explanations of changing inflation dynamics is a possible change in the expectations-formation process. The first stylized fact discussed earlier is that inflation persistence, which rose in the 1970s during the Great Inflation, has since declined to a much lower level. An intuitive way of thinking about this rise and fall in inflation persistence is that it resulted from an un-anchoring of trend inflation during the period of the Great Inflation, and a re-anchoring in recent years, as the work of Stock and Watson suggests. When we think about what drives trend inflation, inflation expectations--particularly long-run expectations--come to mind. A de-anchoring of inflation expectations would surely lead to trend inflation becoming unanchored, whereas an anchoring of inflation expectations at a particular level would necessarily lead to a stabilization of trend inflation and hence a decline in inflation persistence. Do indicators of inflation expectations support this story? They certainly do. Consider the measure of expected inflation for the coming twelve months reported by the Livingston survey. As illustrated by the dashed line infigure 3, this measure of expected short-run inflation--adjusted by a constant factor to convert it from a CPI basis to a PCE basis--soared during the 1970s and then fell back markedly during the 1980s and early 1990s. Over the past few years, the short-run series has fluctuated around 2 percent, with its month-to-month movements correlated with swings in energy prices, as one might expect. An even more striking story is told by the survey-based measure of expected long-run inflation used in the FRB/US model, the dotted blue line in figure 3.8When we look at this long-run series (which should be more closely related to expectations about policy objectives than the short-run measure), we see that the public’s expectations stood at a high level of 7-3/4 percent at the start of the 1980s, when this information first began to be collected. From that point on, however, expectations fell steadily over the 1980s and most of the 1990s as the process of re-anchoring continued. By 1998, this process was apparently completed, and since that time the public’s expectations--at least according to this particular measure--have been steady as a rock. Estimates of inflation compensation derived from indexed Treasury yields have also been remarkably stable in recent years. Figure 3 also reproduces the estimate of trend inflation produced by the Stock-Watson procedure (the solid line). As you can see, this series more or less tracks the survey-based measures of long-run expectations, suggesting that the anchoring of long-run inflation expectations in recent years may explain the finding of a marked decline in inflation persistence. Anchoring of inflation expectations is not adeus ex machina. It must come from somewhere, and since Milton Friedman’s adage that “[i]nflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon” is still true, monetary policy must be the source of the change in the evolution of long-run inflation expectations. During the 1960s and 1970s, the Federal Reserve and a number of other central banks maintained a policy stance that, inadvertently or not, was too easy on average and that allowed both actual and expected inflation to drift up markedly over many years. Since the late 1970s, however, the Federal Reserve and many other central banks have increased their commitment to price stability, in both words and actions. The Fed pursued preemptive strikes against rises in inflation in 1994-95, 1999-00, and in 2004-06, as well as preemptive strikes against potentially deflationary forces in the fall of 1998 and in 2001-04. The result has been not only low and stable inflation but also, as we have seen, a strong anchoring of long-run inflation expectations. The pursuit of more-aggressive monetary policy to control inflation and the achievement of anchored inflation expectations can also help explain the other stylized facts about inflation dynamics. With expectations of inflation anchored, any given shock to inflation--whether it is from aggregate demand, energy prices, or the foreign exchange rate--will have a smaller effect on expected inflation and hence on trend inflation. These shocks will then have a much less persistent effect on actual inflation. The recent experience with surging oil prices seems consistent with this story. The price of West Texas intermediate crude oil rose from about $30 per barrel in late 2003 to a peak of almost $75 per barrel in July of last year. During this episode, inflation appears to have been boosted only temporarily and by a strikingly small amount, in contrast to the 1970s when oil price shocks led to large, persistent increases in inflation. Interestingly, monetary policy could have worked to flatten the estimated Phillips curve even without these favorable expectational effects, simply by moving more aggressively to stabilize both inflation and output. A theorem from the literature on optimal control states that implementing a policy of adjusting some instrument to stabilize a particular variable has the effect, in the limit, of driving the correlation between the instrument and the targeted variable to zero. Thus, a monetary policy that more successfully stabilizes inflation and resource utilization could well lead to a smaller estimated coefficient on unemployment gaps in a traditional Phillips-curve equation. Research carried out with quite different models of the macroeconomy by my former colleagues at Columbia, Jean Boivin and Marc Giannoni (2006), and by John Roberts (2006) at the Federal Reserve Board, supports these conclusions. In particular, their analyses suggest that changes in the way the Federal Reserve conducts monetary policy--including changes in both the parameters of monetary policy reaction functions and the volatility of shocks to those functions--may account for most of the reduction in the coefficients on resource utilization in traditional Phillips curves.9 What is particularly attractive about highlighting a better anchoring of inflation expectations as probably the primary factor driving the changes in inflation dynamics is that this one explanation covers so many of the stylized facts--an application of Occam’s razor. Indeed, I have always become more confident in a theory if it can explain a number of very different facts.10This is why I am so attracted to the view that inflation expectations are a key driving factor in the inflation process. Of course, many other factors also influence inflation, and some of these provide other possible explanations for the recent changes in inflation dynamics. For example, smaller coefficients on unemployment gaps and energy prices in traditional Phillips curve equations may reflect the influence of lower and less-variable inflation on the frequency with which firms change their prices. In the context of a low-inflation environment, firms may have concluded that they can leave their prices fixed for longer periods at little cost, causing inflation to be less responsive to shocks, particularly if they are transitory. In this way, monetary policy may have affected the slope of the Phillips curve without having affected the manner in which expectations are formed. Also, from the mid-1980s through the first years of this decade, energy price movements were smaller and more transitory. We see this in futures markets, in which oil prices in far-dated futures contracts moved much less than spot prices over this period, suggesting that people expected a quick reversal in any rise in oil prices. Such transitory shocks to energy price would presumably have a smaller effect on inflation than the more-persistent oil price shocks of the 1970s and early 1980s. Increased globalization and other sources of increased competition may also have lowered the sensitivity of domestic inflation to aggregate demand, thereby flattening the Phillips curve. However, the evidence on this last point is limited and inconclusive.11 Policy ImplicationsThese stylized facts--that inflation has become less persistent and now responds less to aggregate demand and supply shocks--can lead to inappropriate policy advice. If we take these facts to be structural and attributable to factors other than monetary policy, we might interpret them as suggesting that the Federal Reserve could respond less to shocks and yet be confident that inflation would remain at a low level. In addition, the smaller coefficient on unemployment gaps in traditional Phillips-curve models, which seems to imply that the sacrifice ratio has gone up, might lead us to think that reducing inflation is very costly because it requires long periods of high unemployment. As a result, policymakers might decide that such an attempt would not be worthwhile and so would be less likely to try to reduce inflation if it were undesirably high. If used in model simulation exercises, the flatter Phillips curve might also suggest that getting inflation down to a particular desired level could take an inordinately long time. However, if we instead attribute the observed changes in inflation dynamics to better monetary policy and a resultant better anchoring of inflation expectations, then such policy conclusions are unwarranted. Under this alternative interpretation, the reason that inflation has become less persistent is that monetary policy, in carrying out its dual mandate of promoting both price stability and maximum sustainable employment, has been vigilant in maintaining a low rate of inflation on average. But if the monetary authorities were to become complacent and to think that they could get away with not reacting to shocks that, in their mistaken view, no longer have the potential to cause inflation to rise persistently, then inflation expectations would surely become unhinged again. In short, complacency that might arise from the current low inflation persistence might result indeja vuall over again and return us to an era like the Great Inflation. These are exactly the concerns expressed in Tom Sargent’s (2000) book on the rise and fall of U.S. inflation, in which he worries that a misunderstanding of the inflation process might again lead to a high-inflation equilibrium. If inflation has indeed become less persistent because better monetary policy has anchored inflation expectations more solidly, the monetary authorities may find that they have less need to induce large swings in economic activity to control inflation. This is a key benefit of establishing a strong nominal anchor. Because the public has become confident that the Fed will do the right thing, expectations now behave in a manner that makes the economy more stable to begin with. If this hypothesis is correct, cyclical movements in interest rates need not be as great as was necessary when expectations were unanchored. However, these favorable circumstances will persist only so long as the monetary authorities continue to ratify the public’s expectations. Consistent with its dual mandate, the Fed must therefore continue to respond aggressively to shocks that have potentially persistent adverse effects on both inflation and real activity. Because long-run inflation expectations are a key driver of trend inflation, the monetary authorities need to monitor long-run inflation expectations closely. If they find that they are losing credibility with the markets, so that inflation expectations begin to drift and rise above (or fall below) a desired level, they must take actions to restore their credibility. At the Federal Reserve, we understand the importance to the health of the economy of anchoring inflation expectations. This is why Federal Reserve officials continually reiterate our commitment to maximum sustainable employment and price stability, why we have been willing to make preemptive strikes against both inflationary and deflationary pressures, and why we remain vigilant about developments in the economy that could lead to persistent departures of inflation from levels that are consistent with price stability. My view--that recent changes in inflation dynamics result primarily from better-anchored inflation expectations and not from structural change or simply the achievement of a persistent low rate of inflation--implies some very good news: Potentially inflationary shocks, like a sharp rise in energy prices, are less likely to spill over into expected and actual core inflation. Therefore, the Fed does not have to respond as aggressively as would be necessary if inflation expectations were unanchored, as they were during the Great Inflation era. Indeed, this can help explain why the recent sharp rises in energy prices have had a much more benign effect on the real economy than they did in the 1970s--a point that then-Governor Ben Bernanke made three years ago. Although solidly anchored inflation expectations are indeed highly desirable, they could pose a bit of a problem for monetary policy if they were at a level somewhat above or below the rate preferred by policymakers. Under such circumstances, the central bank would likely be interested in shifting the public’s expectations in a more favorable direction. Whether such adjustment would be easy or difficult is, unfortunately, quite uncertain because we do not understand the expectations-formation process very well. In some early models that used the rational expectations assumption, changing inflation expectations was relatively easy and thus implied sacrifice ratios that were extremely low, suggesting that the monetary authorities could shift inflation at little cost. However, the historical record suggests that permanently lowering inflation expectations may require keeping monetary policy tight for a substantial period, resulting in considerable output and employment losses for a time. On the other hand, as Christy and David Romer (2002) have pointed out, the Federal Reserve in the 1970s overestimated the cost of reducing inflation because estimates of sacrifice ratios by Arthur Okun and other economists at that time proved to be too high.12As a historical note, this provides one explanation for the Federal Reserve’s tolerance of such high inflation at the time. The disinflation after October 1979, carried out by the Federal Reserve under the leadership of Paul Volcker using words, procedures, and actions that were a sharp break from the past, produced a much lower cost of disinflation than policymakers had anticipated during the 1970s. I think these considerations leave us with fairly wide bounds on what the costs might be of permanently shifting long-run inflation expectations that are already anchored. On the one hand, the historical record gives us little reason to think the costs would be as minimal as the simplest models with rational expectations might suggest. On the other hand, overly pessimistic estimates have proved to be wrong in the past. Implications for Inflation ForecastsI have argued here that the most attractive explanation for recent changes in inflation dynamics is that expectations have become better anchored. Inflation is now less persistent and more likely to gravitate to a trend level that is determined by where long-run inflation expectations have settled. What implication does this have for forecasts of future inflation? In this framework, the first priority is to determine where inflation expectations may be anchored. This task is somewhat tricky. According to the latest reading from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF), long-term inflation expectations are currently around 2 percent, as measured by the PCE price index that the FOMC has emphasized. The private forecasters appear to have held this view for many years, given that long-run expectations for CPI inflation in the SPF have been running at around 2-1/2 percent since the late 1990s, and that the average historical wedge between the CPI measure and the PCE measure of inflation has been about 50 basis points.13 Of course, the views of professional forecasters may not be representative of what the average person or firm is thinking.If we turn to the financial markets, we find that inflation expectations extracted from a comparison of the yields between Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS) and standard Treasury securities seem consistent with an anchor at or perhaps a little above 2 percent in terms of PCE inflation.14I say “seem consistent,” because we cannot be sure about at least one of the items used in the extraction, the premium paid to investors to compensate them for inflation risk. In the case of households, long-term inflation expectations from the Reuters/Michigan survey have been running much higher for a number of years, at around 3 percent. However, this figure seems overstated in light of the persistent bias found in the short-term inflation expectations reported by this survey. Correcting for the bias, these survey results are probably more in line with PCE inflation closer to 2 percent.15As for firms, we unfortunately have no good data on their inflation expectations. More information on this score would be particularly welcome, but expectations in general is an area worthy of further study. Taken together, the data suggest to me that long-run inflation expectations are currently around 2 percent. That said, I think it should be clear that the evidence points to a range of estimates; moreover, this range is itself uncertain because of the assumptions needed to tease point estimates from the available data. So, although I think that 2 percent is a reasonable estimate of current long-run expectations, I don’t want to overstate the precision of this figure. We still face some uncertainty in this regard, and policymakers must be cautious about placing too much confidence in any one estimate. If long-run expectations are in fact about 2 percent, where is actual inflation likely to be headed in the next year or two? While recognizing how embarrassingly wrong such prognostications often turn out to be, I think that we can be reasonably optimistic that core PCE inflation will gradually drift down from its latest twelve-month reading of 2-1/4 percent. This process may take a while in light of the recent rebound in prices for gasoline and other petroleum products. These price increases have boosted the cost of producing many non-energy goods and services, and as firms gradually pass on these higher costs to their customers, monthly readings on the change in core prices are likely to be higher than they otherwise would be. Once this process is completed, however, we might expect consumer price inflation to move into better alignment with long-run expectations and thus settle in around 2 percent. Of course, our understanding of the empirical links between our measures of expected inflation and actual inflation is sufficiently poor that things could well go awry with this forecast. Moreover, many things could happen in the coming months to alter the outlook, as the recent fluctuations in energy markets and swings in GDP growth illustrate. Looking to the medium term, I am less optimistic about the prospects for core PCE inflation to move much below 2 percent in the absence of a determined effort by monetary policy. For the most part, this assessment--which I should stress is subject to considerable uncertainty--flows from my view that long-term expectations appear to be well anchored at a level not very far below the current rate of inflation. If so, a substantial further decline in inflation would require a shift in expectations, and such a shift could be difficult and time consuming to bring about, as I noted earlier. As I mentioned at the start, central bankers are acutely interested in the inflation process. This is why I have thought about the topic a lot and chosen to talk about it today. I hope you have found my musings on this subject useful. References Bernanke, Ben (2004)."The Great Moderation,"speech delivered at the meeting of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, D.C., February 20. Boivin, Jean, and Marc Giannoni (forthcoming) "Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?"Review of Economics and Statistics. Borio, Claudio, and Andrew Filardo (2006). "Globalisation and Inflation: New Cross-Country Evidence on the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation," unpublished paper, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland (March). Cecchetti, Stephen G., Peter Hooper, Bruce C. Kasman, Kermit L. Schoenholtz, and Mark W. Watson (2007). "Understanding the Evolving Inflation Process," presentation at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, Washington, D.C., March 9. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (2000)."Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 115 (February), pp. 147-80. Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas Sargent (2005)."Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Policies and Outcomes in the Post WWII U.S.,"Review of Economic Dynamics,vol. 8 (April), pp. 262-302. Friedman, Milton (1957).Theory of the Consumption Function.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Hanson, Bruce (1999)."The Grid Bootstrap and the Autoregressive Model."Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 81 (November), 594-607. Hellerstein, Rebecca, Deirdre Daly, and Christina Marsh (2006)."Have U.S. Import Prices Become Less Responsive to Changes in the Dollar?"Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Current Issues in Economics and Finance,vol. 12 (September), pp. 1-7. Hooker, Mark A. (2002)."Are Oil Shocks Inflationary? Asymmetric and Nonlinear Specifications versus Changes in Regime,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,vol. 34 (May), pp. 540-61. Ihrig, Jane, Steven Kamin, Deborah Lindner, and Jaime Marquez (forthcoming). “Some Simple Tests of the Globalization and Inflation Hypothesis,” International Finance Discussion Papers. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Levin, Andrew T., and Jeremy M. Piger (2004)."Is Inflation Persistence Intrinsic in Industrial Economies?" (1.0 MB PDF)ECB Working Paper Series 334. Frankfurt, Germany: European Central Bank, April. Marazzi, Mario, Nathan Sheets, Robert J. Vigfusson, Jon Faust, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jaime Marquez, Robert F. Martin, Trevor A. Reeve, and John H. Rogers (2005)."Exchange Rate Pass-Through to U.S. Import Prices: Some New Evidence,"International Finance Discussion Papers 833. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April. Nason, James M. (2006)."Instability in U.S. Inflation: 1967-2005,"Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,Economic Review,vol. 91 (Second Quarter), pp. 39-59. Okun, Arthur M. (1978)."Efficient Disinflationary Policies,"American Economic Review,vol. 68 (May), pp. 348-52. O’Reilly, Gerard, and Karl Whelan (2005)."Has Euro-Area Inflation Persistence Changed over Time?"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 87 (November), pp. 709-20. Roberts, John M. (2006)."Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 2 (September), pp. 193-230. Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer (2002). "The Evolution of Economic Understanding and Postwar Stabilization Policy," inRethinking Stabilization Policy,proceedings of a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 29-31, pp. 11-78. Rudebusch, Glenn D. (2005)."Assessing the Lucas Critique in Monetary Policy Models,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 37(April), pp. 247-72. Sargent, Thomas J. (2000).The Conquest of American Inflation.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Sekine, Toshitaka (2006)."Time-Varying Exchange Rate Pass-Through: Experiences of Some Industrial Countries,"BIS Working Paper 202. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, March. Stock, James, and Mark Watson (2007). "Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,vol. 39 (February), pp. 3-34. Williams, John C. (2006). "The Phillips Curve in an Era of Well-Anchored Inflation Expectations," unpublished working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, September. Footnotes 1.I want to thank Michael Kiley, Jean-Philippe Laforte, Deborah Lindner, David Reifschneider, John Roberts, and Jeremy Rudd for their extremely helpful comments and assistance on this speech.Return to text 2.Two recent studies that report a marked decline in inflation persistence in the United States are Nason (2006) and Williams (2006). Their findings should be treated carefully, however, as analysis by the staff of the Federal Reserve Board suggests that modest changes in methodology, such as lengthening the sample period, correcting for small-sample bias, or changing the particular price index used in the analysis, can alter both the magnitude and the statistical significance of the estimated decline in persistence.Return to text 3.Levin and Piger (2004) find significant declines in inflation persistence since the 1980s for the major European economies as well as for Japan, Canada, Australia and New Zealand. However, O’Reilly and Whelan (2005) find little or no evidence for a recent decline in persistence for the euro area as a whole.Return to text 4.Studies that present evidence of a marked decline in the sensitivity of U.S. inflation to unemployment and other measures of resource utilization include Roberts (2006) and Williams (2006). Unpublished work by staff at the Federal Reserve Board indicates that this result generally holds across a variety of regression specifications, estimation methods, and data definitions. Other studies find similar declines in many foreign industrial economies; see, among others, Borio and Filardo (2006) and Ihrig and others (forthcoming). However, the empirical evidence on this question is such that the exact magnitude, timing, and statistical significance of these changes remain a subject of debate.Return to text 5.Hooker (2002) finds that oil price movements during the 1980s and 1990s had little or no effect on core inflation, in contrast to a substantial influence in previous decades. Recent empirical work carried out at the Federal Reserve Board confirms Hooker’s findings using data through 2006; however, some of this work also hints that the surge in energy prices since 2004 may have had a larger influence on core inflation.Return to text 6.Interestingly, Ihrig and others (forthcoming) find that the sensitivity of inflation to movements in import prices has fallen in several foreign industrial economies.Return to text 7.For evidence on U.S. exchange rate pass-through effects, see Marazzi and others (2005). Hellerstein, Daly, and Marsh (2006) also find that pass-through has declined in the United States, although by a considerably smaller amount. Empirical results for other developed countries are reported in Sekine (2006).Return to text 8.The FRB/US series splices data from two surveys of expected long-run inflation--the Hoey survey of financial market participants from 1981 through 1989, and the Survey of Professional Forecasters from 1990 on. After splicing, a 50-basis-point constant factor is subtracted from the series to put it on a PCE price index basis, on the assumption that survey respondents reported their expectation for CPI inflation, not PCE inflation. (The average wedge between CPI inflation and PCE inflation was about 50 basis points from 1980 through 2006.) I have made a similar adjustment to the Livingston survey data plotted in figure 3 to put it on a PCE price basis.Return to text 9.Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000) make a similar argument, but for a dissenting view, see Rudebusch (2005).Return to text 10.This is why Milton Friedman’sTheory of the Consumption Functionis one of my favorite pieces of empirical research. What is extraordinary about this book is that it has only a handful of regressions but nonetheless shows that the basic idea of permanent income has to be right because the theory explains numerous facts derived from numerous studies. This book is not widely read by graduate students nowadays, but it should be.Return to text 11.See Borio and Filardo (2006) and Ihrig and others (forthcoming) for opposing views on this issue. Borio and Filardo provide evidence that global output gaps may be just as important as conventional domestic output gaps in the determination of inflation; moreover, they argue that these effects have been rising over time. However, Ihrig and her co-authors find that Borio and Filardo’s results are sensitive to small changes in specification; they also find little support for an independent role of global output gaps and no evidence that globalization can account for falling coefficients on domestic gaps.Return to text 12.Okun (1978) estimated that a 10 percent reduction in real GDP for one year would reduce the inflation rate only 1.0 percentage point. By the mid-1980s, however, Federal Reserve Board staff estimates of the sacrifice ratio were roughly half as large.Return to text 13.Recently, the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) has begun to report long-run expectations for the PCE price index as well as the CPI. Long-run expectations for PCE price inflation were 2 percent in the latest release, the same rate as indicated by the FRB/US estimate since the late 1990s. (The FRB/US estimate since 1991 derives from the SPF reading on expected long-run CPI inflation less an average historical wedge between the CPI measure and the PCE measure of inflation of about 50 basis points.) Interestingly, long-run expectations for CPI inflation in the SPF ticked down to 2-1/3 percent in the latest survey, suggesting that private forecasters may have lowered their estimate of the average CPI-PCE wedge to about 30 basis points. Such a revision would be in line with current Board staff estimates, which indicate that the wedge has declined in recent years and now stands at about 30 basis points.Return to text 14.Inflation compensation--the difference between nominal and indexed Treasury yields--has recently been about 2-1/2 percent. However, two adjustments are necessary to translate inflation compensation into an estimate of expected long-term inflation on a PCE price basis. First, because the difference between nominal and indexed yields equals the sum of inflation expectations and an inflation term premium, we must subtract an estimate of the premium. Given that term premiums on nominal Treasury yields are extremely low at present, the inflation term premium is probably less than 25 basis points currently, and could even be zero. Second, because the inflation series used to index the Treasury securities is the CPI, not the PCE price index, we must subtract an estimate of the wedge between the two measures of inflation. If we use the same 30 basis points wedge expected by private forecasters in the latest reading from the SPF, indexed and nominal yields appear to be consistent with expected long-term PCE inflation of about 2 percent or a little higher.Return to text 15.According to the Reuters/Michigan survey, long-term inflation expectations of households are currently around 3 percent, as they have been for the past few years. This survey does not specify a price index. However, expectations from the companion one-year-ahead expectations have come in about 75 basis points higher than actual PCE inflation since 1990, suggesting that there may be a systematic bias in the responses to the Reuters/Michigan survey relative to this measure of inflation. If this bias also applies to longer-run inflation expectations, then household expectations may be in line with PCE inflation running in the vicinity of 2-1/4 percent in the long run.Return to text
Governor Randall S. Kroszner To the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, Washington, D.C. I’m pleased to be here today to participate in this discussion about liquidity and monetary policy. Apparently many others are having a similar discussion--a quick search of LexisNexis turned up 2,795 separate articles in the past six months alone that mentioned the word "liquidity" in the context of its abundance in financial markets. The use of the term liquidity in these articles spans a wide variety of meanings--perhaps 2,795 of them! Rather than grapple with the definition of the rather slippery concept of liquidity in my short remarks here, I will focus on aspects ofglobalfinancial markets that many analysts associate with liquidity and that are particularly relevant for monetary policy--namely, the relatively low level of long-term interest rates in both real and nominal terms and the resulting relatively flat slope of yield curves around the world.1I want to emphasize that, given the openness of capital markets, explanations of these phenomena should have an international component. I will argue that the flatness of the term structure reflects both the global balance of saving and investment, through its effect on real interest rates, and currency competition, through its effect on expected inflation and inflation risk. I should note at the outset that the views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. Of course, flat and even inverted yield curves in advanced economies are nothing new. We know that the short end of the yield curve is dominated by monetary policy and cyclical factors. To abstract from the potential effects of cyclical factors on the yield curve, consider the pattern of forward rates many years into the future, at which point the effects of current cyclical shocks would be expected to no longer be important.2Such forward rates reflect not only market expectations of future short-term interest rates but also term premiums to compensate for the risk associated with commitments to extend credit so far in the future, including the risk of future inflation. The short-term forward rate ten years ahead estimated from the yield curve for U.S. Treasury coupon securities has ranged between 4-3/4 percent and 5-3/4 percent over the past year, nearly 175 basis points (that is, about 1-3/4 percent) below its average level since 1990. Far-forward rates in many other advanced economies have also declined on balance over the past decade, and they are currently around the low end of their historical ranges.3 Low far-forward rates have both a real and a nominal component. I believe that relatively low real forward rates are likely driven at least in part by what some have called a global saving glut.4That is, high rates of saving relative to investment in other parts of the world have resulted in a relatively large stock of funds seeking investment outlets around the globe. The resulting strength of demand has kept real long-term interest rates lower than they might otherwise have been in many countries, and particularly in the United States because it is a relatively attractive place to invest. In addition, the lower variability in real macroeconomic variables over the past two decades relative to the previous three decades, often dubbed the "Great Moderation," may well have trimmed real term premiums relative to their past levels. Let’s now consider possible reasons for relatively low nominal far-forward rates and, as a consequence, relatively flat (or in some cases) inverted yield curves. I will emphasize three significant changes in most countries around the world that point to a reduction in the compensation required by investors for the possible effects of future inflation on the returns to holding long-term bonds: Namely, declines in (1) actual inflation, (2) inflation volatility, and (3) expectations of long-term inflation, both survey based and "market based." These worldwide effects have been particularly pronounced in emerging markets. What I have elsewhere referred to as "currency competition" may be a driving force behind these changes in inflation outcomes and expectations and may be reflected in low nominal long-term interest rates and the flattening of yield curves.5I’d like to briefly review what I mean by currency competition. A confluence of four factors--deregulation, globalization, financial innovation, and the public’s increased understanding of the costs of inflation--has fostered a form of competition among currencies. That competition, in turn, has led to improved central bank performance and thereby contributed to the recent conquest of worldwide inflation. The factors that drive currency competition are closely related and mutually reinforcing in many respects. Increased competition among currencies, driven by the confluence of factors that I just described, has improved central bank performance by changing the ability and the incentives of governments and central banks to pursue high-inflation policies. In effect, currency competition has raised the costs of poor policy and thus promoted central bank incentives to maintain low inflation. This change has led many governments to be more willing to adopt institutional changes to improve central bank governance that have bolstered central bank credibility for maintaining low inflation. Such changes have included greater central bank independence, which has typically been granted in conjunction with a mandate including the achievement of low and stable inflation as one of the goals of monetary policy. That is, policy is credible because the central bank’s objectives are clear to the public and because the central bank can be held accountable for failing to achieve its objectives. When citizens are more aware of the costs of inflation, and when governments are less able to reap benefits from high inflation, institutional reforms that make central banks more credible and independent are more likely to be adopted and sustained.7 Let me make it clear that I think that currency competition has been a much larger force in emerging-market economies, in which the costs of poor policies have been demonstrated quite clearly, than in advanced economies. Still, at least some degree of currency competition may be at work in the United States as well: One could argue that competition faced by the dollar, particularly abroad, is likely greater now than before the introduction of the euro because of the scale of euro-denominated financial markets and the financial institutions in the euro area, but I would not want to push that argument too far. The forces behind currency competition that have bolstered incentives for central banks to maintain low inflation and so have helped anchor inflation expectations are likely to persist and perhaps strengthen. The ease with which funds move across capital markets should continue to ensure that the responses to inflationary central bank policies will be swift and significant. The resulting incentives provided by currency competition should continue to foster relatively low far-forward nominal interest rates in many countries. As long as capital markets remain open and people remain aware of the costs of high inflation policies, I believe that the forces behind the low level of long-term interest rates and hence the general flatness of yield curves around the globe will tend to persist for some time. Footnotes 1.For more discussion, see Alan Greenspan (2005), "The Federal Reserve Board’s Monetary Policy Report to the Congress," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 16, www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/hh/. See also Randall S. Kroszner (2006), "Why Are Yield Curves So Flat and Long Rates So Low Globally?" speech delivered at a meeting of the Institute of International Bankers, New York, June 16, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/2006speech.htm.Return to text 2.If you could borrow and lend at the same rate as the U.S. Treasury, then you could lock in a three-month loan ten years from now by borrowing for ten years and three months and simultaneously lending the same principal for ten years. The difference between the interest you pay and the interest you earn on the transaction determines the implied forward rate ten years from today.Return to text 3.Far-forward rates in yen are up almost 2 percentage points from their historic lows in the second quarter of 2003, but they are at a level that is obviously still low in a historical context.Return to text 4.See Ben S. Bernanke (2005), "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit," Sandridge Lecture delivered at a meeting of the Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Va., March 10, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/2005speech.htm.Return to text 5.See Randall S. Kroszner (2006), "The Conquest of Worldwide Inflation: Currency Competition and Its Implications for Interest Rates and the Yield Curve," speech delivered at the Cato Institute Monetary Policy Conference, Washington, November 16, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/2006speech.htm.Return to text 6.For emerging-market countries that had experienced high inflations, another aspect of globalization fostering currency competition is the amount of physical dollars now present in these countries that allow citizens to conduct transactions and store liquid wealth without holding the local currency. Over one recent period, the fraction of U.S. currency estimated to be held in foreign countries rose dramatically, from less than 20 percent in 1980 to as much as two-thirds in the late 1990s, and today the total nominal amount is in the neighborhood of $400 billion. See U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and U.S. Secret Service (2006),The Use and Counterfeiting of United States Currency Abroad, Part 3, report to the Congress (Washington: Department of the Treasury), October 25, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/other/20061025a.htm.Return to text 7.In a paper with Douglas Irwin, I documented a similar dynamic at work in the gradual reversal of protectionist policies in the United States in the 1930s and 1940s. See Douglas A. Irwin and Randall S. Kroszner (1999), "Interests, Institutions, and Ideology in Securing Policy Change: The Republican Conversion to Trade Liberalization after Smoot-Hawley,"Journal of Law and Economics,vol. 42 (October), pp. 643–73.Return to text
Governor Kevin Warsh At the Institute of International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington, D.C. Thank you to the Institute of International Bankers for inviting me to speak about liquidity in U.S. financial markets. Certainly, trading activity in recent days has brought additional attention to the subject of market liquidity. It is not my purpose, however, to opine on these very recent market moves--a comprehensive understanding of which may depend on consequent market developments and the fullness of time. I would only note that while premiums on riskier assets rose some last week, markets are functioning well amid higher volatility, market discipline appears effective as investors are reviewing their positions, and overall liquidity does not appear to be in short supply. The balance of my remarks will focus on financial market liquidity from a somewhat broader and longer-term perspective.In recent quarters, we witnessed very strong credit markets, bulging pipelines for leveraged loan and high-yield bond issuance, and near-record low credit spreads. Structured fixed-income products proliferated, and the investor universe expanded to match new supply. Global investment flows were proven noteworthy for the lack of home-country bias. Managers of private pools of capital--in all of its forms, private equity firms, alternative asset management companies, hedge funds, and investment banks--increased funding from many sources and through many structures. Due in no small measure to strong credit markets, leveraged transactions increased and the market for corporate control became increasingly robust.Fund managers of private pools of capital seized upon this opportunity to acquire more-permanent sources of capital: extending lock-up periods; using retail platforms and co-investment funds to increase ‘stickiness’ of contributed capital; securing greater financing flexibility from prime brokers; accessing the private placement markets; and selling public shares of limited and general partnership interests to new investors; to name just a few.Key questions remain: Is liquidity at strong and sustainable levels, justified by economic fundamentals? What is likely to be the liquidity trend going forward? In today’s remarks, I will first propose a definition of market liquidity based on what I believe is its most fundamental characteristic. I will then discuss the primary sources of liquidity in the U.S. capital markets, and attempt to interpret signals from financial asset prices in this environment. I will conclude by discussing implications for the economy and policymakers.1Liquidity: What is It?The traditional concept of liquidity relates to trading: An asset’s liquidity is defined by its ability to be transformed into another asset without loss of value. This definition is sufficiently general to encompass many ideas. Some assets, such as “money” are used to trade goods and services without diminution in value, and therefore are highly liquid. Indeed, when different measures of the money supply were established, it was with an eye toward determining the liquidity of the underlying assets; as an example, components of M1 were considered more liquid than those in M2. It is in this sense that some observers view the stock of money as a measure of liquidity, and changes in these measures as roughly equivalent to changes in liquidity. I doubt, however, that traditional monetary aggregates can adequately capture the form and structure of liquidity many observe in the financial markets today. Instead, market observers are more likely to be referring to liquidity in broader terms, incorporating notions of credit availability, fund flows, asset prices, and leverage.As noted, ‘liquidity’ in the sense of “trading liquidity” reflects the ability to transact quickly without exerting a material effect on prices. Liquidity is optimally achieved when myriad buyers and sellers are ready and willing to trade. The trading is enhanced by market-makers and speculators alike. Underlying this concept is that while buyers and sellers have different views on the most likely outcomes--that is, after all what generates trading--they largely can agree on the distributions of possible outcomes for which they demand risk-based compensation.Consider liquidity, then, in terms of investor confidence. Liquidity exists when investors are confident in their ability to transact and where risks are quantifiable. Moreover, liquidity exists when investors are creditworthy. When considered in terms of confidence, liquidity conditions can be assessed through the risk premiums on financial assets and the magnitude of capital flows. In general, high liquidity is generally accompanied by low risk premiums. Investors’ confidence in risk measures is greater when the perceived quantity and variance of risks are low.This view highlights both the risks and rewards of liquidity. The benefits of greater liquidity are substantial, through higher asset prices and more efficient transfer of funds from savers to borrowers. Historical episodes indicate, however, that markets can become far less liquid due to increases in investor risk aversion and uncertainty. While policymakers and market participants know with certainty that these episodes will occur, they must be humble in their ability to predict the timing, scope, and duration of these periods of financial distress. Recall the market turmoil related to events in Asian financial markets in 1997 and following the Russian bond default in the summer of 1998. Investors flocked to “on-the-run” Treasuries, and risk spreads for high-yield corporate and emerging market bonds spiked. Chairman Greenspan described these episodes as an apparent collapse in investors’ understanding of possible future risks, despite what appeared to be mild imbalances, which led to “disengagement” by traders.2Therefore, I wish to advance a simple proposition: Liquidity is confidence. That is, powerful liquidity in the U.S. capital markets is evidenced when the economic outcomes are believed to be benign. When the “tail” outcomes are either highly improbable or, at the very least, subject to reasonably precise measurement, the conditions are ripe for liquidity to be plentiful. When fund flows are strong and growing, there is little reason to expect trading positions to become inalienable. My goal in proffering this proposition is to improve the discourse by reducing the different notions of liquidity to its most fundamental feature. This exercise may also serve as a healthy reminder: If unmoored from fundamentals, confidence can give way to complacency, complacency can undermine market discipline and liquidity can falter unexpectedly. If, to the contrary, confidence is justified by real economic determinants, liquidity can flourish.Of course, some might disagree with this definition of liquidity. They may argue that any excess liquidity in financial markets results from too little capital investment, here and abroad, which may arise from a lack of confidence in future economic outcomes. For example, high cash balances at U.S. corporations can be interpreted as indicating a lack of confidence in investment prospects. Previously, however, I argued that while the build-up of cash since 2002 has been unusual, the most pressing determinant was not uncertainty about the profit potential of capital investment.3Instead, corporate cash positions are explained more significantly by profits retained at foreign subsidiaries, and a sharper focus by investors and ratings agencies on companies’ abilities to finance short-term liabilities internally.Current Sources of Market LiquidityLet me discuss sources of liquidity of the U.S. financial markets. By my proposed definition, we must ask what forces have increased liquidity (read: confidence) in the United States over the course of the last couple of decades. I will turn, first, to two key drivers of liquidity: rapid financial innovation and strong economic performance. A third important source of liquidity--resulting from the excess savings of emerging-market economies and those with large commodity reserves--has also found its way to the United States in pursuit of high risk-adjusted returns. We must judge the extent to which each of these three liquidity drivers are structural or cyclical, more persistent or more temporary. Understanding the sources of liquidity--and the causes thereof--should help inform judgments about the level and direction of market liquidity. In so doing, we may better understand its implications for the economy and policymakers alike.First, liquidity is significantly higher than it would otherwise be due to the proliferation of financial products and innovation by financial providers. This extraordinary growth itself is made possible by remarkable improvements in risk-management techniques. Hewing to my proposed definition, we could equally state that financial innovation has been made possible by high levels of confidence in the strength and integrity of our financial infrastructure, markets, and laws. Moreover, remarkable competition among commercial banks, securities firms, and other credit intermediaries have helped expand access to--and lower the all-in-cost of--credit. Interest rate risk and credit risk exposures are now more diversified.Look no further than dramatic growth of the derivatives markets. In just the past four years, notional amounts outstanding of interest rate swaps and options tripled, and outstanding credit default swaps surged more than ten-fold. These products allow investors to hedge and unwind positions easily without having to transact in cash markets, expanding the participant pool.Syndication and securitization also lead to greater risk distribution. Commercial and industrial (C&I) lending potential has expanded with the adoption of syndication practices, allowing credit risks to be spread across a greater number of participating banks and nonbank lenders. Perhaps an even more significant support for the expansion of C&I loans is the rapid growth of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs)--special purpose entities that buy C&I loans with funds raised from investors seeking different risk exposures. CLOs allow loans to be financed primarily with high-rated debt securities issued to institutions like mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies. Indeed, in recent years, the share of syndicated C&I term loans funded by institutional investors is estimated to have exceeded that funded by commercial banks.For CLO structures to be effective, they invariably must include a more risky equity tranche. Even the most sophisticated financial products are not immune to the physical Law of Conservation of Matter--the risk must rest somewhere. Hedge funds reportedly have served as willing buyers of these riskier positions, and we are all aware of their phenomenal growth. Now, more than 4,000 hedge funds hold assets of about $1-1/2 trillion. As important as the participation of hedge funds, the derivative products themselves allow credit risk to be hedged, which has the beneficial effect of further increasing the pool of other investors as well. The increase in financial product and provider innovation appears to be quite persistent; future trends, however, are likely to be significantly influenced by legal, regulatory, and other public policies.The second factor, perhaps equally persistent, supporting strong investor confidence in U.S. markets has been our economy’s strong macroeconomic performance. Researchers have documented the so-called “Great Moderation” in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product (GDP) and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. In theory, reduced volatility, if perceived to be persistent, can support higher asset valuations--and lower risk premiums--as investors require less compensation for risks about expected growth and inflation. In this manner, confidence appears to beget confidence, with recent history giving some measure of plausibility to the notion that very bad macroeconomic outcomes can be avoided. The Great Moderation, however, is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a description--an ex post explanation of a period of relative prosperity. If policymakers and market participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor.Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text In recent quarters, we witnessed very strong credit markets, bulging pipelines for leveraged loan and high-yield bond issuance, and near-record low credit spreads. Structured fixed-income products proliferated, and the investor universe expanded to match new supply. Global investment flows were proven noteworthy for the lack of home-country bias. Managers of private pools of capital--in all of its forms, private equity firms, alternative asset management companies, hedge funds, and investment banks--increased funding from many sources and through many structures. Due in no small measure to strong credit markets, leveraged transactions increased and the market for corporate control became increasingly robust.Fund managers of private pools of capital seized upon this opportunity to acquire more-permanent sources of capital: extending lock-up periods; using retail platforms and co-investment funds to increase ‘stickiness’ of contributed capital; securing greater financing flexibility from prime brokers; accessing the private placement markets; and selling public shares of limited and general partnership interests to new investors; to name just a few.Key questions remain: Is liquidity at strong and sustainable levels, justified by economic fundamentals? What is likely to be the liquidity trend going forward? In today’s remarks, I will first propose a definition of market liquidity based on what I believe is its most fundamental characteristic. I will then discuss the primary sources of liquidity in the U.S. capital markets, and attempt to interpret signals from financial asset prices in this environment. I will conclude by discussing implications for the economy and policymakers.1Liquidity: What is It?The traditional concept of liquidity relates to trading: An asset’s liquidity is defined by its ability to be transformed into another asset without loss of value. This definition is sufficiently general to encompass many ideas. Some assets, such as “money” are used to trade goods and services without diminution in value, and therefore are highly liquid. Indeed, when different measures of the money supply were established, it was with an eye toward determining the liquidity of the underlying assets; as an example, components of M1 were considered more liquid than those in M2. It is in this sense that some observers view the stock of money as a measure of liquidity, and changes in these measures as roughly equivalent to changes in liquidity. I doubt, however, that traditional monetary aggregates can adequately capture the form and structure of liquidity many observe in the financial markets today. Instead, market observers are more likely to be referring to liquidity in broader terms, incorporating notions of credit availability, fund flows, asset prices, and leverage.As noted, ‘liquidity’ in the sense of “trading liquidity” reflects the ability to transact quickly without exerting a material effect on prices. Liquidity is optimally achieved when myriad buyers and sellers are ready and willing to trade. The trading is enhanced by market-makers and speculators alike. Underlying this concept is that while buyers and sellers have different views on the most likely outcomes--that is, after all what generates trading--they largely can agree on the distributions of possible outcomes for which they demand risk-based compensation.Consider liquidity, then, in terms of investor confidence. Liquidity exists when investors are confident in their ability to transact and where risks are quantifiable. Moreover, liquidity exists when investors are creditworthy. When considered in terms of confidence, liquidity conditions can be assessed through the risk premiums on financial assets and the magnitude of capital flows. In general, high liquidity is generally accompanied by low risk premiums. Investors’ confidence in risk measures is greater when the perceived quantity and variance of risks are low.This view highlights both the risks and rewards of liquidity. The benefits of greater liquidity are substantial, through higher asset prices and more efficient transfer of funds from savers to borrowers. Historical episodes indicate, however, that markets can become far less liquid due to increases in investor risk aversion and uncertainty. While policymakers and market participants know with certainty that these episodes will occur, they must be humble in their ability to predict the timing, scope, and duration of these periods of financial distress. Recall the market turmoil related to events in Asian financial markets in 1997 and following the Russian bond default in the summer of 1998. Investors flocked to “on-the-run” Treasuries, and risk spreads for high-yield corporate and emerging market bonds spiked. Chairman Greenspan described these episodes as an apparent collapse in investors’ understanding of possible future risks, despite what appeared to be mild imbalances, which led to “disengagement” by traders.2Therefore, I wish to advance a simple proposition: Liquidity is confidence. That is, powerful liquidity in the U.S. capital markets is evidenced when the economic outcomes are believed to be benign. When the “tail” outcomes are either highly improbable or, at the very least, subject to reasonably precise measurement, the conditions are ripe for liquidity to be plentiful. When fund flows are strong and growing, there is little reason to expect trading positions to become inalienable. My goal in proffering this proposition is to improve the discourse by reducing the different notions of liquidity to its most fundamental feature. This exercise may also serve as a healthy reminder: If unmoored from fundamentals, confidence can give way to complacency, complacency can undermine market discipline and liquidity can falter unexpectedly. If, to the contrary, confidence is justified by real economic determinants, liquidity can flourish.Of course, some might disagree with this definition of liquidity. They may argue that any excess liquidity in financial markets results from too little capital investment, here and abroad, which may arise from a lack of confidence in future economic outcomes. For example, high cash balances at U.S. corporations can be interpreted as indicating a lack of confidence in investment prospects. Previously, however, I argued that while the build-up of cash since 2002 has been unusual, the most pressing determinant was not uncertainty about the profit potential of capital investment.3Instead, corporate cash positions are explained more significantly by profits retained at foreign subsidiaries, and a sharper focus by investors and ratings agencies on companies’ abilities to finance short-term liabilities internally.Current Sources of Market LiquidityLet me discuss sources of liquidity of the U.S. financial markets. By my proposed definition, we must ask what forces have increased liquidity (read: confidence) in the United States over the course of the last couple of decades. I will turn, first, to two key drivers of liquidity: rapid financial innovation and strong economic performance. A third important source of liquidity--resulting from the excess savings of emerging-market economies and those with large commodity reserves--has also found its way to the United States in pursuit of high risk-adjusted returns. We must judge the extent to which each of these three liquidity drivers are structural or cyclical, more persistent or more temporary. Understanding the sources of liquidity--and the causes thereof--should help inform judgments about the level and direction of market liquidity. In so doing, we may better understand its implications for the economy and policymakers alike.First, liquidity is significantly higher than it would otherwise be due to the proliferation of financial products and innovation by financial providers. This extraordinary growth itself is made possible by remarkable improvements in risk-management techniques. Hewing to my proposed definition, we could equally state that financial innovation has been made possible by high levels of confidence in the strength and integrity of our financial infrastructure, markets, and laws. Moreover, remarkable competition among commercial banks, securities firms, and other credit intermediaries have helped expand access to--and lower the all-in-cost of--credit. Interest rate risk and credit risk exposures are now more diversified.Look no further than dramatic growth of the derivatives markets. In just the past four years, notional amounts outstanding of interest rate swaps and options tripled, and outstanding credit default swaps surged more than ten-fold. These products allow investors to hedge and unwind positions easily without having to transact in cash markets, expanding the participant pool.Syndication and securitization also lead to greater risk distribution. Commercial and industrial (C&I) lending potential has expanded with the adoption of syndication practices, allowing credit risks to be spread across a greater number of participating banks and nonbank lenders. Perhaps an even more significant support for the expansion of C&I loans is the rapid growth of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs)--special purpose entities that buy C&I loans with funds raised from investors seeking different risk exposures. CLOs allow loans to be financed primarily with high-rated debt securities issued to institutions like mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies. Indeed, in recent years, the share of syndicated C&I term loans funded by institutional investors is estimated to have exceeded that funded by commercial banks.For CLO structures to be effective, they invariably must include a more risky equity tranche. Even the most sophisticated financial products are not immune to the physical Law of Conservation of Matter--the risk must rest somewhere. Hedge funds reportedly have served as willing buyers of these riskier positions, and we are all aware of their phenomenal growth. Now, more than 4,000 hedge funds hold assets of about $1-1/2 trillion. As important as the participation of hedge funds, the derivative products themselves allow credit risk to be hedged, which has the beneficial effect of further increasing the pool of other investors as well. The increase in financial product and provider innovation appears to be quite persistent; future trends, however, are likely to be significantly influenced by legal, regulatory, and other public policies.The second factor, perhaps equally persistent, supporting strong investor confidence in U.S. markets has been our economy’s strong macroeconomic performance. Researchers have documented the so-called “Great Moderation” in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product (GDP) and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. In theory, reduced volatility, if perceived to be persistent, can support higher asset valuations--and lower risk premiums--as investors require less compensation for risks about expected growth and inflation. In this manner, confidence appears to beget confidence, with recent history giving some measure of plausibility to the notion that very bad macroeconomic outcomes can be avoided. The Great Moderation, however, is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a description--an ex post explanation of a period of relative prosperity. If policymakers and market participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor.Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Fund managers of private pools of capital seized upon this opportunity to acquire more-permanent sources of capital: extending lock-up periods; using retail platforms and co-investment funds to increase ‘stickiness’ of contributed capital; securing greater financing flexibility from prime brokers; accessing the private placement markets; and selling public shares of limited and general partnership interests to new investors; to name just a few.Key questions remain: Is liquidity at strong and sustainable levels, justified by economic fundamentals? What is likely to be the liquidity trend going forward? In today’s remarks, I will first propose a definition of market liquidity based on what I believe is its most fundamental characteristic. I will then discuss the primary sources of liquidity in the U.S. capital markets, and attempt to interpret signals from financial asset prices in this environment. I will conclude by discussing implications for the economy and policymakers.1Liquidity: What is It?The traditional concept of liquidity relates to trading: An asset’s liquidity is defined by its ability to be transformed into another asset without loss of value. This definition is sufficiently general to encompass many ideas. Some assets, such as “money” are used to trade goods and services without diminution in value, and therefore are highly liquid. Indeed, when different measures of the money supply were established, it was with an eye toward determining the liquidity of the underlying assets; as an example, components of M1 were considered more liquid than those in M2. It is in this sense that some observers view the stock of money as a measure of liquidity, and changes in these measures as roughly equivalent to changes in liquidity. I doubt, however, that traditional monetary aggregates can adequately capture the form and structure of liquidity many observe in the financial markets today. Instead, market observers are more likely to be referring to liquidity in broader terms, incorporating notions of credit availability, fund flows, asset prices, and leverage.As noted, ‘liquidity’ in the sense of “trading liquidity” reflects the ability to transact quickly without exerting a material effect on prices. Liquidity is optimally achieved when myriad buyers and sellers are ready and willing to trade. The trading is enhanced by market-makers and speculators alike. Underlying this concept is that while buyers and sellers have different views on the most likely outcomes--that is, after all what generates trading--they largely can agree on the distributions of possible outcomes for which they demand risk-based compensation.Consider liquidity, then, in terms of investor confidence. Liquidity exists when investors are confident in their ability to transact and where risks are quantifiable. Moreover, liquidity exists when investors are creditworthy. When considered in terms of confidence, liquidity conditions can be assessed through the risk premiums on financial assets and the magnitude of capital flows. In general, high liquidity is generally accompanied by low risk premiums. Investors’ confidence in risk measures is greater when the perceived quantity and variance of risks are low.This view highlights both the risks and rewards of liquidity. The benefits of greater liquidity are substantial, through higher asset prices and more efficient transfer of funds from savers to borrowers. Historical episodes indicate, however, that markets can become far less liquid due to increases in investor risk aversion and uncertainty. While policymakers and market participants know with certainty that these episodes will occur, they must be humble in their ability to predict the timing, scope, and duration of these periods of financial distress. Recall the market turmoil related to events in Asian financial markets in 1997 and following the Russian bond default in the summer of 1998. Investors flocked to “on-the-run” Treasuries, and risk spreads for high-yield corporate and emerging market bonds spiked. Chairman Greenspan described these episodes as an apparent collapse in investors’ understanding of possible future risks, despite what appeared to be mild imbalances, which led to “disengagement” by traders.2Therefore, I wish to advance a simple proposition: Liquidity is confidence. That is, powerful liquidity in the U.S. capital markets is evidenced when the economic outcomes are believed to be benign. When the “tail” outcomes are either highly improbable or, at the very least, subject to reasonably precise measurement, the conditions are ripe for liquidity to be plentiful. When fund flows are strong and growing, there is little reason to expect trading positions to become inalienable. My goal in proffering this proposition is to improve the discourse by reducing the different notions of liquidity to its most fundamental feature. This exercise may also serve as a healthy reminder: If unmoored from fundamentals, confidence can give way to complacency, complacency can undermine market discipline and liquidity can falter unexpectedly. If, to the contrary, confidence is justified by real economic determinants, liquidity can flourish.Of course, some might disagree with this definition of liquidity. They may argue that any excess liquidity in financial markets results from too little capital investment, here and abroad, which may arise from a lack of confidence in future economic outcomes. For example, high cash balances at U.S. corporations can be interpreted as indicating a lack of confidence in investment prospects. Previously, however, I argued that while the build-up of cash since 2002 has been unusual, the most pressing determinant was not uncertainty about the profit potential of capital investment.3Instead, corporate cash positions are explained more significantly by profits retained at foreign subsidiaries, and a sharper focus by investors and ratings agencies on companies’ abilities to finance short-term liabilities internally.Current Sources of Market LiquidityLet me discuss sources of liquidity of the U.S. financial markets. By my proposed definition, we must ask what forces have increased liquidity (read: confidence) in the United States over the course of the last couple of decades. I will turn, first, to two key drivers of liquidity: rapid financial innovation and strong economic performance. A third important source of liquidity--resulting from the excess savings of emerging-market economies and those with large commodity reserves--has also found its way to the United States in pursuit of high risk-adjusted returns. We must judge the extent to which each of these three liquidity drivers are structural or cyclical, more persistent or more temporary. Understanding the sources of liquidity--and the causes thereof--should help inform judgments about the level and direction of market liquidity. In so doing, we may better understand its implications for the economy and policymakers alike.First, liquidity is significantly higher than it would otherwise be due to the proliferation of financial products and innovation by financial providers. This extraordinary growth itself is made possible by remarkable improvements in risk-management techniques. Hewing to my proposed definition, we could equally state that financial innovation has been made possible by high levels of confidence in the strength and integrity of our financial infrastructure, markets, and laws. Moreover, remarkable competition among commercial banks, securities firms, and other credit intermediaries have helped expand access to--and lower the all-in-cost of--credit. Interest rate risk and credit risk exposures are now more diversified.Look no further than dramatic growth of the derivatives markets. In just the past four years, notional amounts outstanding of interest rate swaps and options tripled, and outstanding credit default swaps surged more than ten-fold. These products allow investors to hedge and unwind positions easily without having to transact in cash markets, expanding the participant pool.Syndication and securitization also lead to greater risk distribution. Commercial and industrial (C&I) lending potential has expanded with the adoption of syndication practices, allowing credit risks to be spread across a greater number of participating banks and nonbank lenders. Perhaps an even more significant support for the expansion of C&I loans is the rapid growth of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs)--special purpose entities that buy C&I loans with funds raised from investors seeking different risk exposures. CLOs allow loans to be financed primarily with high-rated debt securities issued to institutions like mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies. Indeed, in recent years, the share of syndicated C&I term loans funded by institutional investors is estimated to have exceeded that funded by commercial banks.For CLO structures to be effective, they invariably must include a more risky equity tranche. Even the most sophisticated financial products are not immune to the physical Law of Conservation of Matter--the risk must rest somewhere. Hedge funds reportedly have served as willing buyers of these riskier positions, and we are all aware of their phenomenal growth. Now, more than 4,000 hedge funds hold assets of about $1-1/2 trillion. As important as the participation of hedge funds, the derivative products themselves allow credit risk to be hedged, which has the beneficial effect of further increasing the pool of other investors as well. The increase in financial product and provider innovation appears to be quite persistent; future trends, however, are likely to be significantly influenced by legal, regulatory, and other public policies.The second factor, perhaps equally persistent, supporting strong investor confidence in U.S. markets has been our economy’s strong macroeconomic performance. Researchers have documented the so-called “Great Moderation” in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product (GDP) and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. In theory, reduced volatility, if perceived to be persistent, can support higher asset valuations--and lower risk premiums--as investors require less compensation for risks about expected growth and inflation. In this manner, confidence appears to beget confidence, with recent history giving some measure of plausibility to the notion that very bad macroeconomic outcomes can be avoided. The Great Moderation, however, is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a description--an ex post explanation of a period of relative prosperity. If policymakers and market participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor.Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Key questions remain: Is liquidity at strong and sustainable levels, justified by economic fundamentals? What is likely to be the liquidity trend going forward? In today’s remarks, I will first propose a definition of market liquidity based on what I believe is its most fundamental characteristic. I will then discuss the primary sources of liquidity in the U.S. capital markets, and attempt to interpret signals from financial asset prices in this environment. I will conclude by discussing implications for the economy and policymakers.1Liquidity: What is It?The traditional concept of liquidity relates to trading: An asset’s liquidity is defined by its ability to be transformed into another asset without loss of value. This definition is sufficiently general to encompass many ideas. Some assets, such as “money” are used to trade goods and services without diminution in value, and therefore are highly liquid. Indeed, when different measures of the money supply were established, it was with an eye toward determining the liquidity of the underlying assets; as an example, components of M1 were considered more liquid than those in M2. It is in this sense that some observers view the stock of money as a measure of liquidity, and changes in these measures as roughly equivalent to changes in liquidity. I doubt, however, that traditional monetary aggregates can adequately capture the form and structure of liquidity many observe in the financial markets today. Instead, market observers are more likely to be referring to liquidity in broader terms, incorporating notions of credit availability, fund flows, asset prices, and leverage.As noted, ‘liquidity’ in the sense of “trading liquidity” reflects the ability to transact quickly without exerting a material effect on prices. Liquidity is optimally achieved when myriad buyers and sellers are ready and willing to trade. The trading is enhanced by market-makers and speculators alike. Underlying this concept is that while buyers and sellers have different views on the most likely outcomes--that is, after all what generates trading--they largely can agree on the distributions of possible outcomes for which they demand risk-based compensation.Consider liquidity, then, in terms of investor confidence. Liquidity exists when investors are confident in their ability to transact and where risks are quantifiable. Moreover, liquidity exists when investors are creditworthy. When considered in terms of confidence, liquidity conditions can be assessed through the risk premiums on financial assets and the magnitude of capital flows. In general, high liquidity is generally accompanied by low risk premiums. Investors’ confidence in risk measures is greater when the perceived quantity and variance of risks are low.This view highlights both the risks and rewards of liquidity. The benefits of greater liquidity are substantial, through higher asset prices and more efficient transfer of funds from savers to borrowers. Historical episodes indicate, however, that markets can become far less liquid due to increases in investor risk aversion and uncertainty. While policymakers and market participants know with certainty that these episodes will occur, they must be humble in their ability to predict the timing, scope, and duration of these periods of financial distress. Recall the market turmoil related to events in Asian financial markets in 1997 and following the Russian bond default in the summer of 1998. Investors flocked to “on-the-run” Treasuries, and risk spreads for high-yield corporate and emerging market bonds spiked. Chairman Greenspan described these episodes as an apparent collapse in investors’ understanding of possible future risks, despite what appeared to be mild imbalances, which led to “disengagement” by traders.2Therefore, I wish to advance a simple proposition: Liquidity is confidence. That is, powerful liquidity in the U.S. capital markets is evidenced when the economic outcomes are believed to be benign. When the “tail” outcomes are either highly improbable or, at the very least, subject to reasonably precise measurement, the conditions are ripe for liquidity to be plentiful. When fund flows are strong and growing, there is little reason to expect trading positions to become inalienable. My goal in proffering this proposition is to improve the discourse by reducing the different notions of liquidity to its most fundamental feature. This exercise may also serve as a healthy reminder: If unmoored from fundamentals, confidence can give way to complacency, complacency can undermine market discipline and liquidity can falter unexpectedly. If, to the contrary, confidence is justified by real economic determinants, liquidity can flourish.Of course, some might disagree with this definition of liquidity. They may argue that any excess liquidity in financial markets results from too little capital investment, here and abroad, which may arise from a lack of confidence in future economic outcomes. For example, high cash balances at U.S. corporations can be interpreted as indicating a lack of confidence in investment prospects. Previously, however, I argued that while the build-up of cash since 2002 has been unusual, the most pressing determinant was not uncertainty about the profit potential of capital investment.3Instead, corporate cash positions are explained more significantly by profits retained at foreign subsidiaries, and a sharper focus by investors and ratings agencies on companies’ abilities to finance short-term liabilities internally.Current Sources of Market LiquidityLet me discuss sources of liquidity of the U.S. financial markets. By my proposed definition, we must ask what forces have increased liquidity (read: confidence) in the United States over the course of the last couple of decades. I will turn, first, to two key drivers of liquidity: rapid financial innovation and strong economic performance. A third important source of liquidity--resulting from the excess savings of emerging-market economies and those with large commodity reserves--has also found its way to the United States in pursuit of high risk-adjusted returns. We must judge the extent to which each of these three liquidity drivers are structural or cyclical, more persistent or more temporary. Understanding the sources of liquidity--and the causes thereof--should help inform judgments about the level and direction of market liquidity. In so doing, we may better understand its implications for the economy and policymakers alike.First, liquidity is significantly higher than it would otherwise be due to the proliferation of financial products and innovation by financial providers. This extraordinary growth itself is made possible by remarkable improvements in risk-management techniques. Hewing to my proposed definition, we could equally state that financial innovation has been made possible by high levels of confidence in the strength and integrity of our financial infrastructure, markets, and laws. Moreover, remarkable competition among commercial banks, securities firms, and other credit intermediaries have helped expand access to--and lower the all-in-cost of--credit. Interest rate risk and credit risk exposures are now more diversified.Look no further than dramatic growth of the derivatives markets. In just the past four years, notional amounts outstanding of interest rate swaps and options tripled, and outstanding credit default swaps surged more than ten-fold. These products allow investors to hedge and unwind positions easily without having to transact in cash markets, expanding the participant pool.Syndication and securitization also lead to greater risk distribution. Commercial and industrial (C&I) lending potential has expanded with the adoption of syndication practices, allowing credit risks to be spread across a greater number of participating banks and nonbank lenders. Perhaps an even more significant support for the expansion of C&I loans is the rapid growth of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs)--special purpose entities that buy C&I loans with funds raised from investors seeking different risk exposures. CLOs allow loans to be financed primarily with high-rated debt securities issued to institutions like mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies. Indeed, in recent years, the share of syndicated C&I term loans funded by institutional investors is estimated to have exceeded that funded by commercial banks.For CLO structures to be effective, they invariably must include a more risky equity tranche. Even the most sophisticated financial products are not immune to the physical Law of Conservation of Matter--the risk must rest somewhere. Hedge funds reportedly have served as willing buyers of these riskier positions, and we are all aware of their phenomenal growth. Now, more than 4,000 hedge funds hold assets of about $1-1/2 trillion. As important as the participation of hedge funds, the derivative products themselves allow credit risk to be hedged, which has the beneficial effect of further increasing the pool of other investors as well. The increase in financial product and provider innovation appears to be quite persistent; future trends, however, are likely to be significantly influenced by legal, regulatory, and other public policies.The second factor, perhaps equally persistent, supporting strong investor confidence in U.S. markets has been our economy’s strong macroeconomic performance. Researchers have documented the so-called “Great Moderation” in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product (GDP) and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. In theory, reduced volatility, if perceived to be persistent, can support higher asset valuations--and lower risk premiums--as investors require less compensation for risks about expected growth and inflation. In this manner, confidence appears to beget confidence, with recent history giving some measure of plausibility to the notion that very bad macroeconomic outcomes can be avoided. The Great Moderation, however, is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a description--an ex post explanation of a period of relative prosperity. If policymakers and market participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor.Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Liquidity: What is It?The traditional concept of liquidity relates to trading: An asset’s liquidity is defined by its ability to be transformed into another asset without loss of value. This definition is sufficiently general to encompass many ideas. Some assets, such as “money” are used to trade goods and services without diminution in value, and therefore are highly liquid. Indeed, when different measures of the money supply were established, it was with an eye toward determining the liquidity of the underlying assets; as an example, components of M1 were considered more liquid than those in M2. It is in this sense that some observers view the stock of money as a measure of liquidity, and changes in these measures as roughly equivalent to changes in liquidity. I doubt, however, that traditional monetary aggregates can adequately capture the form and structure of liquidity many observe in the financial markets today. Instead, market observers are more likely to be referring to liquidity in broader terms, incorporating notions of credit availability, fund flows, asset prices, and leverage.As noted, ‘liquidity’ in the sense of “trading liquidity” reflects the ability to transact quickly without exerting a material effect on prices. Liquidity is optimally achieved when myriad buyers and sellers are ready and willing to trade. The trading is enhanced by market-makers and speculators alike. Underlying this concept is that while buyers and sellers have different views on the most likely outcomes--that is, after all what generates trading--they largely can agree on the distributions of possible outcomes for which they demand risk-based compensation.Consider liquidity, then, in terms of investor confidence. Liquidity exists when investors are confident in their ability to transact and where risks are quantifiable. Moreover, liquidity exists when investors are creditworthy. When considered in terms of confidence, liquidity conditions can be assessed through the risk premiums on financial assets and the magnitude of capital flows. In general, high liquidity is generally accompanied by low risk premiums. Investors’ confidence in risk measures is greater when the perceived quantity and variance of risks are low.This view highlights both the risks and rewards of liquidity. The benefits of greater liquidity are substantial, through higher asset prices and more efficient transfer of funds from savers to borrowers. Historical episodes indicate, however, that markets can become far less liquid due to increases in investor risk aversion and uncertainty. While policymakers and market participants know with certainty that these episodes will occur, they must be humble in their ability to predict the timing, scope, and duration of these periods of financial distress. Recall the market turmoil related to events in Asian financial markets in 1997 and following the Russian bond default in the summer of 1998. Investors flocked to “on-the-run” Treasuries, and risk spreads for high-yield corporate and emerging market bonds spiked. Chairman Greenspan described these episodes as an apparent collapse in investors’ understanding of possible future risks, despite what appeared to be mild imbalances, which led to “disengagement” by traders.2Therefore, I wish to advance a simple proposition: Liquidity is confidence. That is, powerful liquidity in the U.S. capital markets is evidenced when the economic outcomes are believed to be benign. When the “tail” outcomes are either highly improbable or, at the very least, subject to reasonably precise measurement, the conditions are ripe for liquidity to be plentiful. When fund flows are strong and growing, there is little reason to expect trading positions to become inalienable. My goal in proffering this proposition is to improve the discourse by reducing the different notions of liquidity to its most fundamental feature. This exercise may also serve as a healthy reminder: If unmoored from fundamentals, confidence can give way to complacency, complacency can undermine market discipline and liquidity can falter unexpectedly. If, to the contrary, confidence is justified by real economic determinants, liquidity can flourish.Of course, some might disagree with this definition of liquidity. They may argue that any excess liquidity in financial markets results from too little capital investment, here and abroad, which may arise from a lack of confidence in future economic outcomes. For example, high cash balances at U.S. corporations can be interpreted as indicating a lack of confidence in investment prospects. Previously, however, I argued that while the build-up of cash since 2002 has been unusual, the most pressing determinant was not uncertainty about the profit potential of capital investment.3Instead, corporate cash positions are explained more significantly by profits retained at foreign subsidiaries, and a sharper focus by investors and ratings agencies on companies’ abilities to finance short-term liabilities internally.Current Sources of Market LiquidityLet me discuss sources of liquidity of the U.S. financial markets. By my proposed definition, we must ask what forces have increased liquidity (read: confidence) in the United States over the course of the last couple of decades. I will turn, first, to two key drivers of liquidity: rapid financial innovation and strong economic performance. A third important source of liquidity--resulting from the excess savings of emerging-market economies and those with large commodity reserves--has also found its way to the United States in pursuit of high risk-adjusted returns. We must judge the extent to which each of these three liquidity drivers are structural or cyclical, more persistent or more temporary. Understanding the sources of liquidity--and the causes thereof--should help inform judgments about the level and direction of market liquidity. In so doing, we may better understand its implications for the economy and policymakers alike.First, liquidity is significantly higher than it would otherwise be due to the proliferation of financial products and innovation by financial providers. This extraordinary growth itself is made possible by remarkable improvements in risk-management techniques. Hewing to my proposed definition, we could equally state that financial innovation has been made possible by high levels of confidence in the strength and integrity of our financial infrastructure, markets, and laws. Moreover, remarkable competition among commercial banks, securities firms, and other credit intermediaries have helped expand access to--and lower the all-in-cost of--credit. Interest rate risk and credit risk exposures are now more diversified.Look no further than dramatic growth of the derivatives markets. In just the past four years, notional amounts outstanding of interest rate swaps and options tripled, and outstanding credit default swaps surged more than ten-fold. These products allow investors to hedge and unwind positions easily without having to transact in cash markets, expanding the participant pool.Syndication and securitization also lead to greater risk distribution. Commercial and industrial (C&I) lending potential has expanded with the adoption of syndication practices, allowing credit risks to be spread across a greater number of participating banks and nonbank lenders. Perhaps an even more significant support for the expansion of C&I loans is the rapid growth of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs)--special purpose entities that buy C&I loans with funds raised from investors seeking different risk exposures. CLOs allow loans to be financed primarily with high-rated debt securities issued to institutions like mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies. Indeed, in recent years, the share of syndicated C&I term loans funded by institutional investors is estimated to have exceeded that funded by commercial banks.For CLO structures to be effective, they invariably must include a more risky equity tranche. Even the most sophisticated financial products are not immune to the physical Law of Conservation of Matter--the risk must rest somewhere. Hedge funds reportedly have served as willing buyers of these riskier positions, and we are all aware of their phenomenal growth. Now, more than 4,000 hedge funds hold assets of about $1-1/2 trillion. As important as the participation of hedge funds, the derivative products themselves allow credit risk to be hedged, which has the beneficial effect of further increasing the pool of other investors as well. The increase in financial product and provider innovation appears to be quite persistent; future trends, however, are likely to be significantly influenced by legal, regulatory, and other public policies.The second factor, perhaps equally persistent, supporting strong investor confidence in U.S. markets has been our economy’s strong macroeconomic performance. Researchers have documented the so-called “Great Moderation” in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product (GDP) and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. In theory, reduced volatility, if perceived to be persistent, can support higher asset valuations--and lower risk premiums--as investors require less compensation for risks about expected growth and inflation. In this manner, confidence appears to beget confidence, with recent history giving some measure of plausibility to the notion that very bad macroeconomic outcomes can be avoided. The Great Moderation, however, is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a description--an ex post explanation of a period of relative prosperity. If policymakers and market participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor.Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text As noted, ‘liquidity’ in the sense of “trading liquidity” reflects the ability to transact quickly without exerting a material effect on prices. Liquidity is optimally achieved when myriad buyers and sellers are ready and willing to trade. The trading is enhanced by market-makers and speculators alike. Underlying this concept is that while buyers and sellers have different views on the most likely outcomes--that is, after all what generates trading--they largely can agree on the distributions of possible outcomes for which they demand risk-based compensation.Consider liquidity, then, in terms of investor confidence. Liquidity exists when investors are confident in their ability to transact and where risks are quantifiable. Moreover, liquidity exists when investors are creditworthy. When considered in terms of confidence, liquidity conditions can be assessed through the risk premiums on financial assets and the magnitude of capital flows. In general, high liquidity is generally accompanied by low risk premiums. Investors’ confidence in risk measures is greater when the perceived quantity and variance of risks are low.This view highlights both the risks and rewards of liquidity. The benefits of greater liquidity are substantial, through higher asset prices and more efficient transfer of funds from savers to borrowers. Historical episodes indicate, however, that markets can become far less liquid due to increases in investor risk aversion and uncertainty. While policymakers and market participants know with certainty that these episodes will occur, they must be humble in their ability to predict the timing, scope, and duration of these periods of financial distress. Recall the market turmoil related to events in Asian financial markets in 1997 and following the Russian bond default in the summer of 1998. Investors flocked to “on-the-run” Treasuries, and risk spreads for high-yield corporate and emerging market bonds spiked. Chairman Greenspan described these episodes as an apparent collapse in investors’ understanding of possible future risks, despite what appeared to be mild imbalances, which led to “disengagement” by traders.2Therefore, I wish to advance a simple proposition: Liquidity is confidence. That is, powerful liquidity in the U.S. capital markets is evidenced when the economic outcomes are believed to be benign. When the “tail” outcomes are either highly improbable or, at the very least, subject to reasonably precise measurement, the conditions are ripe for liquidity to be plentiful. When fund flows are strong and growing, there is little reason to expect trading positions to become inalienable. My goal in proffering this proposition is to improve the discourse by reducing the different notions of liquidity to its most fundamental feature. This exercise may also serve as a healthy reminder: If unmoored from fundamentals, confidence can give way to complacency, complacency can undermine market discipline and liquidity can falter unexpectedly. If, to the contrary, confidence is justified by real economic determinants, liquidity can flourish.Of course, some might disagree with this definition of liquidity. They may argue that any excess liquidity in financial markets results from too little capital investment, here and abroad, which may arise from a lack of confidence in future economic outcomes. For example, high cash balances at U.S. corporations can be interpreted as indicating a lack of confidence in investment prospects. Previously, however, I argued that while the build-up of cash since 2002 has been unusual, the most pressing determinant was not uncertainty about the profit potential of capital investment.3Instead, corporate cash positions are explained more significantly by profits retained at foreign subsidiaries, and a sharper focus by investors and ratings agencies on companies’ abilities to finance short-term liabilities internally.Current Sources of Market LiquidityLet me discuss sources of liquidity of the U.S. financial markets. By my proposed definition, we must ask what forces have increased liquidity (read: confidence) in the United States over the course of the last couple of decades. I will turn, first, to two key drivers of liquidity: rapid financial innovation and strong economic performance. A third important source of liquidity--resulting from the excess savings of emerging-market economies and those with large commodity reserves--has also found its way to the United States in pursuit of high risk-adjusted returns. We must judge the extent to which each of these three liquidity drivers are structural or cyclical, more persistent or more temporary. Understanding the sources of liquidity--and the causes thereof--should help inform judgments about the level and direction of market liquidity. In so doing, we may better understand its implications for the economy and policymakers alike.First, liquidity is significantly higher than it would otherwise be due to the proliferation of financial products and innovation by financial providers. This extraordinary growth itself is made possible by remarkable improvements in risk-management techniques. Hewing to my proposed definition, we could equally state that financial innovation has been made possible by high levels of confidence in the strength and integrity of our financial infrastructure, markets, and laws. Moreover, remarkable competition among commercial banks, securities firms, and other credit intermediaries have helped expand access to--and lower the all-in-cost of--credit. Interest rate risk and credit risk exposures are now more diversified.Look no further than dramatic growth of the derivatives markets. In just the past four years, notional amounts outstanding of interest rate swaps and options tripled, and outstanding credit default swaps surged more than ten-fold. These products allow investors to hedge and unwind positions easily without having to transact in cash markets, expanding the participant pool.Syndication and securitization also lead to greater risk distribution. Commercial and industrial (C&I) lending potential has expanded with the adoption of syndication practices, allowing credit risks to be spread across a greater number of participating banks and nonbank lenders. Perhaps an even more significant support for the expansion of C&I loans is the rapid growth of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs)--special purpose entities that buy C&I loans with funds raised from investors seeking different risk exposures. CLOs allow loans to be financed primarily with high-rated debt securities issued to institutions like mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies. Indeed, in recent years, the share of syndicated C&I term loans funded by institutional investors is estimated to have exceeded that funded by commercial banks.For CLO structures to be effective, they invariably must include a more risky equity tranche. Even the most sophisticated financial products are not immune to the physical Law of Conservation of Matter--the risk must rest somewhere. Hedge funds reportedly have served as willing buyers of these riskier positions, and we are all aware of their phenomenal growth. Now, more than 4,000 hedge funds hold assets of about $1-1/2 trillion. As important as the participation of hedge funds, the derivative products themselves allow credit risk to be hedged, which has the beneficial effect of further increasing the pool of other investors as well. The increase in financial product and provider innovation appears to be quite persistent; future trends, however, are likely to be significantly influenced by legal, regulatory, and other public policies.The second factor, perhaps equally persistent, supporting strong investor confidence in U.S. markets has been our economy’s strong macroeconomic performance. Researchers have documented the so-called “Great Moderation” in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product (GDP) and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. In theory, reduced volatility, if perceived to be persistent, can support higher asset valuations--and lower risk premiums--as investors require less compensation for risks about expected growth and inflation. In this manner, confidence appears to beget confidence, with recent history giving some measure of plausibility to the notion that very bad macroeconomic outcomes can be avoided. The Great Moderation, however, is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a description--an ex post explanation of a period of relative prosperity. If policymakers and market participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor.Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Consider liquidity, then, in terms of investor confidence. Liquidity exists when investors are confident in their ability to transact and where risks are quantifiable. Moreover, liquidity exists when investors are creditworthy. When considered in terms of confidence, liquidity conditions can be assessed through the risk premiums on financial assets and the magnitude of capital flows. In general, high liquidity is generally accompanied by low risk premiums. Investors’ confidence in risk measures is greater when the perceived quantity and variance of risks are low.This view highlights both the risks and rewards of liquidity. The benefits of greater liquidity are substantial, through higher asset prices and more efficient transfer of funds from savers to borrowers. Historical episodes indicate, however, that markets can become far less liquid due to increases in investor risk aversion and uncertainty. While policymakers and market participants know with certainty that these episodes will occur, they must be humble in their ability to predict the timing, scope, and duration of these periods of financial distress. Recall the market turmoil related to events in Asian financial markets in 1997 and following the Russian bond default in the summer of 1998. Investors flocked to “on-the-run” Treasuries, and risk spreads for high-yield corporate and emerging market bonds spiked. Chairman Greenspan described these episodes as an apparent collapse in investors’ understanding of possible future risks, despite what appeared to be mild imbalances, which led to “disengagement” by traders.2Therefore, I wish to advance a simple proposition: Liquidity is confidence. That is, powerful liquidity in the U.S. capital markets is evidenced when the economic outcomes are believed to be benign. When the “tail” outcomes are either highly improbable or, at the very least, subject to reasonably precise measurement, the conditions are ripe for liquidity to be plentiful. When fund flows are strong and growing, there is little reason to expect trading positions to become inalienable. My goal in proffering this proposition is to improve the discourse by reducing the different notions of liquidity to its most fundamental feature. This exercise may also serve as a healthy reminder: If unmoored from fundamentals, confidence can give way to complacency, complacency can undermine market discipline and liquidity can falter unexpectedly. If, to the contrary, confidence is justified by real economic determinants, liquidity can flourish.Of course, some might disagree with this definition of liquidity. They may argue that any excess liquidity in financial markets results from too little capital investment, here and abroad, which may arise from a lack of confidence in future economic outcomes. For example, high cash balances at U.S. corporations can be interpreted as indicating a lack of confidence in investment prospects. Previously, however, I argued that while the build-up of cash since 2002 has been unusual, the most pressing determinant was not uncertainty about the profit potential of capital investment.3Instead, corporate cash positions are explained more significantly by profits retained at foreign subsidiaries, and a sharper focus by investors and ratings agencies on companies’ abilities to finance short-term liabilities internally.Current Sources of Market LiquidityLet me discuss sources of liquidity of the U.S. financial markets. By my proposed definition, we must ask what forces have increased liquidity (read: confidence) in the United States over the course of the last couple of decades. I will turn, first, to two key drivers of liquidity: rapid financial innovation and strong economic performance. A third important source of liquidity--resulting from the excess savings of emerging-market economies and those with large commodity reserves--has also found its way to the United States in pursuit of high risk-adjusted returns. We must judge the extent to which each of these three liquidity drivers are structural or cyclical, more persistent or more temporary. Understanding the sources of liquidity--and the causes thereof--should help inform judgments about the level and direction of market liquidity. In so doing, we may better understand its implications for the economy and policymakers alike.First, liquidity is significantly higher than it would otherwise be due to the proliferation of financial products and innovation by financial providers. This extraordinary growth itself is made possible by remarkable improvements in risk-management techniques. Hewing to my proposed definition, we could equally state that financial innovation has been made possible by high levels of confidence in the strength and integrity of our financial infrastructure, markets, and laws. Moreover, remarkable competition among commercial banks, securities firms, and other credit intermediaries have helped expand access to--and lower the all-in-cost of--credit. Interest rate risk and credit risk exposures are now more diversified.Look no further than dramatic growth of the derivatives markets. In just the past four years, notional amounts outstanding of interest rate swaps and options tripled, and outstanding credit default swaps surged more than ten-fold. These products allow investors to hedge and unwind positions easily without having to transact in cash markets, expanding the participant pool.Syndication and securitization also lead to greater risk distribution. Commercial and industrial (C&I) lending potential has expanded with the adoption of syndication practices, allowing credit risks to be spread across a greater number of participating banks and nonbank lenders. Perhaps an even more significant support for the expansion of C&I loans is the rapid growth of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs)--special purpose entities that buy C&I loans with funds raised from investors seeking different risk exposures. CLOs allow loans to be financed primarily with high-rated debt securities issued to institutions like mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies. Indeed, in recent years, the share of syndicated C&I term loans funded by institutional investors is estimated to have exceeded that funded by commercial banks.For CLO structures to be effective, they invariably must include a more risky equity tranche. Even the most sophisticated financial products are not immune to the physical Law of Conservation of Matter--the risk must rest somewhere. Hedge funds reportedly have served as willing buyers of these riskier positions, and we are all aware of their phenomenal growth. Now, more than 4,000 hedge funds hold assets of about $1-1/2 trillion. As important as the participation of hedge funds, the derivative products themselves allow credit risk to be hedged, which has the beneficial effect of further increasing the pool of other investors as well. The increase in financial product and provider innovation appears to be quite persistent; future trends, however, are likely to be significantly influenced by legal, regulatory, and other public policies.The second factor, perhaps equally persistent, supporting strong investor confidence in U.S. markets has been our economy’s strong macroeconomic performance. Researchers have documented the so-called “Great Moderation” in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product (GDP) and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. In theory, reduced volatility, if perceived to be persistent, can support higher asset valuations--and lower risk premiums--as investors require less compensation for risks about expected growth and inflation. In this manner, confidence appears to beget confidence, with recent history giving some measure of plausibility to the notion that very bad macroeconomic outcomes can be avoided. The Great Moderation, however, is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a description--an ex post explanation of a period of relative prosperity. If policymakers and market participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor.Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text This view highlights both the risks and rewards of liquidity. The benefits of greater liquidity are substantial, through higher asset prices and more efficient transfer of funds from savers to borrowers. Historical episodes indicate, however, that markets can become far less liquid due to increases in investor risk aversion and uncertainty. While policymakers and market participants know with certainty that these episodes will occur, they must be humble in their ability to predict the timing, scope, and duration of these periods of financial distress. Recall the market turmoil related to events in Asian financial markets in 1997 and following the Russian bond default in the summer of 1998. Investors flocked to “on-the-run” Treasuries, and risk spreads for high-yield corporate and emerging market bonds spiked. Chairman Greenspan described these episodes as an apparent collapse in investors’ understanding of possible future risks, despite what appeared to be mild imbalances, which led to “disengagement” by traders.2Therefore, I wish to advance a simple proposition: Liquidity is confidence. That is, powerful liquidity in the U.S. capital markets is evidenced when the economic outcomes are believed to be benign. When the “tail” outcomes are either highly improbable or, at the very least, subject to reasonably precise measurement, the conditions are ripe for liquidity to be plentiful. When fund flows are strong and growing, there is little reason to expect trading positions to become inalienable. My goal in proffering this proposition is to improve the discourse by reducing the different notions of liquidity to its most fundamental feature. This exercise may also serve as a healthy reminder: If unmoored from fundamentals, confidence can give way to complacency, complacency can undermine market discipline and liquidity can falter unexpectedly. If, to the contrary, confidence is justified by real economic determinants, liquidity can flourish.Of course, some might disagree with this definition of liquidity. They may argue that any excess liquidity in financial markets results from too little capital investment, here and abroad, which may arise from a lack of confidence in future economic outcomes. For example, high cash balances at U.S. corporations can be interpreted as indicating a lack of confidence in investment prospects. Previously, however, I argued that while the build-up of cash since 2002 has been unusual, the most pressing determinant was not uncertainty about the profit potential of capital investment.3Instead, corporate cash positions are explained more significantly by profits retained at foreign subsidiaries, and a sharper focus by investors and ratings agencies on companies’ abilities to finance short-term liabilities internally.Current Sources of Market LiquidityLet me discuss sources of liquidity of the U.S. financial markets. By my proposed definition, we must ask what forces have increased liquidity (read: confidence) in the United States over the course of the last couple of decades. I will turn, first, to two key drivers of liquidity: rapid financial innovation and strong economic performance. A third important source of liquidity--resulting from the excess savings of emerging-market economies and those with large commodity reserves--has also found its way to the United States in pursuit of high risk-adjusted returns. We must judge the extent to which each of these three liquidity drivers are structural or cyclical, more persistent or more temporary. Understanding the sources of liquidity--and the causes thereof--should help inform judgments about the level and direction of market liquidity. In so doing, we may better understand its implications for the economy and policymakers alike.First, liquidity is significantly higher than it would otherwise be due to the proliferation of financial products and innovation by financial providers. This extraordinary growth itself is made possible by remarkable improvements in risk-management techniques. Hewing to my proposed definition, we could equally state that financial innovation has been made possible by high levels of confidence in the strength and integrity of our financial infrastructure, markets, and laws. Moreover, remarkable competition among commercial banks, securities firms, and other credit intermediaries have helped expand access to--and lower the all-in-cost of--credit. Interest rate risk and credit risk exposures are now more diversified.Look no further than dramatic growth of the derivatives markets. In just the past four years, notional amounts outstanding of interest rate swaps and options tripled, and outstanding credit default swaps surged more than ten-fold. These products allow investors to hedge and unwind positions easily without having to transact in cash markets, expanding the participant pool.Syndication and securitization also lead to greater risk distribution. Commercial and industrial (C&I) lending potential has expanded with the adoption of syndication practices, allowing credit risks to be spread across a greater number of participating banks and nonbank lenders. Perhaps an even more significant support for the expansion of C&I loans is the rapid growth of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs)--special purpose entities that buy C&I loans with funds raised from investors seeking different risk exposures. CLOs allow loans to be financed primarily with high-rated debt securities issued to institutions like mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies. Indeed, in recent years, the share of syndicated C&I term loans funded by institutional investors is estimated to have exceeded that funded by commercial banks.For CLO structures to be effective, they invariably must include a more risky equity tranche. Even the most sophisticated financial products are not immune to the physical Law of Conservation of Matter--the risk must rest somewhere. Hedge funds reportedly have served as willing buyers of these riskier positions, and we are all aware of their phenomenal growth. Now, more than 4,000 hedge funds hold assets of about $1-1/2 trillion. As important as the participation of hedge funds, the derivative products themselves allow credit risk to be hedged, which has the beneficial effect of further increasing the pool of other investors as well. The increase in financial product and provider innovation appears to be quite persistent; future trends, however, are likely to be significantly influenced by legal, regulatory, and other public policies.The second factor, perhaps equally persistent, supporting strong investor confidence in U.S. markets has been our economy’s strong macroeconomic performance. Researchers have documented the so-called “Great Moderation” in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product (GDP) and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. In theory, reduced volatility, if perceived to be persistent, can support higher asset valuations--and lower risk premiums--as investors require less compensation for risks about expected growth and inflation. In this manner, confidence appears to beget confidence, with recent history giving some measure of plausibility to the notion that very bad macroeconomic outcomes can be avoided. The Great Moderation, however, is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a description--an ex post explanation of a period of relative prosperity. If policymakers and market participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor.Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Therefore, I wish to advance a simple proposition: Liquidity is confidence. That is, powerful liquidity in the U.S. capital markets is evidenced when the economic outcomes are believed to be benign. When the “tail” outcomes are either highly improbable or, at the very least, subject to reasonably precise measurement, the conditions are ripe for liquidity to be plentiful. When fund flows are strong and growing, there is little reason to expect trading positions to become inalienable. My goal in proffering this proposition is to improve the discourse by reducing the different notions of liquidity to its most fundamental feature. This exercise may also serve as a healthy reminder: If unmoored from fundamentals, confidence can give way to complacency, complacency can undermine market discipline and liquidity can falter unexpectedly. If, to the contrary, confidence is justified by real economic determinants, liquidity can flourish.Of course, some might disagree with this definition of liquidity. They may argue that any excess liquidity in financial markets results from too little capital investment, here and abroad, which may arise from a lack of confidence in future economic outcomes. For example, high cash balances at U.S. corporations can be interpreted as indicating a lack of confidence in investment prospects. Previously, however, I argued that while the build-up of cash since 2002 has been unusual, the most pressing determinant was not uncertainty about the profit potential of capital investment.3Instead, corporate cash positions are explained more significantly by profits retained at foreign subsidiaries, and a sharper focus by investors and ratings agencies on companies’ abilities to finance short-term liabilities internally.Current Sources of Market LiquidityLet me discuss sources of liquidity of the U.S. financial markets. By my proposed definition, we must ask what forces have increased liquidity (read: confidence) in the United States over the course of the last couple of decades. I will turn, first, to two key drivers of liquidity: rapid financial innovation and strong economic performance. A third important source of liquidity--resulting from the excess savings of emerging-market economies and those with large commodity reserves--has also found its way to the United States in pursuit of high risk-adjusted returns. We must judge the extent to which each of these three liquidity drivers are structural or cyclical, more persistent or more temporary. Understanding the sources of liquidity--and the causes thereof--should help inform judgments about the level and direction of market liquidity. In so doing, we may better understand its implications for the economy and policymakers alike.First, liquidity is significantly higher than it would otherwise be due to the proliferation of financial products and innovation by financial providers. This extraordinary growth itself is made possible by remarkable improvements in risk-management techniques. Hewing to my proposed definition, we could equally state that financial innovation has been made possible by high levels of confidence in the strength and integrity of our financial infrastructure, markets, and laws. Moreover, remarkable competition among commercial banks, securities firms, and other credit intermediaries have helped expand access to--and lower the all-in-cost of--credit. Interest rate risk and credit risk exposures are now more diversified.Look no further than dramatic growth of the derivatives markets. In just the past four years, notional amounts outstanding of interest rate swaps and options tripled, and outstanding credit default swaps surged more than ten-fold. These products allow investors to hedge and unwind positions easily without having to transact in cash markets, expanding the participant pool.Syndication and securitization also lead to greater risk distribution. Commercial and industrial (C&I) lending potential has expanded with the adoption of syndication practices, allowing credit risks to be spread across a greater number of participating banks and nonbank lenders. Perhaps an even more significant support for the expansion of C&I loans is the rapid growth of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs)--special purpose entities that buy C&I loans with funds raised from investors seeking different risk exposures. CLOs allow loans to be financed primarily with high-rated debt securities issued to institutions like mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies. Indeed, in recent years, the share of syndicated C&I term loans funded by institutional investors is estimated to have exceeded that funded by commercial banks.For CLO structures to be effective, they invariably must include a more risky equity tranche. Even the most sophisticated financial products are not immune to the physical Law of Conservation of Matter--the risk must rest somewhere. Hedge funds reportedly have served as willing buyers of these riskier positions, and we are all aware of their phenomenal growth. Now, more than 4,000 hedge funds hold assets of about $1-1/2 trillion. As important as the participation of hedge funds, the derivative products themselves allow credit risk to be hedged, which has the beneficial effect of further increasing the pool of other investors as well. The increase in financial product and provider innovation appears to be quite persistent; future trends, however, are likely to be significantly influenced by legal, regulatory, and other public policies.The second factor, perhaps equally persistent, supporting strong investor confidence in U.S. markets has been our economy’s strong macroeconomic performance. Researchers have documented the so-called “Great Moderation” in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product (GDP) and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. In theory, reduced volatility, if perceived to be persistent, can support higher asset valuations--and lower risk premiums--as investors require less compensation for risks about expected growth and inflation. In this manner, confidence appears to beget confidence, with recent history giving some measure of plausibility to the notion that very bad macroeconomic outcomes can be avoided. The Great Moderation, however, is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a description--an ex post explanation of a period of relative prosperity. If policymakers and market participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor.Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Of course, some might disagree with this definition of liquidity. They may argue that any excess liquidity in financial markets results from too little capital investment, here and abroad, which may arise from a lack of confidence in future economic outcomes. For example, high cash balances at U.S. corporations can be interpreted as indicating a lack of confidence in investment prospects. Previously, however, I argued that while the build-up of cash since 2002 has been unusual, the most pressing determinant was not uncertainty about the profit potential of capital investment.3Instead, corporate cash positions are explained more significantly by profits retained at foreign subsidiaries, and a sharper focus by investors and ratings agencies on companies’ abilities to finance short-term liabilities internally.Current Sources of Market LiquidityLet me discuss sources of liquidity of the U.S. financial markets. By my proposed definition, we must ask what forces have increased liquidity (read: confidence) in the United States over the course of the last couple of decades. I will turn, first, to two key drivers of liquidity: rapid financial innovation and strong economic performance. A third important source of liquidity--resulting from the excess savings of emerging-market economies and those with large commodity reserves--has also found its way to the United States in pursuit of high risk-adjusted returns. We must judge the extent to which each of these three liquidity drivers are structural or cyclical, more persistent or more temporary. Understanding the sources of liquidity--and the causes thereof--should help inform judgments about the level and direction of market liquidity. In so doing, we may better understand its implications for the economy and policymakers alike.First, liquidity is significantly higher than it would otherwise be due to the proliferation of financial products and innovation by financial providers. This extraordinary growth itself is made possible by remarkable improvements in risk-management techniques. Hewing to my proposed definition, we could equally state that financial innovation has been made possible by high levels of confidence in the strength and integrity of our financial infrastructure, markets, and laws. Moreover, remarkable competition among commercial banks, securities firms, and other credit intermediaries have helped expand access to--and lower the all-in-cost of--credit. Interest rate risk and credit risk exposures are now more diversified.Look no further than dramatic growth of the derivatives markets. In just the past four years, notional amounts outstanding of interest rate swaps and options tripled, and outstanding credit default swaps surged more than ten-fold. These products allow investors to hedge and unwind positions easily without having to transact in cash markets, expanding the participant pool.Syndication and securitization also lead to greater risk distribution. Commercial and industrial (C&I) lending potential has expanded with the adoption of syndication practices, allowing credit risks to be spread across a greater number of participating banks and nonbank lenders. Perhaps an even more significant support for the expansion of C&I loans is the rapid growth of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs)--special purpose entities that buy C&I loans with funds raised from investors seeking different risk exposures. CLOs allow loans to be financed primarily with high-rated debt securities issued to institutions like mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies. Indeed, in recent years, the share of syndicated C&I term loans funded by institutional investors is estimated to have exceeded that funded by commercial banks.For CLO structures to be effective, they invariably must include a more risky equity tranche. Even the most sophisticated financial products are not immune to the physical Law of Conservation of Matter--the risk must rest somewhere. Hedge funds reportedly have served as willing buyers of these riskier positions, and we are all aware of their phenomenal growth. Now, more than 4,000 hedge funds hold assets of about $1-1/2 trillion. As important as the participation of hedge funds, the derivative products themselves allow credit risk to be hedged, which has the beneficial effect of further increasing the pool of other investors as well. The increase in financial product and provider innovation appears to be quite persistent; future trends, however, are likely to be significantly influenced by legal, regulatory, and other public policies.The second factor, perhaps equally persistent, supporting strong investor confidence in U.S. markets has been our economy’s strong macroeconomic performance. Researchers have documented the so-called “Great Moderation” in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product (GDP) and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. In theory, reduced volatility, if perceived to be persistent, can support higher asset valuations--and lower risk premiums--as investors require less compensation for risks about expected growth and inflation. In this manner, confidence appears to beget confidence, with recent history giving some measure of plausibility to the notion that very bad macroeconomic outcomes can be avoided. The Great Moderation, however, is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a description--an ex post explanation of a period of relative prosperity. If policymakers and market participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor.Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Current Sources of Market LiquidityLet me discuss sources of liquidity of the U.S. financial markets. By my proposed definition, we must ask what forces have increased liquidity (read: confidence) in the United States over the course of the last couple of decades. I will turn, first, to two key drivers of liquidity: rapid financial innovation and strong economic performance. A third important source of liquidity--resulting from the excess savings of emerging-market economies and those with large commodity reserves--has also found its way to the United States in pursuit of high risk-adjusted returns. We must judge the extent to which each of these three liquidity drivers are structural or cyclical, more persistent or more temporary. Understanding the sources of liquidity--and the causes thereof--should help inform judgments about the level and direction of market liquidity. In so doing, we may better understand its implications for the economy and policymakers alike.First, liquidity is significantly higher than it would otherwise be due to the proliferation of financial products and innovation by financial providers. This extraordinary growth itself is made possible by remarkable improvements in risk-management techniques. Hewing to my proposed definition, we could equally state that financial innovation has been made possible by high levels of confidence in the strength and integrity of our financial infrastructure, markets, and laws. Moreover, remarkable competition among commercial banks, securities firms, and other credit intermediaries have helped expand access to--and lower the all-in-cost of--credit. Interest rate risk and credit risk exposures are now more diversified.Look no further than dramatic growth of the derivatives markets. In just the past four years, notional amounts outstanding of interest rate swaps and options tripled, and outstanding credit default swaps surged more than ten-fold. These products allow investors to hedge and unwind positions easily without having to transact in cash markets, expanding the participant pool.Syndication and securitization also lead to greater risk distribution. Commercial and industrial (C&I) lending potential has expanded with the adoption of syndication practices, allowing credit risks to be spread across a greater number of participating banks and nonbank lenders. Perhaps an even more significant support for the expansion of C&I loans is the rapid growth of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs)--special purpose entities that buy C&I loans with funds raised from investors seeking different risk exposures. CLOs allow loans to be financed primarily with high-rated debt securities issued to institutions like mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies. Indeed, in recent years, the share of syndicated C&I term loans funded by institutional investors is estimated to have exceeded that funded by commercial banks.For CLO structures to be effective, they invariably must include a more risky equity tranche. Even the most sophisticated financial products are not immune to the physical Law of Conservation of Matter--the risk must rest somewhere. Hedge funds reportedly have served as willing buyers of these riskier positions, and we are all aware of their phenomenal growth. Now, more than 4,000 hedge funds hold assets of about $1-1/2 trillion. As important as the participation of hedge funds, the derivative products themselves allow credit risk to be hedged, which has the beneficial effect of further increasing the pool of other investors as well. The increase in financial product and provider innovation appears to be quite persistent; future trends, however, are likely to be significantly influenced by legal, regulatory, and other public policies.The second factor, perhaps equally persistent, supporting strong investor confidence in U.S. markets has been our economy’s strong macroeconomic performance. Researchers have documented the so-called “Great Moderation” in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product (GDP) and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. In theory, reduced volatility, if perceived to be persistent, can support higher asset valuations--and lower risk premiums--as investors require less compensation for risks about expected growth and inflation. In this manner, confidence appears to beget confidence, with recent history giving some measure of plausibility to the notion that very bad macroeconomic outcomes can be avoided. The Great Moderation, however, is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a description--an ex post explanation of a period of relative prosperity. If policymakers and market participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor.Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text First, liquidity is significantly higher than it would otherwise be due to the proliferation of financial products and innovation by financial providers. This extraordinary growth itself is made possible by remarkable improvements in risk-management techniques. Hewing to my proposed definition, we could equally state that financial innovation has been made possible by high levels of confidence in the strength and integrity of our financial infrastructure, markets, and laws. Moreover, remarkable competition among commercial banks, securities firms, and other credit intermediaries have helped expand access to--and lower the all-in-cost of--credit. Interest rate risk and credit risk exposures are now more diversified.Look no further than dramatic growth of the derivatives markets. In just the past four years, notional amounts outstanding of interest rate swaps and options tripled, and outstanding credit default swaps surged more than ten-fold. These products allow investors to hedge and unwind positions easily without having to transact in cash markets, expanding the participant pool.Syndication and securitization also lead to greater risk distribution. Commercial and industrial (C&I) lending potential has expanded with the adoption of syndication practices, allowing credit risks to be spread across a greater number of participating banks and nonbank lenders. Perhaps an even more significant support for the expansion of C&I loans is the rapid growth of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs)--special purpose entities that buy C&I loans with funds raised from investors seeking different risk exposures. CLOs allow loans to be financed primarily with high-rated debt securities issued to institutions like mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies. Indeed, in recent years, the share of syndicated C&I term loans funded by institutional investors is estimated to have exceeded that funded by commercial banks.For CLO structures to be effective, they invariably must include a more risky equity tranche. Even the most sophisticated financial products are not immune to the physical Law of Conservation of Matter--the risk must rest somewhere. Hedge funds reportedly have served as willing buyers of these riskier positions, and we are all aware of their phenomenal growth. Now, more than 4,000 hedge funds hold assets of about $1-1/2 trillion. As important as the participation of hedge funds, the derivative products themselves allow credit risk to be hedged, which has the beneficial effect of further increasing the pool of other investors as well. The increase in financial product and provider innovation appears to be quite persistent; future trends, however, are likely to be significantly influenced by legal, regulatory, and other public policies.The second factor, perhaps equally persistent, supporting strong investor confidence in U.S. markets has been our economy’s strong macroeconomic performance. Researchers have documented the so-called “Great Moderation” in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product (GDP) and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. In theory, reduced volatility, if perceived to be persistent, can support higher asset valuations--and lower risk premiums--as investors require less compensation for risks about expected growth and inflation. In this manner, confidence appears to beget confidence, with recent history giving some measure of plausibility to the notion that very bad macroeconomic outcomes can be avoided. The Great Moderation, however, is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a description--an ex post explanation of a period of relative prosperity. If policymakers and market participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor.Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Look no further than dramatic growth of the derivatives markets. In just the past four years, notional amounts outstanding of interest rate swaps and options tripled, and outstanding credit default swaps surged more than ten-fold. These products allow investors to hedge and unwind positions easily without having to transact in cash markets, expanding the participant pool.Syndication and securitization also lead to greater risk distribution. Commercial and industrial (C&I) lending potential has expanded with the adoption of syndication practices, allowing credit risks to be spread across a greater number of participating banks and nonbank lenders. Perhaps an even more significant support for the expansion of C&I loans is the rapid growth of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs)--special purpose entities that buy C&I loans with funds raised from investors seeking different risk exposures. CLOs allow loans to be financed primarily with high-rated debt securities issued to institutions like mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies. Indeed, in recent years, the share of syndicated C&I term loans funded by institutional investors is estimated to have exceeded that funded by commercial banks.For CLO structures to be effective, they invariably must include a more risky equity tranche. Even the most sophisticated financial products are not immune to the physical Law of Conservation of Matter--the risk must rest somewhere. Hedge funds reportedly have served as willing buyers of these riskier positions, and we are all aware of their phenomenal growth. Now, more than 4,000 hedge funds hold assets of about $1-1/2 trillion. As important as the participation of hedge funds, the derivative products themselves allow credit risk to be hedged, which has the beneficial effect of further increasing the pool of other investors as well. The increase in financial product and provider innovation appears to be quite persistent; future trends, however, are likely to be significantly influenced by legal, regulatory, and other public policies.The second factor, perhaps equally persistent, supporting strong investor confidence in U.S. markets has been our economy’s strong macroeconomic performance. Researchers have documented the so-called “Great Moderation” in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product (GDP) and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. In theory, reduced volatility, if perceived to be persistent, can support higher asset valuations--and lower risk premiums--as investors require less compensation for risks about expected growth and inflation. In this manner, confidence appears to beget confidence, with recent history giving some measure of plausibility to the notion that very bad macroeconomic outcomes can be avoided. The Great Moderation, however, is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a description--an ex post explanation of a period of relative prosperity. If policymakers and market participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor.Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Syndication and securitization also lead to greater risk distribution. Commercial and industrial (C&I) lending potential has expanded with the adoption of syndication practices, allowing credit risks to be spread across a greater number of participating banks and nonbank lenders. Perhaps an even more significant support for the expansion of C&I loans is the rapid growth of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs)--special purpose entities that buy C&I loans with funds raised from investors seeking different risk exposures. CLOs allow loans to be financed primarily with high-rated debt securities issued to institutions like mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies. Indeed, in recent years, the share of syndicated C&I term loans funded by institutional investors is estimated to have exceeded that funded by commercial banks.For CLO structures to be effective, they invariably must include a more risky equity tranche. Even the most sophisticated financial products are not immune to the physical Law of Conservation of Matter--the risk must rest somewhere. Hedge funds reportedly have served as willing buyers of these riskier positions, and we are all aware of their phenomenal growth. Now, more than 4,000 hedge funds hold assets of about $1-1/2 trillion. As important as the participation of hedge funds, the derivative products themselves allow credit risk to be hedged, which has the beneficial effect of further increasing the pool of other investors as well. The increase in financial product and provider innovation appears to be quite persistent; future trends, however, are likely to be significantly influenced by legal, regulatory, and other public policies.The second factor, perhaps equally persistent, supporting strong investor confidence in U.S. markets has been our economy’s strong macroeconomic performance. Researchers have documented the so-called “Great Moderation” in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product (GDP) and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. In theory, reduced volatility, if perceived to be persistent, can support higher asset valuations--and lower risk premiums--as investors require less compensation for risks about expected growth and inflation. In this manner, confidence appears to beget confidence, with recent history giving some measure of plausibility to the notion that very bad macroeconomic outcomes can be avoided. The Great Moderation, however, is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a description--an ex post explanation of a period of relative prosperity. If policymakers and market participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor.Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text For CLO structures to be effective, they invariably must include a more risky equity tranche. Even the most sophisticated financial products are not immune to the physical Law of Conservation of Matter--the risk must rest somewhere. Hedge funds reportedly have served as willing buyers of these riskier positions, and we are all aware of their phenomenal growth. Now, more than 4,000 hedge funds hold assets of about $1-1/2 trillion. As important as the participation of hedge funds, the derivative products themselves allow credit risk to be hedged, which has the beneficial effect of further increasing the pool of other investors as well. The increase in financial product and provider innovation appears to be quite persistent; future trends, however, are likely to be significantly influenced by legal, regulatory, and other public policies.The second factor, perhaps equally persistent, supporting strong investor confidence in U.S. markets has been our economy’s strong macroeconomic performance. Researchers have documented the so-called “Great Moderation” in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product (GDP) and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. In theory, reduced volatility, if perceived to be persistent, can support higher asset valuations--and lower risk premiums--as investors require less compensation for risks about expected growth and inflation. In this manner, confidence appears to beget confidence, with recent history giving some measure of plausibility to the notion that very bad macroeconomic outcomes can be avoided. The Great Moderation, however, is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a description--an ex post explanation of a period of relative prosperity. If policymakers and market participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor.Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text The second factor, perhaps equally persistent, supporting strong investor confidence in U.S. markets has been our economy’s strong macroeconomic performance. Researchers have documented the so-called “Great Moderation” in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product (GDP) and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. In theory, reduced volatility, if perceived to be persistent, can support higher asset valuations--and lower risk premiums--as investors require less compensation for risks about expected growth and inflation. In this manner, confidence appears to beget confidence, with recent history giving some measure of plausibility to the notion that very bad macroeconomic outcomes can be avoided. The Great Moderation, however, is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a description--an ex post explanation of a period of relative prosperity. If policymakers and market participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor.Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Let us look closer at the correlation between confidence and outcomes. Asset prices do appear somewhat correlated with volatility associated with the real economy and inflation. For example, equity valuations for U.S. corporations increased more in the past twenty years than in the two decades prior to the Great Moderation. The price-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 18 from 1985 to 2006. In addition, term premiums on long-term U.S. Treasury securities are estimated to have declined substantially since the late 1980s.4Moreover, this decline is significantly associated with a reduction in uncertainty about long-run inflation and about short-term interest rates.5Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Third, liquidity in U.S. markets also increased significantly in recent years due to increased international capital flows. These flows to the United States from global investors lead to higher liquidity by increasing capital available for investment and facilitating greater transfer and insurability of risk. A recent report by McKinsey & Company estimated that aggregate international capital flows amounted to $6 trillion in 2005--almost triple the volume a decade earlier--and that one-quarter of the worldwide volume flowed through the United States.Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Part of the increased international capital financial flows is a result of excess savings in some emerging-market and oil-exporting countries relative to domestic investment--the phenomenon Chairman Bernanke referred to as the “global saving glut.”6Rapidly aging populations in a few large countries, such as China, Germany, and Japan, generated high savings. Also, some of the fastest growing economies, especially in Asia, pursued export-driven growth strategies, thereby accumulating large reserves of foreign-denominated assets. In addition, high prices of oil and other commodities in recent years shifted income from importing nations to exporters, and research suggests that the bulk of these “windfalls” has been saved rather than invested.7On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text On net, the savings of less developed countries has been deployed to purchase substantial volumes of financial assets in markets in the most developed nations, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Estimates from the International Monetary Fund indicate that the group of the most advanced economies in the world swung from being net purchasers of foreign financial assets on the order of $80 billion in 1997 to being net sellers of domestic financial assets to foreigners of about $570 billion in 2006.8It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text It is no accident that international excess capital flowed primarily to strong and stable economies and those with highly-developed financial markets. In a world of funds increasingly without borders, we would expect investors to seek out the best risk-adjusted returns. Sound, transparent regulatory and legal frameworks in the United States, United Kingdom, and some other advanced economies have helped contribute to the attractiveness of these markets. In addition, top-notch infrastructure allows for efficient clearance and settlement procedures for transactions in the most sophisticated financial markets, all of which promote investor confidence and continued sources of liquidity.Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Implications for the Economy and Challenges for PolicymakersGenerally, high levels of liquidity offer substantial benefits to our financial system and overall economy through higher financial asset prices and a more efficient means to channel funds between savers and borrowers. Strong liquidity may also help to prevent imbalances in certain markets from spreading because of the greater dispersion of risks.The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text The U.S. economy continues to demonstrate extraordinary resilience, no doubt supported by the ability of financial markets to absorb substantial shocks. Financial markets have been buffeted by a number of significant events, including a spate of corporate accounting scandals, the bond rating downgrades of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. to speculative-grade status, the failure of Refco, (at the time the largest broker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and the imposition (and pullback) of capital controls in Thailand. But the effects on broader markets appear to have been remarkably contained. Even the episode last year involving the hedge fund, Amaranth, which accumulated losses of $6 billion in a few short weeks, seemingly had little impact beyond its direct stakeholders.It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text It is hard to know with certainty when investors’ confidence will be stirred--but not shaken--by these events. It is harder still to know precisely why. I have argued that solid fundamentals--effective and dynamic products and markets to disperse risk, stable economic performance, and robust and attractive market infrastructures--are key underpinnings for strong liquidity and correspondingly strong investor confidence. Surely, policymakers must be vigilant to maintain output stability and low and anchored inflation expectations. In addition, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private participants as the first line of defense against financial instability. In particular, we should promote policies that encourage stakeholders to engage in ex ante practices, protocols, and principles--including those recently set forth by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets--to accomplish that objective.Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Of course, investor confidence and liquidity can shift. In the aftermath of a financial shock, if buyers and sellers of credit can no longer agree on the distribution of possible outcomes, their ability to price transactions will be severely limited. While we cannot--and often should not--prevent all shocks or predict how they will reverberate through the financial system, we can attempt to create conditions that would lead investors to most quickly rebuild their confidence. That is most likely to occur when underlying fundamentals are solid.Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Monetary policy is no less challenged by the level and prospects for liquidity. We policymakers must ask whether liquidity conditions are obscuring signals from financial asset prices that we would otherwise use to gauge the performance of the real economy.9Liquidity conditions could, in theory, lead to lower-than-justified risk premiums that stimulate aggregate demand or otherwise generate excessive inflationary pressures. Of course, inferences from market prices are always imprecise, because prices depend on expected growth, the variation surrounding that expected path, and investor risk aversion, none of which we can precisely observe. Market liquidity may further confound the inference challenges. Allow me to comment, nonetheless, on a few key indicators.Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Look at the current configuration of Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum. Typically, investors require compensation for the greater exposure to interest rate risk from holding longer-term securities, leading to an upward-sloping yield curve. Since about mid-2006, the yield curve has been about flat to downward-sloping. Currently, the two-year rate slightly exceeds the ten-year Treasury rate, which stands just above 4-1/2 percent. A negatively sloped yield curve has, in the past, served as a reasonably good predictor of economic recessions.But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text But, there are compelling reasons to suspect that level of liquidity is affecting the slope of the yield curve, and lessening its predictive power. The same factors that are contributing to liquidity--low uncertainty about inflation and output--are also driving down term premiums and, hence, long-term Treasury yields. Thus, to the extent that low long-term Treasury yields and the negative slope of the yield curve reflects a lower term premium, rather than a lower expected short rate, it is less likely to signal future economic weakness.High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text High liquidity could also obscure some information we glean from corporate bond prices. What if the current level of liquidity caused lower risk premiums than could be justified by actual credit risks? Might a misallocation of resources result? Many commentators have pointed to the low spread of corporate yields relative to Treasuries as a sign of investors “reaching for yield” due to perceived excess liquidity. Risk spreads, however, appear less exceptional given the remarkable strength of the corporate sector. We can decompose risk spreads for corporate bonds into a series of forward spreads over a sequence of time periods. Forward spreads include compensation investors require for expected credit losses and a risk premium, and it would be reasonable to expect that investors would have a stronger conviction about expected credit losses in the near term than at future horizons. Currently, forward risk spreads one to two years ahead are quite low by historical standards, consistent with very liquid balance sheets, multi-decade low leverage ratios, and robust profitability. In sharp contrast, one-year forward risk spreads five or ten years ahead are higher relative to their averages of the previous ten years. I take some comfort from these implied forward spreads to suggest that investors may not be unduly sanguine about potential credit losses beyond the near-term.10Of course, too much precision cannot be put on assessments of risk premiums. This is an area worthy of continued analysis.Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text Some market participants tell me that the very low bond default rates seen recently, realized and expected, are themselves a reflection of liquidity. That is, excess market liquidity may have allowed less than creditworthy firms to refinance their obligations, thereby only deferring their financial difficulties. Other observers note the rise in the second half of last year in the share of new bond issuance that is rated highly speculative, and an increase in purchase and debt-multiples for leveraged buy-outs, suggesting some pick-up in risk-taking that may be indicative of overconfidence. This possibility cannot be ruled out. Others have pointed to the low levels of stock market volatility in recent months (prior to last week) as indicative of pressures from excess liquidity. Naturally, one would expect that high levels of liquidity would lead to lower volatility as investors quickly force asset prices back to their fundamental values. But, recent levels are not unprecedented; they were equally low during much of the 1960s. And, of course, volatility itself can be volatile. There may be good fundamental reasons for risk and risk premiums to be relatively low and for liquidity and confidence to be reasonably strong. Even so, the pace of change in the capital markets by credit buyers and sellers reminds us to constantly revisit assumptions underlying the financial and economic environment.If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text If liquidity conditions and risk premiums of the last several quarters were the sole basis by which to judge the stance of monetary policy, it would be hard to conclude that monetary policy has been restrictive. Of course, the assessment of the stance of monetary policy also depends on a variety of other important factors.ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity.Footnotes1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to textTable 1. Current Account Balances, 1997 and 2006(Billions of U.S. dollars)19972006pChangep1.Advanced economies81-571-6522.United States-136-869-7333.United Kingdom-2-56-544.Australia-13-41-285.France40-39-796.Italy32-26-587.Spain3-101-1048.Other Euro area241561329.Japan971677010.Other advanced economies3623820211.Other emerging market and developing countries-8558767212.Developing Asia1018517513Latin America and South America-673510214.Middle East and Africa231531315.Central and Eastern Europe-29528116.Statistical discrepancy (line 1 plus 11)-41620pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text ConclusionIn summary, liquidity has risen significantly, with important benefits to our financial system and economy. An important source of strength has been financial innovation, and while we have yet to see how some new products will play out in a more stressful environment, there almost certainly will remain a greater dispersion and insurability of risks. Stable output and price stability have also been important contributors to liquidity and investor confidence by helping to anchor views about longer-term economic outcomes. And solid fundamentals may help to ease any changes in liquidity should they occur. Hence, job number one for the Federal Open Market Committee is to choose a course for policy to best keep the macroeconomy on an even keel. This attention to our dual mandate--to maintain stable prices and maximum sustainable employment--supports investor confidence in the economy and the considerable benefits conferred by liquidity. Footnotes 1.As usual, I will be expressing my opinions on these issues--opinions that do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Nellie Liang and Michael Palumbo of the Board staff provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text 2.“New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Chairman Alan Greenspan, Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 27, 1999.Return to text 3.“Corporate Cash and Economic Activity,” Governor Kevin M. Warsh, American Enterprise Institute, July 18, 2006.Return to text 4.Kim, Don H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates,” FEDS 2005-33.Return to text 5.An empirical link, however, between financial market volatility and output and inflation volatility is less established. Despite the very low levels of S&P 500 return volatility in recent months, the averages over longer periods have not changed much--volatility averaged close to 13 percent from 1985 to 2006 and between 1960 and 1984. One reason proposed for the lack of a direct relationship is that asset price volatility depends not only on the volatility of future cash flows but also the volatility of the discount rate that is applied to those cash flows, which does not appear to have declined in line with variation in forecasts of cash flows.Return to text 6.Ben S. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005, and “Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy,” Economic Club of New York, March 20, 2006.Return to text 7.“Recycling Petrodollars,” Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard, and Robert Lerman, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2006.Return to text 8.These figures, as intable 1, refer to changes in current account balances for selected developed and emerging-market economies based on recent estimates in the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (September 2006). Except for a statistical discrepancy and a typically small capital account balance, a country’s current account balance approximates its financial account balance--the difference between domestic net purchases of foreign financial assets and foreign net purchases of domestic financial assets.Return to text 9.“Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve,” remarks by Governor Kevin M. Warsh to the New York Stock Exchange, November 21, 2006.Return to text 10.In addition, the level of far-forward credit spreads is broadly consistent with risk premiums evident in U.S. equity markets. The substantial stock price gains in recent years have been outpaced by the exceptional strength in corporate earnings that have posted double-digit annualized increases in every quarter since 2002. And, a measure of the long-run equity risk premium, the spread between the forward earnings (trend adjusted) to price ratio and a long-run Treasury rate is above its average of the past twenty years.Return to text pprojection by the International Monetary FundNote: Components may not sum to totals because of rounding error.Source:World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, September 2006. Data for advanced economies come from table 26 in the statistical appendix; data for other emerging market and developing countries come from table 28.Return to tableReturn to text
Governor Randall S. Kroszner To the 2007 Credit Markets Symposium at the Charlotte Branch of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Charlotte, North Carolina I am delighted to be the opening speaker at this Credit Markets Symposium. The time certainly is ripe for an open dialogue among market participants, risk-management professionals, and policymakers. Credit markets have been evolving very rapidly in recent years. New instruments for transferring credit risk have been introduced and loan markets have become more liquid. Asset managers have become an important force in a wider range of credit markets. Taken together, these changes have transformed the process through which credit demands are met and credit risks are allocated and managed. As I will discuss, I believe these developments generally have enhanced the efficiency and the stability of the credit markets and the broader financial system by making credit markets more transparent and liquid, by creating new instruments for unbundling and managing credit risks, and by dispersing credit risks more broadly. Interestingly, this is not the first time that we have witnessed innovations in derivatives markets that have led to these types of benefits. Later, I will very briefly draw some parallels between recent developments in credit derivatives and the development of agricultural futures in the mid-nineteenth century. For all their benefits, these developments have posed some significant challenges to market participants. The complexity of some instruments creates difficulties with respect to valuation, risk measurement, and risk management. Also, the trading of certain instruments has at times run well ahead of developments in the infrastructure necessary for clearing and settling those trades. Although impressive progress is being made toward addressing these challenges, I believe they need continuing attention from market participants and policymakers. Recent DevelopmentsThe evolution of the credit markets has been spurred by the astonishing growth of new credit instruments, particularly credit derivatives. The notional amount of credit derivatives outstanding has doubledeach yearfor the past five years; it totaled $20 trillion at the end of June 2006, according to statistics compiled by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). The bulk of credit derivatives outstanding consist of single-name credit default swaps, or single-name CDS, which reference the obligations of a single obligor.1Derivatives are sometimes faulted for their complexity, but that charge cannot be leveled against single-name CDS: The risk of a single-name CDS is essentially that of simply buying or selling short a bond. Single-name CDS make up 70 percent of all credit derivatives, according to the BIS. The bulk of CDS trading is in the investment-grade segment of the corporate credit market, although CDS trading involving high-yield names has been expanding quickly. Most recently, CDS that reference asset-backed securities have been a high-growth part of the market. Single-name CDS can be used as building blocks to construct credit derivatives referencing portfolios of issuers. These so-called multiname CDS make up the remaining 30 percent of credit derivatives, according to the BIS. Some multiname CDS are quite straightforward, such as an index of actively-traded names in a particular market segment. Some, however, are indeed quite complex; they include certain structured credit derivatives that unbundle the risk of a portfolio of names into tranches with different seniorities and dramatically different risks. Credit derivative indexes are currently the fastest-growing and most liquid area of the credit markets. They were created first in the most actively traded market segments: investment-grade and high-yield names in both North America and Europe. Recently, newer indexes have been created in other market segments, including securities backed by commercial mortgages, subprime residential mortgages, and European leveraged loans.2 Among the more complex credit derivatives, the credit index tranches stand out as an important development. A credit index tranche exposes an investor to a particular slice of the losses due to defaults among names in one of the credit derivative indexes. The so-called equity tranche bears a disproportionate share of the total credit risk of the underlying index. For example, an equity tranche might be exposed to the first 3 percent of losses. Other tranches would cover the remaining percentiles of loss, and the sum of all tranches reproduces the exposure of the entire index. As I will discuss in a few minutes, one factor behind the complexity of credit index tranches is that the loss exposure depends not only on the level of defaults but also on the correlation of defaults across issuers. Another instrument in the credit markets, similar to a credit index tranche, is the collateralized debt obligation, or CDO. A CDO pools a portfolio of fixed-income assets into a tranched liability structure that is familiar from other securitization markets. For example, banks have long used a similar liability structure to fund their credit card loans to consumers. The most common types of collateral for CDOs are asset-backed and corporate securities and syndicated loans. CDOs backed by loans are referred to as collateralized loan obligations, or CLOs. The growth of CLOs has certainly had an effect on the market for syndicated loans. Of course, syndicated loans are not a new instrument. They have been around since the 1970s. But recently, the secondary-market liquidity of syndicated loans has improved dramatically, in part because of the demand for loans by CLOs. This improved liquidity has transformed loans from buy-and-hold investments into traded assets. Market participants are now working to standardize documentation for trading credit default swaps referencing loans. These so-called loan CDS have already started to trade in small amounts. The development of these new instruments and markets has been facilitated by nonbank institutional investors and has in turn helped such investors expand their participation in credit markets. Data on participation by nonbank institutional investors are difficult to come by, but such data are available for the syndicated loan markets.3Historically, loan syndications, which include both loan commitments and term loans, were predominantly funded by banks. But in the period from 2001 through 2006, when the amount of term loans to U.S. nonfinancial corporations rose from $100 billion to more than $350 billion, the nonbank share of such lending rose from less than one-half to roughly two-thirds. The institutional investors in these loans include mutual funds, insurance companies, pension funds, and hedge funds. In the mid-1990s, mutual funds were the most important type of institutional investor in these markets. More recently, identifying the ultimate sources of institutional demand has become more difficult. For example, from 2001 through 2006, about two-thirds of institutional term loans were purchased as collateral for the issuance of CLOs. Although institutional investors undoubtedly are the predominant investors in CLOs, little is known about the holdings of the various types of institutions. Also, while much is being made of the increasingly important role of hedge funds in credit markets, hedge funds, in turn, are increasingly managing assets on behalf of endowments, pension funds, and other institutional investors.4 Asset managers are clearly playing an increasingly important role in credit markets, whether they are managing mutual funds, CLOs, or hedge funds. The decisions of those asset managers are increasingly being driven by the preferences of institutional investors. And the decisions of the asset managers have a large influence on the pricing of credit, even for types of credit whose pricing historically was driven by the decisions of banks. Benefits of Recent DevelopmentsThe new instruments, markets, and participants I just described have brought some important benefits to credit markets. I will touch on three of these benefits: enhanced liquidity and transparency, the availability of new tools for managing credit risk, and a greater dispersion of credit risk. In listing these benefits, I am struck by the strong resemblance of what is happening right now in credit markets to what happened historically in other markets when derivatives were introduced. For example, the markets for agricultural commodities in the United States reaped some of these benefits when standardized futures contracts for wheat and other commodities were introduced in the middle of the nineteenth century.5 Historically, the secondary markets for corporate bonds, loans, and asset-backed securities were illiquid and not transparent. Liquidity in these[msg1]markets has improved over time but is still quite poor. For example, half of outstanding corporate bonds did not even trade once in the first three months of 2006.6Individual bonds tend to be somewhat liquid immediately after they are issued, but trading activity declines quickly thereafter as investors put the bonds into buy-and-hold portfolios. Also, shorting corporate bonds is very difficult. The dramatic improvement in credit market liquidity has been spurred by credit derivatives. One way to measure the improvement in liquidity is with bid-ask spreads. For investment-grade corporate bonds--a relatively liquid part of the bond market--the bid-ask spread averaged 64 basis points last year.7The bid-ask spreads for single-name investment-grade CDS, however, are typically only 10 basis points or less, and the usual bid-ask spread for investment-grade credit indexes is just 2 basis points. The liquidity of the secondary market for loans has also improved in recent years. Trading volume totaled $239 billion in 2006, up from $102 billion in 2000.8A key factor driving the improvement in secondary-market liquidity is the expanded participation of nonbank institutional investors. These investors are active managers of credit risk, and consequently they appear to place a higher value on liquidity. Along with liquidity, transparency in credit markets has also improved over time. Corporate bond markets are more transparent thanks to a regulatory change that took effect in 2002. Dealers must now report nearly all corporate bond trades to the NASD within fifteen minutes, and the NASD immediately reports the trade data to the market. For asset-backed securities and loans, price transparency is available from specialist vendors who aggregate and disseminate dealers’ prices. For example, in the syndicated loan market, one vendor currently aggregates data from more than seventy traders to price nearly 6,000 loans daily. Prices of many credit derivatives, including single-name CDS, credit derivative indexes, and credit index tranches, are widely available on services such as Bloomberg or Reuters. Complex credit derivatives such as CDO tranches are an exception to all this: They remain largely illiquid and nontransparent. Enhanced liquidity and transparency should promote better risk management by market participants and facilitate broader participation in credit markets. Liquid markets make it easier to access historical price data and thus permit better measurement of credit risks. Measuring a risk more accurately allows it to be priced more accurately. A more transparent market with more accurate pricing is attractive to a wider array of investors. In effect, better liquidity and transparency have lowered the cost of entry into the credit markets. In addition to enhanced liquidity and transparency, the recent developments in credit markets have equipped market participants with new tools for taking on, hedging, and managing credit risk. These new tools allow investors to more easily customize their credit risk portfolios. Investors can now construct a diverse portfolio at much lower transaction costs compared with purchasing a portfolio of corporate bonds or even single-name CDS. As derivatives, indexes can readily be used either to reduce or to take on more credit risk. In contrast, for corporate bonds, the lack of a well-developed securities lending market makes it difficult to shed credit risk by short selling. The enhanced transparency and liquidity of credit markets and the development of new instruments for customizing the risk characteristics of credit exposures have resulted in a wider dispersion of credit risk. Although significant participation by nonbank institutional investors has long been a hallmark of U.S. credit markets, these developments have facilitated greater risk-bearing by entities other than banks and other highly regulated depository institutions. On its face, a wider dispersion of credit risk would seem to enhance the stability of the financial system by reducing the likelihood that credit defaults will weaken any one financial institution or class of financial institutions. Some have expressed concern about the transfer of risk by banks and other heavily regulated depository institutions to more lightly regulated or unregulated entities. Some specific concerns are quite legitimate. For example, as I will discuss in a few moments, if banks transfer credit risk to other entities through mechanisms that expose the banks to counterparty risks to those entities, the transfer is fully effective only if the banks manage those counterparty risks prudently. However, some other concerns about the transfer of credit risk outside the banking system seem to be based on questionable assumptions. For example, some observers believe that credit risks will be managed more effectively by banks because they generally are more heavily regulated than the entities to which they are transferring credit risk. But those unregulated or less regulated entities should in principle be subject to more-effective market discipline than banks because, without a safety net supporting them, their creditors have stronger incentives to monitor and limit their risk-taking. In fact, while many focus on the dangers of risk transfer to highly leveraged entities that might be vulnerable to a sharp widening of credit spreads, a significant portion of the risks that are being transferred outside the banking system are being transferred to institutional investors that are far less leveraged than banks. Challenges Associated with Recent DevelopmentsThe benefits from the development of new instruments and markets that I have described will be fully realized only if market participants address various risk-management challenges posed by the use of these instruments. I will discuss three challenges: limiting counterparty credit risk, modeling default correlation, and improving the infrastructure for clearing and settling credit derivative trades. But before I discuss the risk-management challenges, I want to emphasize that the fundamental risks in credit markets have not been changed by the new instruments that are now being traded. Credit risks may be traded among market participants, but that does not eliminate the risk. Investors in credit markets are still exposed to the risk that issuers may default on their obligations. And in the event of default, investors are still exposed to the further risk that the recovery rate will be lower than expected. The management of default and recovery risks presents nothing fundamentally new to investors. Instruments like single-name CDS and credit derivative indexes simply replicate the sort of credit exposures that have always existed. From the perspective of financial stability, I believe that the most important risk-management challenge in credit markets is the management of counterparty credit risk. I mentioned earlier that institutional investors, including hedge funds, are now more active in credit markets. I also noted that when banks trade credit risk using new instruments such as credit derivatives or CDOs, they must take care to limit any counterparty credit risk that might result. Banks commonly rely on collateral to mitigate counterparty credit risk on over-the-counter derivatives. Credit derivatives are no exception. Also, banks universally require their hedge fund counterparties to post collateral to cover current exposures and, with some exceptions, to cover potential exposures from future market movements. But given the growing role of hedge funds in credit markets, it is appropriate to ask whether dealer banks have enough collateral to protect them against a stress scenario that goes well beyond the recent benign experience in credit markets. Default correlation is a distinctly new aspect of credit risk. The value of credit index tranches and CDO tranches is sensitive not only to the number of defaults among a set of issuers but also to the correlation of defaults. The more senior tranches suffer losses only in a scenario with many correlated defaults. The value of these senior tranches falls when default correlation rises. The value of a first-loss tranche rises when default correlation rises. And somewhere in the middle of the capital structure is a tranche whose value is roughly insensitive to correlation. The mathematical relationship between tranche value and correlation depends on the particular model that is used to forecast defaults. This dependency exposes dealers and investors to so-called correlation risk if their models or forecasts of default correlation turn out to be incorrect. Correlation risk is challenging to measure and manage, and fairly recently some market participants learned a hard lesson about those challenges. In May 2005, a widening of credit spreads for several automotive companies led to sharp movements in the prices of credit index tranches that seemed to catch market participants by surprise. Their models of correlation risk seemed to have lagged behind the development of the new tranched credit products. Since then, much energy has been devoted to building better models of correlation risk, but I believe it is fair to say that much work remains to be done before this risk can be considered to be fully understood. These risk-management challenges have not gone unnoticed by market participants themselves. In 2005, a private-sector group, the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group II, or CRMPG II, chaired by E. Gerald Corrigan, produced a report highlighting many of these issues.9That report also made a number of useful recommendations to market participants on how they could address some of the challenges I have mentioned here. It is encouraging to find market participants taking a leading role in making the improvements in risk management that will be needed to fully reap the benefits of innovations in credit markets. The third and final challenge I will discuss is that of infrastructure. The very rapid growth of trading credit derivatives had until recently outpaced the development of the infrastructure necessary to clear and settle those trades. Post-trade processes were largely manual, with attendant inefficiencies and risks. By early 2005, credit derivatives dealers had huge backlogs of unconfirmed trades, even though they had greatly increased their back-office resources. Unconfirmed trades increase the potential for material inaccuracies in trade records, which can cause mismeasurement and mismanagement of market risks and counterparty credit risks. Market infrastructures can be improved only through collective actions by market participants. In 2005, some stimulus for the necessary collective actions was provided by both the private sector and the public sector. CRMPG II called attention to the growing backlogs and the risks that they posed to market participants and called for the convening of an industry roundtable to address them.10Prudential supervisors then took the lead. In September 2005 they called fourteen leading dealers to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, where the supervisors collectively made clear their concerns about the risks posed by the growing backlogs. The supervisors wisely avoided any temptation to design their own improvements to the market infrastructure. Instead, they simply insisted that the backlogs be reduced and left it to the dealers who had been at the meeting (and who became known as the Fed 14) to figure out with other market participants how best to achieve that objective. The market participants recognized that automation was the key; manual processes simply are not scalable. Both dealers and asset managers embraced use of the Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation’s Deriv/Serv electronic confirmation service. The results have been dramatic. Between September 2005 and December 2006, aggregate credit derivatives confirmations outstanding thirty days or more at the fourteen dealers declined 92 percent despite continued rapid growth in trading volumes. With the encouragement and support of supervisors, a larger group of dealers and asset managers are now turning their attention to addressing backlogs in the equity derivatives markets. ConclusionsCredit markets undoubtedly will continue to evolve in the years to come. In the short run, rapid change can pose significant challenges to market participants. Cooperative initiatives, such as CRMPG II and the Fed 14, can contribute greatly to ensuring that those challenges are met successfully by identifying effective risk-management practices and by stimulating collective action when it is necessary, notably in achieving improvements in market infrastructures. The recent success of such initiatives strengthens my confidence that future innovations in the market will serve to enhance market efficiency and stability, notwithstanding the challenges that inevitably accompany change. Footnotes 1.A CDS provides the purchaser with protection against the cost of defaults or other credit events that reduce the market value of underlying reference obligations (usually bonds or loans). Reference obligations and obligors are known as “names.”Return to text 2.A leveraged loan is commonly defined as a syndicated loan, typically to a riskier borrower, with an interest rate of at least libor plus 125 basis points.Return to text 3.Standard and Poor’s Leveraged Commentary and Data, “Leveraged Lending Review,” 2006:Q3.Return to text 4.One industry survey forecasts that institutions will account for roughly half of hedge fund inflows in 2007, up from virtually zero in 2000 (“Hedge Funds,” International Financial Services, London, March 2006, p. 3, chart 7).Return to text 5.See Randall S. Kroszner (1999), “Can the Financial Markets Privately Regulate Risk? The Development of Derivatives Clearinghouses and Recent Over-the-Counter Innovations,”Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,vol. 31 (August, part 2), pp. 596-618.Return to text 6.Calculated from NASD, TRACE Corporate Bond Data.Return to text 7.Calculated from NASD, TRACE Corporate Bond Data.Return to text 8.Reuters Loan Pricing Corporation,www.loanpricing.com/analytics/pricing_service_volume1.htm.Return to text 9.Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group II (2005),Toward Greater Financial Stability: A Private Sector Perspective, July 27,www.crmpolicygroup.org.Return to text 10.Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group II,Toward Greater Financial Stability,p. 19.Return to text
Roger T. Cole, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Before the U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs IntroductionChairman Dodd, Ranking Member Shelby, members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss mortgage lending, the recent rise in mortgage delinquency and foreclosure rates, particularly in the subprime sector, and the Federal Reserve’s supervisory response. The Federal Reserve is concerned about recent developments in mortgage markets and has been closely monitoring the effects of these developments on the financial health of mortgage borrowers and lending institutions. Regarding safety and soundness of the banking system, less than half of subprime loans have been originated by federally regulated banking institutions. To date, the deterioration in housing credit has been focused on the relatively narrow market for subprime, adjustable-rate mortgages, which represent fewer than one out of ten outstanding mortgages. Borrower performance deterioration in the subprime market has been concentrated in loans made very recently, especially those originated in late 2005 and 2006, and problems in those loans started to become apparent in the data during the latter half of 2006. As in past credit cycles, market investors and lenders have begun to implement more appropriate underwriting standards and to change their risk profiles. Some borrowers are clearly experiencing significant financial and personal challenges, and more subprime borrowers may join these ranks in the coming months. We are mindful that any action we take should not have the unintended consequence of limiting the availability of credit to borrowers who have the capacity to repay. I will shortly offer some suggestions to address these challenges, including the potential for lenders to work with troubled borrowers. We know from past cycles that credit problems in one segment of the economy can disturb the flow of credit to other segments, including to sound borrowers, creating the potential for spillover effects in the broader economy. Nevertheless, at this time, we are not observing spillover effects from the problems in the subprime market to traditional mortgage portfolios or, more generally, to the safety and soundness of the banking system. Subprime lending has grown rapidly in recent years and has expanded homeownership opportunities for many individuals. It is important to ensure that these gains are not eroded by the recent increase in delinquencies and foreclosures in the subprime market. It is especially important to preserve homeownership for the many low- and moderate-income borrowers who have only recently been able to achieve the goal of owning a home. Later in my testimony, I will discuss the recent activity in mortgage markets and the possible causes for the increases in delinquencies and foreclosures in the subprime market. I will discuss the Federal Reserve’s ongoing efforts as a banking supervisor to ensure that the institutions we supervise are managing their mortgage lending activities in a safe and sound manner, including assessing the repayment capacity of borrowers. In particular, I will discuss existing guidance that has been issued over the past several years that addresses many of these issues and the general scope and findings of examinations at the lending institutions we supervise. I will also discuss our efforts in the area of consumer protection, including guidance to ensure that lenders provide consumers with clear and balanced information about the risks and features of loan products at a time when the information is most useful, before a consumer has applied for a loan. The Federal Reserve Board has significant responsibilities as a rulewriter for several consumer protection laws, and I will discuss our efforts to date to improve the effectiveness of our regulations in this area as well as our plans to continue this work in the near and longer term. Mortgages and the Role of the Capital MarketsThe banking system has changed dramatically since I first joined the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston in the mid-1970s. Back then, banks and savings and loans used their deposit bases and other funding sources to finance, originate, and hold loans to maturity. These financial institutions were highly exposed to any problems that might emerge in residential markets, and their analysis of credit risk was generally limited to making sure that each loan was underwritten properly. Home mortgages had fixed rates and few bells and whistles. Today, the mortgage lending business has changed dramatically. With the remarkable growth we have seen in securitization, that simple book-and-hold model has evolved to incorporate an alternative and more complex originate-to-distribute model. While commercial banks still play a significant role in the mortgage origination and distribution process, they are no longer the only originators or holders of residential mortgages. Securitization has had profound effects in financial centers, where investment bankers use a broad array of approaches to package and resell home mortgages to willing investors, and in local communities, where mortgage brokers and mortgage finance companies compete aggressively with banks to offer new products to would-be homeowners. These innovations in housing finance have brought many benefits to lenders, investors, and borrowers. Much more so than in the past, insured depository institutions are now able to manage liquidity and control risks by adjusting credit concentrations and maturities through the use of financial instruments such as mortgage-backed securities. For capital market investors, securitization has reduced transaction costs, increased transparency, and increased liquidity. The market has become very proficient at segmenting cash flows of mortgage portfolios into risk tranches targeted at investors with differing risk appetites. Homebuyers have also benefited in this environment of financial innovation and market liquidity. More lenders are actively competing in the mortgage market, product offerings have expanded greatly, the underwriting process has become more streamlined, borrowing spreads have decreased, and obtaining a mortgage loan has become easier. In short, securitization has helped to expand homeownership, which recently reached a record 69 percent.1Not surprisingly, there have also been significant gains in homeownership for low- and moderate-income individuals. The development of the subprime mortgage market has been an integral factor in creating these homeownership opportunities for previously underserved borrowers. Recent Trends in the Subprime MarketThe term “subprime” generally refers to borrowers who do not qualify for prime interest rates because they exhibit one or more of the following characteristics: weakened credit histories typically characterized by payment delinquencies, previous charge-offs, judgments, or bankruptcies; low credit scores; high debt-burden ratios; or high loan-to-value ratios. Prime borrowers represent more than 75 percent of the 43 million first-lien mortgage loans outstanding in the United States; subprime borrowers represent about 13 or 14 percent; and the remaining borrowers fall within a somewhat ill-defined category between prime and subprime known as “Alt-A,” or “near-prime,” which includes borrowers with good credit records who do not meet standard guidelines for documentation requirements, debt-to-income ratios, or loan-to-value ratios.2 While still only a relatively small part of outstanding mortgages, the subprime sector grew rapidly over the past three years and accounted for an outsized share of originations in 2006. The roots of this increase can be traced back to the low levels of market interest rates that existed in the early part of this decade which, in turn, spurred significant volumes of mortgage refinancing, as well as new originations. To meet this demand, financial institutions significantly increased their mortgage origination and securitization infrastructures. New entrants in the mortgage industry, including independent mortgage brokers and finance companies, also ramped up their origination capacity. With the rise in short-term market interest rates beginning in 2004, the cost burden of such infrastructures came under increasing pressure as both mortgage refinance and new origination volumes declined. In this environment of high liquidity, rising home prices, and competition, some lenders that had an originate-to-distribute model responded to the capital market’s demand for new products by easing their credit standards and increasing risks through “risk-layering” practices such as simultaneous second liens, no- or low-income documentation, and high loan-to-value ratios. Some borrowers were actually investors utilizing the ease in terms to purchase investment and rental properties. In the latter part of 2005 and in 2006, risk-layered loans were originated in greater numbers and, increasingly, to borrowers with lower credit scores. An additional layer of risk was embedded in the subprime market since subprime borrowers are more likely to use adjustable-rate mortgages, or ARMs, because these loans generally carry lower interest rates at origination, particularly if a promotional or “teaser” rate is offered for the loan’s introductory period. While these loans contribute to more manageable payments early in the life of the mortgage loan, borrowers can be exposed to payment shock when rates adjust. ARMs account for only about one in eight prime mortgages, but they account for between one-half and two-thirds of subprime mortgages. During the years of exceptionally strong growth in housing prices and low, stable interest rates, most borrowers did not face large payment shocks and many of those that did could later take advantage of home price appreciation to refinance. These conditions changed in 2006, when mortgage interest rates hit four-year highs, the volume of home sales declined, and the rate of house price appreciation decelerated, leaving the most recent subprime borrowers vulnerable to payment difficulties. Subprime borrowers with hybrid ARMs have experienced the largest recent increase in delinquency and foreclosure rates.3Meanwhile, an unusual number of subprime loans have defaulted shortly after origination; these “early payment defaults” are further evidence of laxer underwriting standards by subprime lenders, especially during 2006. Based on anecdotal evidence, it seems possible that fraud has also been a factor in the recent increase in early payment defaults. Undiversified subprime finance companies have been hit especially hard by early payment defaults, and many have been forced under the terms of their securitization contracts to repurchase these loans. The costs associated with these repurchases have further reduced earnings, pushing some lenders into bankruptcy and forcing the sale or operational shutdown of others. This consolidation in the subprime sector of the mortgage finance industry began several months ago and has likely not yet run its course. These changes in market conditions may assist the industry as investors become more focused on risk-reward tradeoffs and as lenders become more prudent. However, over the next one to two years existing subprime borrowers, especially those with more recently originated hybrid ARMs, may continue to face challenges. Supervisory GuidanceOver the past several years, the Federal Reserve has been monitoring these developments and has adjusted our supervisory activities accordingly. Banking supervisors expect our regulated institutions to be mindful of the risks posed by new and expanding business activities. The principles of sound lending have been with us for generations and most of the guidance we issue is to remind bankers what they should already be doing. In our routine on-site examinations over the past several years, most banking practices that we have observed have reflected sound risk management. However, at a few institutions, we have observed weaknesses in risk management and consumer protection practices. We have addressed issues involving these individual institutions through the examination process with requirements that management take appropriate corrective actions. We have also responded by issuing guidance, with the other federal regulators, on subjects such as real estate lending, subprime lending, home equity lending, nontraditional mortgages, and securitization. Since the early 1990s, the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies have issued a number of guidance statements on residential real estate lending that focus on sound underwriting and risk-management practices, including the evaluation of a borrower’s repayment capacity and collateral valuation. Interagency Guidelines for Real Estate LendingThe foundation for much of this guidance is the 1993Interagency Guidelines for Real Estate Lending, which was issued pursuant to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA). FDICIA required the federal banking agencies to prescribe uniform real estate lending standards. The final rule requires every depository institution to establish and maintain comprehensive, written real estate lending policies that are consistent with safe and sound banking practices. A key point in this document is that prudently underwritten real estate loans should reflect all relevant credit factors, including the capacity of the borrower to adequately service the debt. Interagency Guidance on Subprime LendingThe 1999Interagency Guidance on Subprime Lending, as expanded in 2001, discusses essential components of a well-structured risk-management program for subprime lenders. This guidance emphasizes that lending standards should include well-defined underwriting parameters such as acceptable loan-to-value ratios, debt-to-income ratios, and minimum acceptable credit scores. It advises institutions actively involved in the securitization and sale of subprime loans to develop contingency plans that include alternate funding sources and measures for raising additional capital if investors lose their appetite for certain risks. The subprime guidance, as amended in 2001, also addresses concerns about predatory or abusive lending practices. The agencies recognized three common characteristics of predatory lending, including making unaffordable loans based on the assets of the borrower rather than on the borrower’s ability to repay an obligation; inducing a borrower to refinance a loan repeatedly in order to charge high points and fees each time the loan is refinanced; or engaging in fraud or deception to conceal the true nature of the loan obligation, or ancillary products, from an unsuspecting or unsophisticated borrower. The guidance advises institutions that higher fees and interest rates, combined with compensation incentives, can foster predatory pricing or discriminatory practices and that institutions should take special care to avoid violating fair lending and consumer protection laws and regulations. The agencies expressed the expectation that institutions should recognize the elevated levels of credit and other risks arising from subprime lending activities and advised that these activities require more robust risk management and, often, additional capital. The guidance also states that loans to borrowers who do not demonstrate the capacity to repay the loan, as structured, from sources other than collateral are generally considered unsafe and unsound. Where risk-management practices are deemed deficient, the guidance advises examiners to criticize bank management and to require corrective actions. Interagency Guidance on Nontraditional Mortgage Product RisksIn 2005, the Federal Reserve and the other federal agencies observed that lenders were increasingly combining nontraditional or “exotic” mortgage loans, which defer repayment of principal and sometimes interest, with the risk layering practices that I talked about earlier. In particular, the agencies were concerned about the lack of principal amortization and the potential for negative amortization in these products. Moreover, we were concerned that the easing of underwriting standards and the marketing of these products to a wider spectrum of borrowers, including investors purchasing rental properties, might create higher embedded risks. To address those concerns, the Federal Reserve and other agencies issued guidance on nontraditional mortgage products last September. TheInteragency Guidance on Nontraditional Mortgage Product Riskshighlights sound underwriting procedures, portfolio risk management, and consumer protection practices that institutions should follow to prudently originate and manage nontraditional mortgage loans. A major aspect of this guidance is the recommendation that the analysis of repayment capacity should include an evaluation of borrowers’ ability to repay debt by final maturity at the fully indexed rate, assuming a fully amortizing repayment schedule. The agencies were also concerned that borrowers were obtaining these loans without understanding the risks as well as the benefits. The guidance also reminds institutions that they should clearly communicate the risks and features of these products to consumers in a timely manner, before consumers have applied for a loan. To complement the guidance on consumer protection, the agencies issued for comment proposed illustrations that show how institutions might explain the risks and terms to consumers in a clear and timely manner. Currently, the agencies are reviewing the comment letters on that proposal. Proposed Guidance on Subprime Mortgage LendingEarlier this month, the agencies proposed theInteragency Statement on Subprime Mortgage Lendingfor public comment. This proposal specifies the same qualification standard as the nontraditional mortgage guidance and emphasizes the added dimension of risk when these products are combined with other features such as simultaneous second lines and little or no documentation of income or assets. However, unlike the nontraditional mortgage guidance, which targeted prime and subprime loans with the potential for negative amortization, the proposed guidance covers fully amortizing loans. The proposed subprime guidance would apply to all depository institutions, their subsidiaries, and non-depository affiliates, but not to state-regulated independent mortgage companies. To protect borrowers in the broader subprime market that is outside our purview, and to ensure a “level playing field” for depository institutions and independent mortgage companies, we coordinated the development of the proposed guidance with the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS). CSBS has committed to making every effort to encourage the states to consider proposing this guidance for state-regulated lenders. Supervisory ActivitiesRegulators became concerned in the late 1990s about certain subprime lending activities that had become the primary or sole business activity of some institutions. As regulators increased their scrutiny, it became clear that risk-management practices were deficient at some institutions. We understood that concentrations in subprime lending, if not properly managed, could result in significant safety and soundness concerns. Supervisors took actions to address identified deficiencies, including formal enforcement actions, but a few of these institutions were unable to resolve their credit problems and ultimately failed. The agencies issued the firstInteragency Statement on Subprime Lendingin 1999 to address such situations. Between 1999 and 2003, in implementing the guidance, the Federal Reserve focused on those institutions that had concentrations in subprime lending or were operating large subprime programs to ensure that risk-management practices were appropriate and that the activity was conducted in a safe, sound, and prudent manner. As examiners identified additional issues and concerns, the agencies recognized the need for additional guidance and issued the 2001 expanded subprime guidance. As the larger mortgage lenders under our supervision began to expand their subprime lending activities in recent years, examiners increased their scrutiny of risk-management practices, including lending policies, underwriting standards, portfolio limits and performance, and management information systems. Examiners also began to evaluate institutions’ advanced risk-management techniques to make sure bank managers understood the ramifications of a possible downturn. We also evaluated institutions’ securitization activities, particularly with respect to subprime lending, to determine if residual interests were properly valued and if there were any capital implications for implicit recourse. More recently, we have conducted a number of examinations on the subprime businesses of the banks and bank holding companies that we supervise, including subprime residential mortgage portfolios. These examinations have included the review of credit risk-management practices such as underwriting, portfolio risk management, and quality control processes concerning third-party originations. In addition, examiners have conducted reviews of stress testing, economic capital methods, and other quantitative risk-management techniques to ensure that banks are assessing the level and nature of the risks associated with subprime lending and nontraditional mortgages; residential lending appraisal practices to ensure appropriate collateral valuation processes; and new product review processes to ensure that disciplined approaches are being brought to new lending products and programs. Where Federal Reserve examiners observe weaknesses in the practices of supervised institutions, we ensure that these institutions take appropriate corrective action. In our examination reports to individual institutions, as needed, we highlight weaknesses in real estate lending practices, including residential mortgage activities, both from a safety and soundness and from a consumer protection perspective, and direct management to take recommended actions. Our ability to describe findings at specific institutions in this forum is limited because examination reports are, by their nature, highly confidential. For illustrative purposes, I will describe a few recent examples that involved supervised institutions. In one case, following the examination of a banking organization’s mortgage banking activities, examiners identified weaknesses in its risk management and controls and recommended that the institution improve its real estate appraisal processes, mortgage servicing asset valuations, and management information systems for tracking performance in specific product portfolios. Another institution, in which examiners discovered weaknesses in policies and procedures, was required to strengthen and amend practices to avoid further supervisory action. Regulatory Action to Protect ConsumersThe Federal Reserve also has significant rule-writing responsibilities for consumer protection laws such as the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) and for laws designed to assist in consumer protection efforts such as the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) of 1975. HMDA Loan Price InformationHMDA requires most mortgage lenders in metropolitan areas to collect data about their housing-related lending activity, report the data annually, and make the data publicly available. Congress authorized the Federal Reserve Board to issue regulations implementing HMDA. During the 1990s, the early growth of the subprime mortgage market raised concerns that some consumers lacked the information they needed to negotiate the best terms, or to protect themselves from unfair or deceptive practices. There were also concerns that wide price differences in these markets may reflect unlawful discrimination rather than legitimate risk- and cost-related factors. In 2002, to bring greater transparency to the subprime mortgage market, the Federal Reserve made two changes to the HMDA rules: adding a requirement to report loan price information for certain higher priced loans and extending reporting responsibilities to more independent state-regulated mortgage companies. These changes first took effect for HMDA data collected in 2004 and disclosed in 2005. Based on 2004 and 2005 HMDA data, independent mortgage companies originated slightly more than half of all subprime loans. The new loan price information and the expanded coverage of nondepositories have increased our ability to detect potential problems in the subprime market and to conduct reviews of banks’ fair lending practices. The changes have also facilitated the states’ oversight of independent state-regulated mortgage companies. The Board’s Review of the Truth in Lending DisclosuresThe Federal Reserve also has responsibility for the regulations associated with the TILA and its required disclosures. While consumer disclosures alone cannot solve the problems that lead to foreclosures, disclosures help consumers to understand the terms and features of various mortgage products before entering into a long-term financial obligation. To that end, the Federal Reserve Board has begun a comprehensive review of Regulation Z, which implements TILA. Currently, the Federal Reserve is addressing credit card disclosures and expects to address mortgage cost disclosures beginning later this year. Rulemakings take time, however, and in the meantime the Board has taken steps to address concerns that consumers are not getting sufficient information to help them understand the risks and features of ARMs and nontraditional mortgage products. The CHARM BookletThe Board and the Office of Thrift Supervision recently revised theConsumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages(CHARM booklet) to include additional information about nontraditional mortgage products, including hybrid ARMs. The CHARM booklet is an effective means of delivering to consumers information about ARMs because creditors are required to provide a copy of the booklet to each consumer when an application for an ARM is provided. Consumer Brochure on Nontraditional Mortgage ProductsThe Board has taken other steps to increase consumer awareness of the risks of nontraditional mortgage loans. We published a consumer education brochure,Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs-Are They for You?The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan, and is available in printed form and in electronic form on the Board’s website. Responding to the ChallengeThe Federal Reserve believes that the availability of credit to subprime borrowers is beneficial and that subprime loans can be originated in a safe and sound manner. We continue to focus on institutions’ sound underwriting and risk-management practices and to promote clear, balanced, and timely consumer disclosures. The proposedInteragency Statement on Subprime Mortgage Lendingspecifies that an institution’s analysis of a borrower’s repayment capacity should include an evaluation of the borrower’s ability to repay the debt by its final maturity at the fully indexed rate, assuming a fully amortizing repayment schedule. In proposing the guidance, the agencies specifically asked whether the subprime guidance would unduly restrict the ability of subprime borrowers to refinance their loans in order to avoid payment shock. We are mindful of unintended consequences that may affect credit availability to otherwise sound borrowers and are prepared to make changes in response to constructive comments. Lenders and investors should take an active role in working through the current problems in the subprime market. They should not manage subprime and nontraditional mortgage portfolios in the same way as they manage more traditional portfolios that do not contain the same level of risks. Lenders, portfolio managers, and mortgage servicers should be examining how interest rate increases, real estate price fluctuations, and future payment resets can affect delinquencies, default rates, foreclosures, and losses. Strategies should be developed to minimize the effect of deteriorating conditions on segments of the portfolio identified as at-risk. Lenders should be assessing how severely a stressed environment may affect the credit quality of their portfolios, especially with respect to the large volume of subprime adjustable-rate mortgages underwritten in the last year or so. As the supervisor of some of these institutions, the Federal Reserve will continue to closely monitor our institutions’ practices and the trends in this market. Although a rising number of borrowers are having difficulty meeting their obligations, regulated institutions do not face additional supervisory scrutiny if they pursue reasonable workout arrangements with these borrowers. Existing regulatory guidance does not require institutions to immediately foreclose on the underlying collateral when a borrower exhibits repayment difficulties. Working constructively with borrowers is typically in the long-term best interests of both financial institutions and the borrowers. Capital markets investors in securitizations have the same motivation as direct lenders in maximizing recoveries on defaulted loans. Thus, mortgage servicers will have an important role to play in working with delinquent borrowers. Established and well-rated loan servicers are usually given a range of options by investors in workout situations. These options could include modification of interest rates, payment restructuring, and extension of maturities. Working together, the federal regulatory agencies will continue to use their supervisory authority to ensure that regulated institutions have policies and procedures designed to treat borrowers fairly, both when seeking new credit and when working through financial difficulties. In conclusion, I would like to commend you, Chairman Dodd, Ranking Member Shelby, and the Committee for holding this hearing today. The issues you have raised pertaining to the subprime mortgage markets will serve as an important reminder to both borrowers and lenders of the risks that can be inherent in complex financial products designed to make credit more widely available. As I mentioned previously, the principles of sound lending have been with us for generations. From a supervisory perspective, the Federal Reserve believes those principles need to be part of any risk-management approach to new and emerging products such as subprime lending and risk-layered loans, as well as the securitization of such loans. We also believe that consumer education efforts to explain both the benefits and risks of new financial products are important, including disclosures that borrowers who are not fully conversant with financial products can easily understand. I am prepared to answer any questions you may have. Footnotes 1.United States Census Bureau.Return to text 2.Estimates based on data from LoanPerformance Corp. and the Mortgage Bankers Association.Return to text 3.Delinquency rates on subprime variable-rate mortgages rose during 2006 from 6.3 to 10.9 percent, according to data from LoanPerformance (data from the Mortgage Bankers Association show a similar pattern; delinquency rates are for loans 90 days or more past due or in foreclosure). Delinquencies in the Alt-A sector have increased at rates comparable to subprime loans, but the overall delinquency level is far lower. For example, Alt-A loans 60 days or more past due represented between two and three percent of all Alt-A loans in January 2007. Because, at most, one in ten borrowers has a subprime variable rate mortgage, and because delinquency rates on other types of loans have remained relatively low and stable, the overall delinquency rate on all loans drifted up only slightly during 2006.Return to text 1990 and 1994- Poor real estate appraisal practices were identified as a contributing factor to real estate lending problems at failed institutions in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Pursuant to the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989, the agencies adopted real estate appraisal regulations to establish appropriate standards for regulated institutions' real estate appraisal practices. In 1994, the agencies amended their appraisal regulations and issued Interagency Appraisal and Evaluation Guidelines to further promote sound appraisal practices.1993- In response to poor real estate lending practices in the late 1980s and early 1990s that led to thrift and bank failures, and the FDIC Improvement Act of 1991, the agencies adopted regulations and guidelines on real estate lending standards for commercial and residential lending. These guidelines impose supervisory loan-to-value (LTV) limits and capital limitations on high LTV loans.1998 through 2002- Five institutions closed due to problems related to subprime lending, including poor underwriting, fraud, and valuation of securitization and residual interests.July 1998 - BestbankSeptember 1999 - KeystoneNovember 1999 - Pacific Thrift and LoanJuly 2001 - SuperiorFebruary 2002 - Nextbank1999- The agencies identified problems related to the risk management practices and valuation of securitization and residual interests at federally regulated subprime lenders. In December 1999, the agencies issued the Interagency Guidance On Asset Securitization Activities that describes the proper valuation of residual interests and highlights situations where such interest should be assigned no value.1999- Problems were observed at both regulated and nonregulated subprime lenders, resulting in the bankruptcy of several nonregulated lenders. In March 1999, the agencies issued the Interagency Guidance on Subprime Lending to address concerns with mono-line subprime lending institutions.1999- In October 1999, the agencies issued the Interagency Guidance on High Loan-to-Value (LTV) Residential Real Estate Lending to remind institutions that risks are higher in residential mortgages when the LTV ratio exceeds 90 percent and that institutions' risk management practices need to address these risks.2001- In January 2001, the agencies issued the Expanded Guidance for Subprime Lending Programs. The issuance was in large part in response to the increasing number of mono-line subprime lending institutions, particularly credit card and residential mortgage lending. The guidance addresses a number of concerns related to the subprime lending business model and inappropriate risk management practices and underwriting standards.2001- As a result of concerns with predatory lending in the subprime mortgage market, the Federal Reserve revised the rules implementing the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) to extend HOEPA's protections to more high-cost loans and to strengthen HOEPA's prohibitions and restrictions, including a requirement that lenders generally document and verify a consumer's ability to repay a high-cost mortgage loan.2002- The Federal Reserve expanded the data collection and disclosure rules under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) to increase transparency in the subprime mortgage market. New data elements were added on loan pricing for certain higher priced loans, which helps to facilitate the federal banking and thrift agencies' ability to identify potential problems in the subprime market. The Federal Reserve also expanded the share of nondepository state-regulated mortgage companies that must report HMDA data, which has provided a more complete picture of the mortgage market, including the subprime mortgage market.2003- The agencies observed weaknesses in regulated institutions' appraisal practices and issued in October the Interagency Guidance on Independent Appraisal and Evaluation Functions. The statement reinforces the importance of appraiser independence from the loan origination and credit decision process to ensure that valuations are fairly and appropriately determined.2003 to 2006- The Federal Reserve issued three formal enforcement actions and three informal actions, which involve mortgage lending issues, including subprime mortgage lending. Formal enforcement actions included:Citigroup Inc. and CitiFinancial Credit Company: Cease & Desist Order 5/27/04Doral Financial Corporation - Cease & Desist Order - 3/16/06R&G Financial Corporation - Cease & Desist Order - 3/16/062004- In March 2004, the Federal Reserve and the FDIC issued Interagency Guidance on Unfair or Deceptive Acts or Practices by State-Chartered Banks. This guidance describes standards that the agencies will apply to determine when acts or practices by state-chartered banks are unfair or deceptive. Such practices are illegal under section five of the Federal Trade Commission Act.2005- In February 2005, the agencies under the auspices of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council issued interagency guidance on the Detection, Investigation, and Deterrence of Mortgage Loan Fraud Involving Third Parties to assist the banking industry in detecting, investigating, and deterring third party mortgage fraud. The term "third party" refers to the parties necessary to execute a residential mortgage other than a financial institution or a legitimate borrower. Third parties include mortgage brokers, real estate appraisers, and settlement agents.2005- As a result of the 2003 interagency appraisal independence guidance, many institutions started to review their appraisal practices and asked for additional guidance on appropriate practices. In March the agencies issued a follow-up document of questions and answers to promote sound appraisal and collateral valuation practices.2005- In response to supervisory concerns that regulated institutions' risk management practices were not keeping pace with the rapid growth and changing risk profile of their home equity loan portfolios, the agencies issued in May the Interagency Credit Risk Management Guidance for Home Equity Lending.2005 to 2006- The Federal Reserve conducted supervisory reviews of mortgage lending, including subprime lending activity, at large banking institutions with significant mortgage lending activity. The focus of these reviews was an assessment of the adequacy of the institutions' credit risk management practices, including lending policies, underwriting standards, appraisal practices, portfolio limits and performance, economic capital, credit stress testing, management information systems, and controls over third party originations.2004 to 2005- The agencies observed a rapid growth of mortgage products that allow for the deferral of principal, and sometimes interest, (interest-only loans and payment option ARMs) that contain the potential for substantial payment shock when the loans begin to fully amortize. In 2004 and 2005, the Federal Reserve and the other agencies reviewed the nontraditional mortgage lending activity and risk management practices at selected major regulated institutions. During this time, the Federal Reserve staff met with various industry and consumer groups to discuss the trends and practices in the nontraditional mortgage markets. In December 2005, the agencies issued the proposed Interagency Guidance on Nontraditional Mortgage Products in December 2005.2006- In October 2006, the agencies issued the Interagency Guidance on Nontraditional Mortgage Product Risks. The guidance addresses the need for an institution to have appropriate risk management practices and underwriting standards, including an assessment of a borrower's ability to repay the loan at the fully indexed rate, assuming a fully amortizing repayment schedule, including any balances added through negative amortization. The guidance details recommended practices for lenders' consumer disclosures so that a borrower receives clear, balanced and timely information.2006- In October 2006, the agencies issued two additional documents related to the nontraditional mortgage guidance: (1) Proposed Illustrations of Consumer Information for Nontraditional Mortgage Products and (2) an addendum to the May 2005 Interagency Credit Risk Management Guidance for Home Equity Lending.Current- In March 2007, the agencies issued for public comment the Proposed Statement on Subprime Mortgage Lending in which the agencies discuss the risk management, underwriting standards, and consumer disclosure practices for a regulated institution's subprime mortgage lending activity.
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Madam Chair Maloney, Ranking Member Gillmor, members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss how current subprime practices and products affect homeownership and foreclosures, and the interagency proposed guidance on subprime mortgage lending. Recent reports on delinquencies and foreclosures in the subprime market underscore the need for clarity regarding these matters and you are to be commended for holding this hearing today. My testimony will discuss the recent increases in delinquencies and foreclosures in the subprime mortgage market and some of the developments that may have contributed to these increases. I will discuss the Federal Reserve Board’s ongoing efforts as a banking supervisor to ensure that the institutions we supervise are managing their mortgage lending activities in a safe and sound manner, including assessing the repayment capacity of borrowers. I will also discuss several steps the Board has undertaken to strengthen protections for consumers, including subprime borrowers, and I will discuss those efforts as well as our plans to continue this work in the near and longer term. Finally, I will highlight our work through our Community Affairs function to support foreclosure prevention through approaches such as education and outreach to troubled borrowers at risk of losing their homes. The Growth of the Subprime Market and the Recent Increase in Delinquencies and ForeclosuresMortgages and the Role of the Capital Markets The banking system has changed dramatically since the mid-1970s. Then, banks and savings and loans used their deposit base and other funding sources to finance, originate, and hold loans to maturity. These financial institutions were highly exposed to their local community residential markets, and their analysis of credit risk was generally limited to reviews of individual loans. Home mortgages had fixed rates and there were few alternative products available to consumers. Today, the mortgage lending business has changed dramatically with the development of national markets for mortgages, technological changes, and the advent of securitization. The traditional book-and-hold model of mortgage lending has shifted to an originate-to-distribute model. While commercial banks still have a significant role in the mortgage origination and distribution process, they are no longer the leading originators or holders of residential mortgages. Securitization has allowed many financial institutions to use increasingly sophisticated strategies to package and resell home mortgages to investors. This has resulted in increased competition and a wide variety of mortgage products and choices for consumers, in a market in which mortgage brokers and mortgage finance companies compete aggressively with traditional banks to offer new products to would-be homeowners. These innovations mean that insured depository institutions are now able to manage liquidity and control credit concentrations, maturities, and loan balances in portfolios much more than they could in the past through the use of financial instruments such as mortgage-backed securities. For capital market investors, securitization has reduced transaction costs, increased transparency, and increased liquidity. The Growth of the Subprime Market and Increased Opportunities for Homeownership One of the products of this new mortgage market is subprime lending.1Subprime lending has grown rapidly in recent years. In 1994, fewer than 5 percent of mortgage originations were subprime, but by 2005 about 20 percent of new mortgage loans were subprime. The expanded access to subprime mortgage credit has helped fuel growth in homeownership. The national rate of homeownership increased from 1995 through 2006, from 65 percent to nearly 69 percent of all households. This means that nearly 67 million households now own homes, compared to roughly 64 million 10 years ago. All major racial and ethnic groups have made gains in homeownership, but in percentage terms the largest increases have been made by minority households. In particular, from 1995 to 2006 the homeownership rate has increased by 7 percent among white households, 13 percent among African American households, and 18 percent among Hispanic households. Significantly, the Federal Reserve’s Survey of Consumer Finances indicates that, from 1995 to 2004, census tracts in all income groups experienced gains in homeownership, with rates in lower-income areas growing by 6 percent, somewhat faster than the 4 percent growth rate in higher-income areas. Explaining Increased Delinquencies and Foreclosures The rise in subprime foreclosures from the multi-year lows they hit in the middle of 2005 is in part a consequence of broader economic conditions including rising interest rates and slowing house price growth. Until recently, borrowers with adjustable rate mortgages could cope with payment increases by refinancing or in some cases selling, because of rapid house price appreciation. In 2006, however, mortgage interest rates hit four-year highs, the volume of home sales declined and the rate of house price appreciation decelerated or in some cases home prices fell, leaving the most recent subprime borrowers vulnerable to payment difficulties. Subprime borrowers with ARMs have experienced the largest recent increase in delinquency and foreclosure rates, while prime borrowers experienced almost no increase in delinquencies and foreclosures. Borrowers may not be able to avoid sharp payment increases as they could in earlier years. Even borrowers with enough equity to refinance their adjustable rate mortgages may face difficulty finding a loan with affordable payments, as interest rates are higher than in earlier years. However, with long-term rates unusually low relative to short-term rates, this problem is not as acute as it would be under a historically more normal configuration of interest rates. Moreover, an unusually large number of subprime loans have defaulted shortly after origination. In many of these “early payment defaults,” borrowers stopped making payments before they faced payment shocks, suggesting that in 2006 some lenders may have lowered their underwriting standards in the face of reduced borrower demand for credit. Because of the rapid expansion of subprime lending in recent years, lenders, investors, and ratings agencies had limited data with which to model credit risk posed by new borrowers or novel mortgage types, and so may have underestimated the risk involved. Several lenders have already been forced out of the subprime market, in part because of the wave of early payment defaults on mortgages they originated. Although there are some indications that the market is correcting itself, we remain concerned that over the next one to two years, existing subprime borrowers, especially those with more recently originated ARMs, may face more difficulty. They are likely to continue to experience elevated delinquency and foreclosure rates as these loans reach their interest rate reset point and they are faced with larger monthly payments. The Board’s Responses to this Growing MarketOver the past several years, the Federal Reserve has monitored developments in subprime lending. At the same time that subprime lending has increased homeownership, it has also been associated with higher levels of delinquency, foreclosure, and, in some cases, abusive lending practices. While these are serious problems, the Board believes they need to be addressed in a way that preserves incentives for responsible subprime lenders so that borrowers with non-prime credit can become homeowners or access the equity in their homes, or have flexibility in refinancing their mortgages when necessary. It is important that any actions we might take in response to these market outcomes are well calibrated and do not have unintended consequences. Constricting the market and returning to a situation where some borrowers have very limited access to credit is not an ideal solution. We want to encourage, not limit, mortgage lending by responsible lenders. I would like to discuss how we approach these issues through supervision, examination, guidance and regulation. Supervisory ActivitiesExamination and Enforcement The Federal Reserve conducts regular examinations of its institutions for both safety and soundness and compliance with consumer protection laws. We examine the mortgage businesses of the banks and bank holding companies that we supervise, including subprime residential portfolios. Safety and soundness examinations include a review of credit risk-management practices such as underwriting, portfolio risk management, and quality control processes concerning third-party originations. In addition, examiners review stress testing, economic capital methods, and other quantitative risk-management techniques to ensure that banks are assessing the level and nature of these risks appropriately; asset securitization activity to ensure appropriate risk management and capital treatment; residential lending appraisal practices to ensure appropriate collateral valuation processes; and new product review processes to ensure that disciplined approaches are being brought to new lending products and programs. Regular examinations for compliance with consumer protection laws are also conducted by a specially trained cadre of examiners. The scope of these examinations includes a review of the bank’s compliance with the Truth in Lending Act, the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act, the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, the Community Reinvestment Act, and other federal consumer protection laws. Where Federal Reserve examiners observe weaknesses or noncompliance in the practices of supervised institutions, examiners document them in a report to bank management. Corrective action is requested in the examination report and we find that bank management in most cases voluntarily addresses violations or weaknesses without the need for formal enforcement actions. In those rare instances where the bank is not willing to address the problem, we have a full range of powerful enforcement tools at our disposal to compel corrective action. I have listed the enforcement actions we have taken in an appendix to my testimony. These actions may appear to be few in number, but that is because in the overwhelming majority of cases bank management corrects the weakness or problem without our having to compel them to do so. It is also due to the fact that our institutions are not heavily engaged in subprime lending. Guidance and Regulations We have issued several pieces of guidance in concert with the other agencies to address weaknesses in underwriting and risk management at the institutions we supervise. We have also revised regulations to address concerns about abusive practices; those regulations apply broadly throughout the mortgage industry. Interagency Guidelines for Real Estate Lending. The foundation for much of the guidance we have issued throughout the last decade is the 1993Interagency Guidelines for Real Estate Lending,which was issued pursuant to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA). FDICIA required the federal banking agencies to prescribe uniform real estate lending standards. The final rule requires every depository institution to establish and maintain comprehensive, written real estate lending policies that are consistent with safe and sound banking practices. A key point in this document is that prudently underwritten real estate loans should reflect all relevant credit factors, including the capacity of the borrower to adequately service the debt. Expanded Subprime Guidance.The 1999Interagency Guidance on Subprime Lending, originally issued in 1999 and expanded in 2001, discusses essential components of a well-structured risk-management program for subprime lenders. This guidance emphasizes that lending standards should include well-defined underwriting parameters such as acceptable loan-to-value ratios, debt-to-income ratios, and minimum acceptable credit scores. It advises that institutions actively involved in the securitization and sale of subprime loans should develop contingency plans that include alternate funding sources and measures for raising additional capital if investors lose their appetite for certain risks. The subprime guidance, as amended in 2001, also addresses concerns about predatory or abusive lending practices. The agencies recognized three common characteristics of predatory lending, including making unaffordable loans based on the assets of the borrower rather than on the borrower’s ability to repay an obligation; inducing a borrower to refinance a loan repeatedly in order to charge high points and fees each time the loan is refinanced (“loan flipping”); or engaging in fraud or deception to conceal the true nature of the loan obligation, or ancillary products, from an unsuspecting or unsophisticated borrower. The guidance advises institutions that higher fees and interest rates, combined with compensation incentives, can foster predatory pricing or discriminatory practices, and that institutions should take special care to avoid violating fair lending and consumer protection laws and regulations. The agencies expressed the expectation that institutions should recognize the elevated levels of credit and other risks arising from subprime lending activities and that these activities require more intensive risk management and, often, additional capital. The guidance also states that loans to borrowers who do not demonstrate the capacity to repay the loan, as structured, from sources other than the collateral pledged are generally considered unsafe and unsound. Where risk-anagement practices are deemed deficient, the guidance advises examiners to criticize bank management and to require corrective actions. 2001 Revisions to HOEPA Rules.In 1994, Congress enacted the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) as an amendment to the Truth in Lending Act (TILA), in response to testimony before Congress about predatory home equity lending practices in underserved markets, where some lenders were making high-rate, high-fee home equity loans to cash-poor homeowners. HOEPA identifies a class of high‑cost mortgage loans through criteria keyed to the loans’ rates and fees and requires creditors to provide enhanced disclosures of, and to comply with substantive restrictions on, the terms of those loans. The Board implemented HOEPA through revisions to TILA rules effective in 1995. In 2001, the Board revised the HOEPA rules in response to renewed concerns about predatory lending. The 2001 rule changes, effective in 2002, extended HOEPA’s protections to more high-cost loans and strengthened HOEPA’s prohibitions and restrictions, including by requiring that lenders generally document and verify a consumer’s ability to repay a high-cost mortgage loan. In addition, the rule changes addressed concerns that high-cost loans were “packed” with credit life insurance or other similar products that increased the loan’s cost without commensurate benefit to consumers. The Board also increased protections for consumers under discretionary rulemaking authority in HOEPA that authorizes the Board to prohibit unfair or deceptive practices or practices designed to evade HOEPA for all mortgage loans. Specifically, in 2001 the Board revised the HOEPA rules to prohibit a HOEPA lender from refinancing one of its own loans with another HOEPA loan (“flipping”) within the first year, unless the new loan is “in the borrower’s interest.” We also adopted a prohibition on “demand notes” for high-cost, closed-end mortgages to mirror the similar statutory prohibition in TILA for home equity lines of credit. In addition, the Board prohibited creditors from evading HOEPA’s requirements for closed-end loans by documenting the transaction as an “open-end” line of credit when it does not qualify, because there is no expectation of repeat transactions under a reusable line. These three revisions to HOEPA are cases where the Board determined that it could write “bright-line” rules defining an unfair and prohibited practice. However, because a determination of unfairness or deception depends heavily on the facts of an individual case, the Board has not issued other rules under this provision. The Board has undertaken a major review of Regulation Z, the implementing regulation for the Truth in Lending Act, of which HOEPA is a part. During this review, the Board will determine if there are opportunities to further utilize this authority in an appropriate manner. HMDA Loan Price Information and Expanded Coverage of Nondepository Lenders.The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) requires most mortgage lenders in metropolitan areas to collect data about their housing-related lending activity, report the data annually, and make the data publicly available. Congress authorized the Federal Reserve Board to issue regulations implementing HMDA. In 2002, to bring greater transparency to the subprime mortgage market, the Board made two changes to the HMDA rules: adding a requirement to report loan price information for certain higher priced loans, and extending reporting responsibilities to more independent state-regulated mortgage companies. These changes first took effect for HMDA data collected in 2004 and disclosed in 2005. Based on 2004 and 2005 HMDA data, independent mortgage companies originated slightly more than half of subprime loans. The new loan price information and the expanded coverage of nondepositories have increased our ability to detect potential problems in the subprime market and to conduct reviews of banks’ fair lending practices. It has also facilitated the states’ ability to oversee independent state-regulated mortgage companies. Guidance on Unfair or Deceptive Acts or Practices. In March 2004, the Board and the FDIC issued guidance on Unfair or Deceptive Acts or Practices (UDAP) to state-chartered banks. The guidance outlines the legal standards the agencies use in carrying out their responsibilities for enforcing the Federal Trade Commission Act’s prohibition of unfair or deceptive acts or practices. The guidance is based on long-standing Federal Trade Commission policy statements that have been applied by courts. The guidance outlines strategies for banks to use to avoid engaging in unfair or deceptive acts or practices, to minimize their own risks and to protect consumers. Among other things, the guidance focuses on credit advertising and solicitations, loan servicing, and managing and monitoring creditors’ employees and third-party service providers. 2006 Guidance on Nontraditional Mortgage Product Risks. In 2005, the Federal Reserve and the other federal agencies observed that lenders were increasingly combining nontraditional or “exotic” mortgage loans, which defer repayment of principal and sometimes interest, with the risk-layering practices that I talked about earlier. Of particular concern were the lack of principal amortization and the potential for negative amortization in these products. Moreover, the easing of underwriting standards and the marketing of these products to a wider spectrum of borrowers, including those purchasing rental properties, held the potential to create larger risks. The guidance also addresses the concern that borrowers were obtaining these loans without understanding their risks as well as their benefits. To address those concerns, the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies issued guidance on nontraditional mortgage products last September. TheInteragency Guidance on Nontraditional Mortgage Product Riskshighlights sound underwriting procedures, portfolio risk management, and consumer protection practices that institutions should follow to prudently originate and manage nontraditional mortgage loans. A major aspect of this guidance is the recommendation that a lender’s analysis of repayment capacity should include an evaluation of the borrower’s ability to repay debt by final maturity at the fully indexed rate, assuming a fully amortizing repayment schedule. The guidance also reminds institutions that they should clearly communicate the risks and features of these products to consumers in a timely manner, before consumers have applied for a loan. To complement the guidance on consumer protection, the agencies issued for comment proposed illustrations that show how institutions might explain the risks and terms to consumers in a clear and timely manner. The agencies are reviewing the comment letters to develop final illustrations. Proposed Guidance on Subprime Mortgage Lending.Earlier this month, the agencies proposed theInteragency Statement on Subprime Mortgage Lendingfor public comment. This proposal specifies the same qualification standard as the nontraditional mortgage guidance and emphasizes the added dimension of risk when these products are combined with other features such as simultaneous second lien loans in lieu of a down payment, or the use of underwriting that involves little or no documentation of income or assets. However, unlike the nontraditional mortgage guidance, which primarily targeted prime loans with the potential for negative amortization, the proposed guidance is primarily directed to loans targeted to subprime borrowers and covers fully amortizing loans. The proposed subprime guidance also differs from earlier guidance in that it highlights the need for lenders to underwrite based not only on principal and interest but also on taxes and insurance. And, the proposed guidance provides that lenders should inform consumers of the need to budget for taxes and insurance if escrows are not required. The proposed subprime guidance would apply to all depository institutions, their subsidiaries, and non-depository affiliates, but not to state-regulated independent mortgage companies. These mortgage companies originated slightly more than half of subprime loans, according to 2004 and 2005 HMDA data. To protect borrowers in the broader subprime market that is outside our purview, and to ensure a “level playing field” for depository institutions and independent mortgage companies, we coordinated the development of the proposed guidance with the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS). CSBS has committed to making every effort to encourage the states to consider proposing this guidance for state-regulated lenders. Public comments are due on the proposed guidance by May 7, 2007. The agencies are particularly interested in comments on whether the guidance would unduly restrict the ability of existing subprime borrowers to refinance their loans and avoid payment shock. The Board’s Plans to Make Consumer Disclosures More EffectiveThe Federal Reserve has responsibility for the regulations associated with TILA and its required disclosures. While consumer disclosures alone cannot solve the problems that lead to foreclosures, disclosures help consumers to understand the terms and features of various mortgage products before entering into a long-term financial obligation. To that end, the Federal Reserve Board has begun a comprehensive review of Regulation Z, which implements TILA. Currently, the Federal Reserve is addressing credit card disclosures and expects to address mortgage cost disclosures in the next phase of the review. I would like to tell you what we have already done to prepare for the next phase of the TILA review, some intermediate steps we have taken to improve consumer information, and our plans for the review itself. The Federal Reserve’s Hearings on Home-Equity Lending: Building Sustainable Homeownership Through Responsible Lending and Informed Consumer Choice During the summer of 2006, the Federal Reserve held public hearings addressing sustainable homeownership in four cities. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Board’s review of Regulation Z disclosures, including disclosures for ARMs and for nontraditional mortgage products such as payment option ARMs. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing ARMs and, in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about the features and risks associated with mortgages. The hearings explored consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges involved in designing more effective and informative disclosures. At the hearings, lenders cited the strong performance of products such as payment option ARMs. Industry representatives believed that when loans are prudently underwritten, consumers are able to benefit from the flexibility these products provide without being at risk of default. On the other hand, consumer advocates and state officials testified that aggressive marketing and the complexity of ARMs put borrowers at additional risk of obtaining mortgages that they do not understand and might not be able to afford. Consumer advocates were particularly concerned about mortgage brokers and lenders “push-marketing” nontraditional mortgages and ARMs to low-income consumers and borrowers who live on fixed-incomes, without adequate regard for whether the products are appropriate for their particular circumstances. They expressed concern about marketing that focuses too heavily on low initial payments that are based on discounted rates or “minimum payment options” that quickly expire. While they supported enhanced disclosures to inform borrowers about worst-case payment scenarios, they questioned whether disclosures alone can protect consumers because the products are so complex. Accordingly, consumer advocates testified in favor of adopting legal standards that would hold brokers and lenders liable for making unaffordable mortgage loans. As I indicated, the Board plans to begin a review of the mortgage cost disclosures this year. However, because rulemakings take time, the Board took more immediate steps to improve the information consumers receive about ARMs and other alternative mortgages. These steps included revising the CHARM booklet and publishing a consumer education brochure. The CHARM Booklet The Board and the Office of Thrift Supervision recently revised the Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages (CHARM booklet) to include additional information about nontraditional mortgage products, including “hybrid” ARMs that include an initial fixed-rate period. The CHARM booklet is an effective means of delivering to consumers information about adjustable rate mortgage products because creditors are required to provide a copy of the booklet to each consumer when an application for an ARM is provided. The Board’s Role in Consumer Education The Board has taken other steps to increase consumer awareness of the risks of nontraditional mortgage loans. We provide consumer information, both in print and on the web, on adjustable rate, interest-only, and payment option mortgages. We published a consumer education brochure titled:Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Payment-Option ARMs--Are They for You?The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan. The Board’s Review of Mortgage Disclosures under Regulation Z To ensure that consumers get timely information in a form that is readily understandable, the Board will study alternatives for improving both the content and format of disclosures, including revising the model forms published by the Board. As a general matter, in crafting regulations, the Board seeks to gather as much information as possible by conducting outreach to the industry, consumer interest groups, consumers, regulators, and other interested parties. We use research and survey data, consumer focus groups, and consumer testing to learn how consumers use and process information about financial services. After regulatory proposals have been published, we obtain input through the public comment process. In addition, we obtain input from the Board’s Consumer Advisory Council, comprised of representatives from consumer and community organizations, financial institutions, industry trade groups, academics, and state and local officials from across the country. And sometimes we hold public meetings such as the home-equity hearings that I mentioned before. In considering how to improve disclosures for ARMs and other alternative mortgage products under TILA, the Board will conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when that information is most useful, what wording and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, prioritized, and organized to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Board will use design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that will be effective in communicating information to consumers. This process will also assist the Board in developing model disclosure forms. Based on this review and testing, the Board will revise Regulation Z within the existing framework of TILA. If the Board determines that useful changes to the closed-end disclosures are best accomplished through legislation, the Board will inform the Congress. Community Affairs and Foreclosure Prevention InitiativesWe sought testimony at our home equity hearings last year on what works to help prevent troubled borrowers to avoid foreclosure. Industry and consumer advocates who testified agreed that the greatest barrier to working with troubled borrowers is in simply making contact with them. These witnesses told us that lenders can reach troubled borrowers through trusted community advocates, and that local partnerships between community groups and lenders can help reduce the number of homes lost to foreclosure. One national nonprofit homeownership organization, NeighborWorks America® (NeighborWorks), has been working tirelessly to forge local and regional partnerships dedicated to homeownership preservation in recent years to assist financially troubled borrowers. The benefit of such outlets is illustrated in an informal survey of borrowers in foreclosure conducted by a NeighborWorks affiliate in Chicago that found that 50 percent of borrowers in foreclosures never sought help or advice about the foreclosure from their lender, primarily because these borrowers believe their lender cannot or will not do anything to help them. The Federal Reserve Board actively supports NeighborWorks in both its national efforts and regional initiatives. A Federal Reserve governor serves on the NeighborWorks board of directors, offering strategic direction and input on the corporation’s national programs. Board staff also serves on a NeighborWorks’ advisory council, providing technical assistance on the development of national homeownership counseling and education standards, with an emphasis on post-homebuyer counseling programs. Our efforts are intended to provide consistency in the education on the responsibilities and financial management skills necessary for successful homeownership. In addition, the Federal Reserve Banks throughout the country work with regional affiliates of NeighborWorks, as I will discuss later. This information underscores the value of local and regional engagement in addressing mortgage challenges, which stem from many factors and dynamics in local markets. Given this, the decentralized nature of the Federal Reserve System, and in particular, its Community Affairs Offices, have enabled the Federal Reserve Banks to respond to concerns of mortgage delinquency and foreclosure in ways that are directly responsive to the needs in their markets. Various initiatives have worked to increase understanding of the issues surrounding troubled borrowers and identify strategies to respond to their needs. Other efforts have sought to improve data and research on foreclosure to help illuminate issues and communities of concern. I will offer a few examples of the work of the Federal Reserve Community Affairs Offices (CAOs), and I have provided a more complete list of such initiatives as an addendum to my testimony. The Atlanta Federal Reserve District, which includes several southern states--Georgia, Florida, Louisiana, in particular--that are experiencing an increasing number of foreclosures, is part of a state-wide foreclosure prevention taskforce, which is undertaking a series of activities around fraud prevention, consumer education, and training for counseling agencies. This initiative began in 2005, when foreclosures spiked in Atlanta, with the Federal Reserve Bank partnering with the district office of NeighborWorks America® and the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. The effort has worked to provide foreclosure prevention training to partnering counseling agencies, to promote the use of homeownership preservation hotlines, and to increase consumer education and awareness of foreclosure prevention resources. In the Gulf Coast, the Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank has also supported outreach to consumers, including training for counselors and promotion of a hotline and workout arrangements, with a focus on foreclosure prevention. Similarly, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland’s Community Affairs Office has responded to the widespread problem of mortgage foreclosures in its District, especially in Ohio where foreclosure rates are among the highest in the country. To respond to the issue, the Cleveland Federal Reserve Bank’s CAO is working with government, financial institutions and community based organizations in assessing and addressing regional foreclosure issues. It hosted an Ohio Foreclosure Summit in 2005, which led to the introduction of the NeighborWorks America® foreclosure hotline in Ohio, and addressed issues of financial education, predatory lending, policy, regulation, and enforcement. A similar event was held in 2006 to continue to engage community, industry and government representatives in discussing issues surrounding foreclosure. Other Federal Reserve Banks have worked to address challenges associated with access to data on mortgage delinquency and foreclosure in their Districts. The Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank has been tracking and posting foreclosure and delinquency data from the Mortgage Bankers Association for each of the states within its District to help identify trends and areas of concern. Ongoing research efforts will seek to develop a literature review around the possible causes of foreclosure, analyze foreclosure trends by mortgage types, and assess the potential impact in the Kansas City Federal Reserve District. The Boston Federal Reserve Bank recently published a paper on foreclosure trends in Massachusetts. The CAO at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis has worked to acquire local data on foreclosures and share it with audiences throughout the Twin Cities. In addition, forthcoming research undertaken by staff analyzes foreclosure data in the Twin Cities to identify ways of predicting potential foreclosures, which may be useful as a tool for targeting foreclosure prevention efforts. These results will be presented at our Community Affairs System Research Conference to be hosted in Washington later this week. Conclusion Undoubtedly, the impact of mortgage delinquency and foreclosure on consumers and communities is one of great concern to the Federal Reserve, and we have worked to respond to the issue at both the national and regional levels. One of the many challenges that we confront in this environment is to address concerns regarding mortgage lending practices while preserving the flexibility necessary to allow lenders to help troubled borrowers by employing various foreclosure prevention strategies, including debt restructuring and refinance. Certainly, we all recognize the importance of preserving the record rate of homeownership, which is to the benefit of both consumers and the economy. And, a robust and disciplined subprime market is vital to ensuring continued progress in broad access to credit and homeownership. We look forward to working with the other federal banking and thrift agencies, and to coordinating those efforts with the states through the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, in ensuring that subprime borrowers can obtain mortgage loans that they can afford to repay. We have much work ahead of us, as there is no one sure and easy “fix” for delinquencies and foreclosures. We will continue to pursue opportunities to help borrowers and to preserve access to responsible lending. Footnotes 1.The term “subprime” generally refers to borrowers who do not qualify for prime interest rates because they exhibit one or more of the following characteristics: weakened credit histories typically characterized by payment delinquencies, previous charge-offs, judgments, or bankruptcies; low credit scores; high debt-burden ratios; or high loan-to-value ratios. Prime borrowers represent more than 75 percent of the 43 million first-lien mortgage loans outstanding in the United States; subprime borrowers represent about 13 or 14 percent; and the remaining borrowers fall within a somewhat loosely defined category between prime and subprime known as “Alt-A,” or “near-prime,” which is designed for borrowers with good credit records who do not meet standard guidelines for documentation requirements, debt-to-income ratios, or loan-to-value ratios.Return to text Overview of Foreclosure Prevention Initiatives byFederal Reserve System’s Community Affairs Offices The Federal Reserve System’s Community Affairs Offices have been engaged in a variety of activities to respond to the needs of low- and moderate-income communities experiencing an increase in foreclosures. Some activities by Reserve Banks are building their understanding of the problem and its manifestation in each District. Others are working with community stakeholders to advance understanding of foreclosure prevention strategies, several of which are in conjunction with theNeighborWorks America® (http://www.nw.org/network/home.aspa), a national nonprofit housing development network. This listing highlights various initiatives at the Federal Reserve Banks in this area. AtlantaThe Atlanta District includes several of the southern states--Georgia, Florida, Louisiana in particular--where there are an increasing number of foreclosures. The ongoing challenges of rebuilding the Gulf Coast, when viewed in conjunction with the distribution of poor credit scores in southern states as detailed by theBrookings Institution(http://www.brookings.edu/metro/pubs/20060501_creditscores.pdf) leads many to expect continued increases in foreclosures and defaults in the Sixth District. In Georgia, the Community Affairs Office is part of a state-wide foreclosure prevention taskforce, which is undertaking a series of activities around fraud prevention, consumer education, and training for counseling agencies. In the Gulf Coast, the Reserve Bank has supported outreach to consumers, including training for counselors and promotion of a hotline and workout arrangements, with a focus on foreclosure prevention. BostonThe Community Affairs Office has published a paper on foreclosure issues and trends in Massachusetts, including data on foreclosure patterns in the state. In addition, it has developed a consumer education brochure on mortgages, “Know Before You Go... To Get a Mortgage A Guide to Mortgage Products and a Glossary of Lending Terms(http://www.bos.frb.org/consumer/knowbeforeyougo/mortgage/index.htm),”to provide general mortgage information to consumers and to shed some light on the risks associated with today’s more complex mortgage offerings. ChicagoIn the Chicago Federal Reserve District, the Community Affairs Office hosted a symposium in January to highlight non-traditional mortgage products and risks. In 2006, it published a paper on foreclosure alternatives and an article discussing the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. ClevelandThe Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland reports a widespread problem with mortgage foreclosures in weaker housing markets within the 4th District. Ohio also recently reported the highest rate of foreclosures in the nation. To address the issue, the Bank is serving as a convener of government, financial institutions and community based organizations in assessing and addressing regional foreclosure issues. Among the events Cleveland has hosted was anOhio Foreclosure Summitin 2005 (http://www.clevelandfed.org/CommAffairs/Past_2005.cfm), which led to the introduction of the NeighborWorks 1-800 hotline in Ohio, and addressed issues of financial education, predatory lending, policy, regulation, and enforcement. In addition, the Bank participated in a 2006 Ohio Foreclosure Summit. Both summits included community, industry and government representatives. Last year, the Cleveland Federal Reserve Bank participated in the launch of the official Financial Partnership of the Miami Valley Website and Directory, www.fepmv.org. Community-based organizations, non-profit organizations, financial and academic institutions partnered to produce this directory in 2005. The website and directory are resource guides to assist residents and community-based organizations in finding professional service providers that can provide assistance with basic money management and help in resolving difficult financial situations such as foreclosure. The Cleveland Federal Reserve will soon release a research paper examining the data availability and gaps that exist in accurately tracking foreclosures within the district. The report explains the challenges that exist in assessing the scope and scale of the issue and barriers to address it due to lack of information. DallasStaff of the Community Affairs Office in Dallas participates in homeownership coalitions composed of financial institutions, non-profit organizations and local government representatives. In Dallas, the coalition has been meeting since 2004. They meet regularly to share information about the scope of the problem, and in Dallas have promoted a toll-free number sponsored by the GMAC Mortgage and Homeownership Preservation Foundation to link consumers to resources. A similar coalition has been recently organized in Houston. The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas is also organizing a foreclosure summit scheduled for June in partnership with Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, National Association of Homebuilders, and the Council of Governments to convene stakeholders from throughout the state to help develop a better understanding of the problems and potential responses to delinquency and foreclosure. Kansas CityThe Kansas City Reserve Bank has been tracking and posting foreclosure and delinquency data from the Mortgage Bankers Association by each state within its District. Ongoing research is taking place to assess similarities or discrepancies in the data. In addition, a forthcoming paper will include a literature review around the possible causes of foreclosure, an analysis of foreclosure trends by mortgage types, and an assessment of the potential impact to the Tenth Federal Reserve District. MinneapolisThe Community Affairs Office at the Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank has worked to develop local data on foreclosures by purchasing sheriff’s data and sharing it with audiences throughout the Twin Cities, including a coalition to increase minority homeownership which has ongoing support from Community Affairs. Researchers have authored a paper analyzing foreclosure data in the Twin Cities to identify ways of predicting potential foreclosures, a potentially useful tool for targeting foreclosure prevention efforts. The research also makes recommendations regarding the availability of data on default and foreclosure. Staff also published an article in 2006 on the availability of foreclosure data, and a paper on various state approaches to regulation of mortgage brokers will soon be posted to its website. New YorkThe Federal Reserve Bank of New York is focused on using data to inform its targeted geographies (Albany, New York City, Rochester, Puerto Rico) for information sharing, highlighting of best practices, and educating both the private and non-profit sectors on the foreclosure challenges and prevention. Toward this end, the Community Affairs Office sponsored two forums in November 2006. The first meeting convened mortgage servicers and lenders to discuss foreclosure prevention best practices and strategies, resulting in increased involvement on the part of many lenders, funding for anti-foreclosure programs by foundations, and the establishment of special 1-800 numbers or designated contacts to non-profit housing counselors. The second meeting aimed to educate non-profits about how the mortgage securitization process works, which resulted in providing some housing counselors a common language to facilitate a better understanding of why some work-out strategies are more feasible than others. PhiladelphiaThe Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia published a technical brief onHEMAP(http://www.phfa.org/consumers/homeowners/hemap.aspx), a state-funded program in Pennsylvania that assists homeowners who are in default, but who can be expected to “recover” in a reasonable period of time. The Community Affairs Office’s outreach has focused on increasing public awareness on the need to understand mortgage terms. The program developed a video on debt, which includes a focus on being a knowledgeable mortgagee. San FranciscoThe Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco’s Community Affairs Office has identified concentrations of subprime lending, using data from a recent report from theCenter for Responsible Lending(http://www.responsiblelending.org/) that identifies concentrations in California’s Central Valley (Fresno, Bakersfield, etc.) and in Nevada, primarily Las Vegas. The Community Affairs Office is currently planning a series of local roundtables that are bringing together local stakeholders--financial institutions, counseling organizations, local governments and community development practitioners, to identify in their local markets steps to: i) mitigate foreclosures, ii) implement foreclosure prevention strategies, and iii) mitigate the effects on neighborhoods where foreclosures are concentrating. Those roundtables are currently scheduled for San Francisco, Los Angeles, Phoenix, Las Vegas and Nevada. In each city, the goal is to seed a working group which will be able to collectively develop an action plan or strategy around issues such as increasing the capacity of local counselors, creation of rescue funds, or providing refinance opportunities.
Governor Randall S. Kroszner To the National Association for Business Economics 2007 Annual Washington Economic Policy Conference, Arlington, Virginia I am pleased to be here today at this meeting of the National Association for Business Economics. My subject this afternoon will be inflation dynamics. Since the mid-1980s, we have seen important improvements in these dynamics--inflation is now much lower and more stable than it once was, and it appears to be less closely correlated with movements in other economic factors than it was during the 1960s and 1970s (see table). Moreover, we have seen these improvements not only in the United States but in other countries as well. Questions of intense interest to many of you as well as to us at the Federal Reserve are, What caused these changes in the inflation process? and What are their implications for monetary policy? Having spent many years as a University of Chicago professor, my first reaction to these changes is to think “money.” As Milton Friedman famously said many years ago, “Inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon.” Unfortunately, given the lack of a stable relationship between money growth and inflation, the pure monetarist view has taken a beating since then. However, Friedman was right that inflation is, ultimately, something that central banks determine, at least on average, over time. My second reaction is to think about another factor that Friedman emphasized--expectations. Views about the inflation process vary, but expectations are at the heart of almost all of them. And in any model in which expectations are important, monetary policy will also be important. So monetary policy, if not money itself, remains a central determinant of inflation dynamics. Accordingly, one of my principal themes today will be that expectations are important in the inflation process and that the improved conduct of monetary policy, by influencing the formation of expectations in a favorable manner, may account for many of the changes in inflation dynamics that we observe. At the same time, I am wary of ascribing all of the changes in dynamics to monetary policy. We should not place too much faith in any one framework, and so we need to keep an open mind about other possible explanations for the recent changes in inflation dynamics. Before proceeding further, let me say that the views I will express today are my own and are not necessarily shared by the other members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee. The Expectational Approach to Thinking about InflationNow almost forty years old, the expectational approach to inflation dynamics--developed simultaneously by Friedman and recent Nobel prize winner Edmund Phelps--is still the dominant framework for thinking about inflation. Let me begin with a quick review of what Friedman and Phelps said forty years ago and then discuss very briefly how it relates to current thinking about the inflation process. In Friedman’s framework as expressed in his 1967 presidential address to the American Economics Association, inflation is related to inflation expectations as well as the level of resource utilization. Friedman explained that for a variety of real-world reasons, wages and prices might not always adjust immediately to changes in the money supply. If they did not so adjust, monetary policy could affect resource utilization. The reason that Friedman’s work, and that of Phelps, was so revolutionary was that it overturned the earlier belief that monetary policy could have a permanent influence on resource utilization in favor of a new view that monetary policy could affect real activity only temporarily. In the early 1970s, Robert Lucas expanded on the ideas of Friedman and Phelps and noted that shifts in the way a central bank conducts monetary policy imply changes in the way the public forms its expectations. Over the past thirty years, economists have taken these observations to heart in trying to explain the behavior of overall inflation. One standard approach starts with the notion that many wages and prices adjust only gradually to changes in costs and demand. That assumption about the microeconomic behavior of price setters has recently been bolstered by some research that has looked at the data underlying the consumer price index to assess how often prices change (Bils and Klenow, 2004). The research finds that, indeed, prices for many goods and services appear to adjust only gradually, with the typical firm changing the price of a typical item about once every four months. When wages and prices adjust only infrequently, expectations are important, because firms and households must take into account the demand and supply conditions that will prevail until they again reset their prices. All sorts of expectations will matter, but central among them are inflation expectations: If wages and prices in general are rising over time, then when firms have a chance to reset their prices, they will generally set them higher than they would if the overall price level was holding steady. Because the new approaches to understanding inflation are grounded in the behavior of individual decisionmakers, they have the solid theoretical foundations that are valuable for policy analysis.1Moreover, some evidence indicates that empirical models based on this research do fairly well at forecasting. Of course, time will tell about their usefulness in the day-to-day operations of monetary policy. But the new research does demonstrate the continuing value of the expectations-focused approach that Friedman and Phelps championed forty years ago. Changes in Inflation DynamicsAs I noted earlier, the inflation process seems to have changed in a number of ways in recent years, both in the United States and in other countries. I would like to review these changes and then consider what they may tell us about the underlying processes driving inflation. One notable change is that movements in inflation now appear to tell us much less about future inflation than was the case, say, thirty years ago. Here I am talking about predictions of inflation using only information on past inflation, without taking into account any other information. The evidence suggests that, at the peak of U.S. inflation in the late 1970s and early 1980s, the best such “univariate” forecast of inflation--into the indefinite future--was a simple average of inflation over the past few quarters (Stock and Watson, 2007; Cecchetti and others, 2007). In that period, sharp increases in inflation were reversed only slowly. By contrast, shocks to inflation since roughly the mid-1980s have tended to be short-lived, so that the best forecast of future inflation would be a very long average of past inflation. Thus, when inflation moves above its recent long-run average, most of the upswing will likely be quickly reversed, although this result is not guaranteed. That’s a remarkable change in the behavior of inflation. The international evidence indicates that the longevity of inflation shocks has been attenuated in many other countries as well (Cecchetti and others, 2007). Moreover, the timing of the switch from largely permanent to mostly transitory movements in inflation is remarkably similar across the United States and these other countries. Another apparent change in the inflation process has been a reduction in the correlation between inflation and unemployment (Atkeson and Ohanian, 2001; Roberts 2006). Now, this relationship was always loose, as most of the historical variation in inflation has reflected influences aside from movements in unemployment or other measures of resource utilization. Still, in the 1960s and 1970s, a reasonably strong empirical relationship between inflation and unemployment could be found for the United States, with inflation tending to rise in periods when unemployment was low and vice-versa. Starting in the 1980s, however, this correlation began to weaken noticeably. In fact, some researchers now find no relationship at all, whereas others tend to find one that is of reduced economic importance.2Again, similar shifts have been observed in other countries, and these results are not sensitive to whether we are looking at core inflation or total inflation (Borio and Filardo, 2006; Ihrig and others, forthcoming). Next on the list of changes is the influence of energy prices. During the 1970s, fluctuations in energy prices appear to have had a significant influence on core inflation--that is, on the growth rate of consumer prices excluding food and energy. But since the early 1980s, the inflationary effect of movements in prices for gasoline, natural gas, and other energy goods seems to have declined considerably, even after allowance is made for a secular decline in the energy intensity of the U.S. economy (Hooker, 1996). Indeed, some estimates even suggest that energy price shocks have no effect whatsoever on core inflation. From a cost-accounting perspective, estimates of a zero effect seem too improbable to be taken literally: Recent swings in energy input costs have been sufficiently large that they should have had a noticeable effect on the prices of other goods and services, even allowing for their relatively small share in overall costs. I will return later to possible explanations for the sharp drop in the estimated effects of movements in energy prices.3 Finally, one of the most striking changes in the U.S. economy in recent decades has been the reduction in the economy’s volatility. The standard deviation of quarterly growth of real (that is, inflation adjusted) gross domestic product for the United States since the mid-1980s has been about half that experienced during the 1960s and 1970s. The volatility of inflation has fallen to a similar degree; moreover, the reduction in volatility for both output and inflation is widespread across countries. Of course, a smaller volatility of real GDP is not a change in inflation dynamics. But if monetary policy has been an important factor behind the drop in the economy’s volatility, then the expectational mechanisms may be very similar to those affecting inflation dynamics.4 Expectations, Monetary Policy, and Changing Inflation DynamicsAs Lucas pointed out, because expectations matter for inflation, monetary policy matters for inflation, too. And the historical record supports the notion that, starting with Chairman Paul Volcker, U.S. monetary policy has been more focused on low and stable inflation than was the case in the 1960s and 1970s (Romer and Romer, 2002). So it is natural to ask, can changes in the conduct of monetary policy in the United States (and elsewhere) help to account for the changes we’ve seen in inflation dynamics? The strongest case for a link between monetary policy and changes in inflation dynamics is in the greater stability of inflation. Inflation is clearly under the long-run control of the Fed, and the relative stability of inflation clearly reflects the action of monetary policy. Thus, if the central bank wants to keep inflation low on average over time, it can surely do so. The case for monetary policy contributing to reducedvolatilityof inflation is also fairly straightforward: The central bank can stabilize inflation by raising and lowering interest rates to lean against inflationary disturbances. Once we take account of the role of expectations, the stabilizing effects of monetary policy become even greater: If economic decision makers come to realize that the Fed is doing more to stabilize inflation, then shocks that push up inflation will lead to smaller increases in inflation expectations than in the past. Because current inflation is affected by inflation expectations, the smaller increase in expected inflation will lead to a smaller increase in actual inflation as well. And because many shocks that may lead to inflation, such as unexpected surges in spending, also cause movements in output and employment in the same direction, the maintenance of price stability promotes the stability of the real economy. This experience of low and stable inflation, coupled with the Fed’s clear statements of commitment to maintaining this performance, has no doubt contributed to the stability of long-run inflation expectations in the past decade or so. This stability has been remarkable. By one measure--from the Philadelphia Fed’s Survey of Professional Forecasters--long-run inflation expectations have barely budged since 1998. Other measures have varied a bit more, but overall, the movements in the expectational indicators have been quite small. Better monetary policy may also help explain the apparent decline in the sensitivity of inflation to resource utilization. We might interpret the reduced statistical correlation between unemployment and inflation as evidence of a decline in the direct effect of resource utilization on inflation. But given that the conduct of monetary policy was changing at the same time, it may be premature to draw such a conclusion. Consider the following thought experiment. Suppose that the Federal Reserve managed to stabilize inflation perfectly. That outcome would eliminate anyempiricalcorrelation between inflation and unemployment even if there really was an underlying relationship between inflation and resource utilization operating through the influence of the latter on, say, marginal labor costs.5As this example illustrates, the correlation between unemployment and inflation may have no bearing on whether these variables are truly linked structurally. I hasten to add that I am not advocating that the Fed stabilize inflation perfectly--this is simply an illustrative example. So let’s consider another alternative: Suppose that the Fed is willing to accept some temporary deviation of inflation from its desirable level to moderate an accompanying weakness in real activity, as might occur in the face of an adverse productivity shock. In this instance, the most likely correlation between inflation and unemployment would be positive--that is, under these conditions the relationship between inflation and unemployment would be the exact opposite of the predictions of the old-fashioned Phillips curve. And again, this result could arise even though the structure of the economy was such that an increase in resource utilization would tend to put upward pressure on production costs and thus prices. From this perspective, the declining correlation of resource utilization with inflation may be an indication of the success of monetary policy in pursuing its dual mandate of price stability and maximum sustainable growth: Because the Fed is trying to stabilize both inflation and real activity, then, when faced by shocks that push these variables in the same direction, the Fed will want to try to offset both adverse developments to the extent that it can. Thus, I see the reduced correlation between inflation and unemployment as an indication of the success of monetary policy in this dimension. Further evidence that better monetary policy and accompanying expectational effects have promoted a more stable economy is provided by the rather muted inflationary effects of the recent sharp increases in crude oil prices. In the 1970s, inflation moved up sharply with increases in crude oil prices. Moreover, not only did overall inflation move up, but core inflation, wages increases, and inflation expectations moved up as well. In response to the resulting high inflation, the Fed was obliged to raise interest rates, and the economy weakened. The contrast with recent performance is quite stark. True, overall inflation moved up with energy prices, and some of the pickup in core inflation last year probably reflected the transitory effects of the pass-through of increased energy costs. However, that pass-through was a mere ripple compared with the behavior of the 1970s. Similarly, when gasoline prices surge, surveys of household inflation expectations still move up, but not for long. By contrast, in the 1970s, survey expectations moved up sharply and remained elevated in the wake of the two oil shocks. Indicators of long-term inflation expectations did not exist in the 1970s, but in the current period, the stability of these expectations has been remarkable. As I shall discuss, other explanations for these changes exist, but in my view, the effects of monetary policy are the most plausible. What can the international experience tell us about the likely sources of the changes in inflation dynamics? First, we need to acknowledge that many of the changes we have seen in U.S. inflation dynamics have also occurred in other countries. That fact suggests that at least some of the explanations of the change in inflation dynamics should be common across countries rather than country-specific. If monetary policy is central to these changes, it must be the case that many countries have made similar changes to monetary policy. As I noted in a speech last fall, one possible reason for such common changes in monetary policy may have been greater currency competition (Kroszner, 2006). In broad terms, the idea is that increased globalization, deregulation, and innovation raised the returns to low inflation--and increased the penalties for high inflation--relative to results obtained twenty or thirty years ago. For example, deregulation has led to an opening of capital markets, and hence financial globalization, which has in turn boosted innovation and helped to increase global competition by shrinking barriers of time and distance. Accordingly, trade and financial linkages between countries have tightened tremendously in recent years. Meanwhile, substantial financial innovations--including advances in electronic payment systems and trading systems as well as more widespread credit card networks and increased use of mutual funds--have facilitated the movement of wealth around the globe. As a result, deregulation, globalization, and innovation have made it easier for citizens to move their wealth out of nominal assets in their local currency and thereby avoid any inflation tax should their government show signs that it might resort to inflationary tactics to finance spending.6At the same time, the public’s understanding of the costs of inflation has increased, in part because of experiences of high inflation in many countries in the 1980s. Almost everywhere, public opinion eventually turned against allowing inflation to continue. This public pressure has reinforced the trend against inflationary policies. Increased competition among currencies, driven by the confluence of factors that I just described, has limited the ability of governments and central banks to pursue high-inflation policies. Moreover, currency competition has raised the costs of poor policy and thus increased the incentives of the monetary authorities to maintain low inflation. Many of these arguments will apply with greater force in developing economies, where the costs of poor policies have been demonstrated quite clearly. Nonetheless, I think that currency competition has played at least some role in disciplining policy in the United States and other developed countries. Other Explanations for the Change in Inflation DynamicsOf course, monetary policy may not be the whole story, and we need to resist embracing any single explanation too wholeheartedly. There may be other reasons for the changes in inflation dynamics. For example, the reduced sensitivity of core inflation to oil and natural gas prices likely also reflects both the increased energy efficiency of the economy and the fact that shocks to the prices of these goods since the mid-1980s have, at least until the latest episode, been viewed as mostly temporary. In contrast, the rise in oil prices during the 1970s was probably seen at the time as largely reflecting a permanent shift in global demand/supply balances. Another factor that might help to account for some of the changes in inflation dynamics is globalization. Because national markets have become more open to international trade, domestic firms and workers face more competition and have less market power than in the past. This development could help to account for any reduced sensitivity of U.S. inflation to domestic resource utilization. In fact, one recent study even purports to show that foreign output gaps are more important in explaining domestic inflation in industrialized countries than domestic factors (Borio and Filardo, 2006). However, this result has been challenged by the Federal Reserve staffers, who find that estimates to this effect are fragile.7That said, this is an issue that merits close monitoring as globalization continues. Other factors may also be at work, such as the deregulation of the 1980s and the faster productivity growth we have seen over the past decade. But I think that even after we have given these factors their appropriate due, the evidence still suggests that better monetary policy explains much (albeit not all) of the changes in inflation dynamics that have occurred. In fact, it is interesting to speculate on the degree to which better monetary policy might account for some of the structural factors I have listed. Consider faster productivity growth. High and variable inflation likely creates a distraction for firms--managers must pay attention to the damage that inflation can do to their balance sheets. They thus divert their attention from improving products and services to financial management. Such distraction likely hurts the productivity of firms. Although I don’t think low inflation is the only factor behind the rebound in productivity growth in the United States--after all, other countries did not see such an acceleration in output per hour as inflation came down--I think it has played a role. Policy ImplicationsA review of the possible causes of the changes in inflation dynamics naturally leads to the question of their implications for the conduct of monetary policy. In today’s economy, it is very difficult to know whether any given change in output or employment will have inflationary consequences. One lesson that is fair to draw, however, is that resource utilization generally does not tell us much about the future course of inflation over the next year or two. Rather, the near-term inflation outlook is more likely to be dominated by cost factors, such as productivity growth and the price of raw materials, than by the tightness of labor and product markets. Furthermore, the weak relationship between inflation and the unemployment rate means that it is probably more difficult than ever to gauge the economy’s productive potential--and hence estimate so-called output gaps--especially in real time. In light of these uncertainties, prudent policymakers should take an eclectic approach and base their policy decisions on both a wide variety of indicators and views about how the economy may work and avoid a narrow focus on economic slack. My earlier comments also underscored the central importance of expectations to the successful conduct of monetary policy. In particular, the Federal Reserve and many other central banks appear to have succeeded in anchoring long-run inflation expectations--an achievement that has contributed to macroeconomic stability and eased the task of monetary policy. However, bad luck or other factors could cause expectations to begin to drift again. If so, the Federal Reserve will need to respond appropriately. A problem of this sort is probably fixed most easily if it is detected early, and thus policymakers should closely monitor the available indicators of expectations to head off any trouble as soon as possible. The final lesson I draw is a cautionary note: The stability of inflation could lead to complacency. As long as inflation expectations are well anchored, actual inflation will have a natural tendency to revert to the anchor of long-run inflation expectations. Under such circumstances, policymakers may be tempted to relax their resolve in responding to potentially inflationary developments. Such relaxation could be costly, however. Inflation expectations have become well-anchored because the public has become confident that the Federal Reserve will do the right thing. But this belief will persist only as long as we on the Federal Open Market Committee continue to ratify the public’s expectations that inflation will remain low and stable. Thus, complacency would be a threat to the credibility that the Federal Reserve has worked so hard to acquire, and its loss would likely mean the reversal of many of the favorable inflation developments seen over the past two decades. One message that I hope has been clear is that there is much we don’t know about the inflation process. Policymakers would of course like to be 100 percent confident that they have the right way of looking at the world. But I think we always need to be open to the possibility that other forces may be at work or that other interpretations better explain what we’ve observed. We need to approach our task with a certain degree of humility and an open mind. Still, I think we can be fairly certain that low and stable inflation has been brought about by guarding against looming inflation risks, and continuing in this vein seems sensible to me. Above all, we must continue to conduct policy in such a way as to keep inflation low and stable--an approach that also promotes full employment and maximum sustainable real growth of the economy. References Atkeson, Andrew, and Lee H. Ohanian (2001).“Are Phillips Curves Useful for Forecasting Inflation?”Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,Quarterly Review, vol. 25 (Winter), pp. 2-11. Bernanke, Ben S. (2007).“Globalization and Monetary Policy,”speech delivered at the Fourth Economic Summit, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, March 2. Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow (2004). “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,”Journal of Political Economy, vol. 112 (October), pp. 947-85. Borio, Claudio, and Andrew Filardo (2006). “Globalization and Inflation: New Cross-Country Evidence on the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation,” unpublished paper, Bank for International Settlements, March. Cecchetti, Stephen G., Peter Hooper, Bruce C. Kasman, Kermit L. Schoenholtz, and Mark W. Watson (2007). “Understanding the Evolving Inflation Process,” paper prepared for the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum 2007 (February),http://research.chicagogsb.edu/gfm/events/conferences/index.aspx. Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans (2005). “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.”Journal of Political Economy, vol. 113 (February), pp. 1-45. Hooker, Mark A. (1996). “What Happened to the Oil Price-Macroeconomy Relationship?”Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 38, pp. 195-213. Ihrig, Jane E., Steven B. Kamin, Deborah Lindner, and Jaime Marquez (forthcoming). “Some Simple Tests of the Globalization and Inflation Hypothesis,” International Finance Discussion Papers. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Ihrig, Jane E., Mario Marazzi, and Alexander D. Rothenberg (2006).“Exchange-Rate Pass-Through in the G-7 Countries,”International Finance Discussion Papers 851. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Kroszner, Randall S. (2006). “The Conquest of Worldwide Inflation: Currency Competition and Its Implications for Interest Rates and the Yield Curve,” speech delivered at the Cato Institute Monetary Policy Conference, Nov. 16, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/kroszner20061116a.htm. Roberts, John M. (2006).“Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,”International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 2 (September), pp. 193-230. Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer (2002). “The Evolution of Economic Understanding and Postwar Stabilization Policy,” (439 KB PDF)inRethinking Stabilization Policy, symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 29-31. Kansas City: the Reserve Bank, pp. 11-78. Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2007). "Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, supplement to vol. 39 (February), pp. 3-33. Thomas, Charles P., and Jaime Marquez (2006).“Measurement Matters for Modeling U.S. Import Prices,”International Finance Discussion Papers 883. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and U.S. Secret Service (2006).The Use and Counterfeiting of United States Currency Abroad, Part 3. Washington: Department of the Treasury, September, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/other/20061025a.htm. Woodford, Michael (2003).Interest and Prices.Princeton: Princeton University Press. Footnotes 1.The academic literature refers to this new generation of macroeconomic models as dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) is one of the most prominent examples of this new approach.Return to text 2.Atkeson and Ohanian (2001) argue that the unemployment rate no longer has any ability to forecast inflation, while Roberts (2006) argues that the correlation has fallen but is still nonzero.Return to text 3.One area in which the pattern of smaller correlations with inflation does not hold is import prices. After adjusting for the rising share of imports in domestic price increases, we see little indication of a reduction in the effect of import prices on U.S. inflation. We have some evidence, however, of a reduced effect of exchange rates on import prices (Ihrig, Marazzi, and Rothenberg, 2006), although this result may be sensitive to specification (Thomas and Marquez, 2006).Return to text 4.One key element of the inflation process that I have not yet mentioned is labor costs. Recent developments in labor markets make it difficult to assess changes in the role of labor costs in the inflation process. For example, since the mid-1990s, incentive-based employee stock options have become an important form of compensation. This development has created measurement difficulties: The government’s principle measure of labor compensation accounts for such options at the time they are exercised (thereby conflating them with capital gains), rather than recording them at their expected value at the time of issuance. As a result, the published compensation data provide a distorted picture of labor costs.Return to text 5.Woodford (2003) includes results of this sort.Return to text 6.For emerging-market countries that had experienced high inflation, another aspect of globalization fostering currency competition is the large amount of physical dollars now present in these countries, which allows citizens to conduct transactions and store liquid wealth without holding the local currency. Over one recent period, the fraction of U.S. currency estimated to be held in foreign countries rose dramatically, from less than one-fifth in 1980 to as much as two-thirds in the late 1990s, and today the total nominal amount is in the neighborhood of $400 billion, or somewhat more than one-half (U.S. Department of the Treasury and others, 2006).Return to text 7.As noted in Bernanke (2007), Ihrig and others (forthcoming) find that these results are sensitive to details of specification.Return to text Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Community Affairs Research Conference, Washington, D.C. This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). Enacted in 1977, the CRA affirmed the obligation of federally insured depository institutions to help meet the credit needs of communities in which they are chartered, consistent with safe and sound operations. The act also charged the federal bank regulatory agencies, including the Federal Reserve, with implementing the CRA through regulations and with examining banks and thrifts to determine whether they meet their CRA obligations. The CRA presents an interesting case study of a regulatory regime that has evolved to adjust to changes in the economic, financial, and social environment. Since the CRA's enactment, the implementing regulations have been substantially amended three times--in 1989, 1995, and 2005. In each case, changes to the regulations reflected both experience gained in the implementation of the law as well as ongoing developments in financial markets and the economy. In my remarks today, I will survey some milestones in the evolution of the CRA, beginning with a description of the economic and social concerns that prompted the passage of the act. With this brief history as background, I will comment on the challenges we face in ensuring that the CRA remains effective and relevant in the future. The Origins of the Community Reinvestment ActPublic and congressional concerns about the deteriorating condition of America's cities, particularly lower-income and minority neighborhoods, led to the enactment of the Community Reinvestment Act. In the view of many, urban decay was partly a consequence of limited credit availability, which encouraged urban flight and inhibited the rehabilitation of declining neighborhoods. Some critics pinned the blame for the lack of credit availability on mainstream financial institutions, which they characterized as willing to accept deposits from households and small businesses in lower-income neighborhoods but unwilling to lend or invest in those same neighborhoods despite the presence of creditworthy borrowers. Several social and economic factors help explain why credit to lower-income neighborhoods was limited at that time. First, racial discrimination in lending undoubtedly adversely affected local communities. Discriminatory lending practices had deep historical roots. The term "redlining," which refers to the practice of designating certain lower-income or minority neighborhoods as ineligible for credit, appears to have originated in 1935, when the Federal Home Loan Bank Board asked the Home Owners' Loan Corporation to create "residential security maps" for 239 cities that would indicate the level of security for real estate investments in each surveyed city.1The resulting maps designated four categories of lending and investment risk, each with a letter and color designation. Type "D" areas, those considered to be the riskiest for lending and which included many neighborhoods with predominantly African-American populations, were color-coded red on the maps--hence the term "redlining" (Federal Home Loan Bank Board, 1937). Private lenders reportedly constructed similar maps that were used to determine credit availability and terms. The 1961 Report on Housing by the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights reported practices that included requiring high down payments and rapid amortization schedules for African-American borrowers as well as blanket refusals to lend in particular areas. Besides discrimination a variety of economic and institutional factors help to explain the relative unavailability of credit in lower-income neighborhoods.2Thirty years ago, the secondary market for mortgages was rudimentary at best, which limited local loan originators' access to capital and reduced their ability to diversify credit risks geographically.3Informational problems also inhibited lending in some urban areas. For example, relative to higher-income neighborhoods, lower-income areas tend to have fewer home sales and more-diverse housing structures, making accurate appraisal more difficult4. Similarly, credit evaluations tend to be more costly for lower-income borrowers, who are relatively more likely to have short or irregular credit histories.5Informational barriers to lending were heightened by the absence of uniform national depositories of information on the credit experiences of consumers; at the time, the credit-reporting system consisted of hundreds of local credit bureaus, each of which maintained limited information on local residents.6The high costs of gathering information, together with the difficulty of keeping information proprietary, may have created a "first-mover" problem, in which each financial institution has an incentive to let one of its competitors be the first to enter an underserved market. Without some coordination, the first-mover problem may result in no institution choosing to incur the costs of entry (Lang and Nakamura, 1993; Barr, 2005; and Ling, 1998). The regulatory environment of the period was yet another factor limiting broad access to credit. State and federal rules prohibited interstate branching or acquisitions and in some cases restricted even intrastate branching, reducing competition and the ability of lenders to diversify geographic risk.7Also, interest rate ceilings on mortgages in some locations effectively blocked lending to potential borrowers judged to pose higher risks, and interest rate ceilings on deposits (notably, the infamous Regulation Q) led to periodic episodes of disintermediation and reduced availability of mortgage credit (Chomsisengphet and Pennington-Cross, 2006; and McNeil and Rechter, 1980). Taken together, these social, economic, and regulatory factors contributed to the perception that banking institutions were failing to adequately serve the credit needs of some residents of their communities, a concern that led the Congress to enact the CRA. The CRA reaffirmed the long-standing principle that financial institutions must serve "the convenience and needs," including credit needs, of the communities in which they are chartered. The obligation of financial institutions to serve their communities was seen as aquid pro quofor privileges such as the protection afforded by federal deposit insurance and access to the Federal Reserve's discount window (FFIEC, 1992). Indeed, the Bank Holding Company Act, passed in 1956, had already required the Federal Reserve Board, when ruling on proposed acquisitions by banks or bank holding companies, to evaluate how well the institutions involved were meeting community needs, consistent with the requirements of safety and soundness. The CRA was only one of a series of laws passed during the 1970s intended to reduce credit-related discrimination, expand access to credit, and shed light on lending patterns. The CRA itself focused on the provision of credit to low- and moderate-income communities rather than on discrimination by race, sex, or other personal characteristics. Legislation that addressed discrimination in lending explicitly included the Equal Credit Opportunity Act and the Fair Housing Act. The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act was enacted to increase transparency in the mortgage lending market and to support public and private investment activity. From an economic perspective, the CRA can be interpreted as an attempt to rectify market failures--for example, by inducing banks to invest in building the knowledge and expertise necessary to lend profitably in lower-income neighborhoods. Similarly, to the extent that the CRA encouraged coordinated or simultaneous efforts by banks to lend in underserved areas, it had the potential to reduce the first-mover problem. The debate surrounding the passage of the CRA was contentious, with critics charging that the law would distort credit markets, create unnecessary regulatory burden, and lead to unsound lending. Partly in response to these concerns, the Congress included little prescriptive detail in the law. Instead, the CRA simply directs the banking regulatory agencies to ensure that banks serve the credit needs of their local communities in a safe and sound manner. In effect, the agencies were left with considerable discretion and flexibility to modify the rules in light of changes in the economy and in financial markets (Garwood and Smith, 1993). At times, this discretion has been the source of some uncertainty on the part of regulated institutions concerned with compliance. However, the flexibility has proved valuable in allowing the CRA to remain relevant despite rapid economic and financial change and widely differing economic circumstances among neighborhoods. The Evolution of the CRAFor more than a decade after its enactment, the CRA was a rather low-profile banking regulation, one that set minimal compliance requirements for depository institutions and attracted limited supervisory attention from the bank regulatory agencies.8By the late 1980s, however, the issues surrounding access to credit were attracting renewed interest. In response to this interest, the Congress included in the Financial Institution Reform and Recovery Act of 1989 (FIRREA) an amendment to the CRA statute to require public disclosure of institutions' ratings and performance evaluations. FIRREA also expanded data collection and made public certain data reported under the HMDA. With the requisite data becoming available, advocacy groups, researchers, and other analysts began to perform more-sophisticated, quantitative analyses of banks' records in meeting the credit needs of their communities. Further attention to CRA was generated by the surge in bank merger and acquisition activities that followed the enactment of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994. As public scrutiny of bank merger and acquisition activity escalated, advocacy groups increasingly used the public comment process to protest bank applications on CRA grounds. In instances of highly contested applications, the Federal Reserve Board and other agencies held public meetings to allow the public and the applicants to comment on the lending records of the banks in question. In response to these new pressures, banks began to devote more resources to their CRA programs. Many institutions established separate business units and subsidiary community development corporations to facilitate lending that would be given favorable consideration in CRA examinations. Local and regional public-private partnerships and multibank loan consortia also gained more prominence as banks developed strategies for expanding and managing CRA-related activities. Even as these developments were occurring, extensive change was taking place in the financial services sector. During the 1980s and 1990s, technological progress significantly improved data collection and information processing, which led to the development and widespread use of credit-scoring models and the availability of generic credit history scores. Deregulation also contributed to the changes in the marketplace. Notably, the lifting of prohibitions against interstate banking was followed by an increased pace of industry consolidation. Also, the preemption of usury laws on home loans created more scope for risk-based pricing of mortgages. Securitization of affordable housing loans expanded, as did the secondary market for those loans, in part reflecting a 1992 law that required the government-sponsored enterprises, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, to devote a percentage of their activities to meeting affordable housing goals (HUD, 2006). A generally strong economy and lower interest rates also helped improved access to credit by lower-income households. Bankers were also gaining experience in underwriting and managing the risk of lending in lower-income communities. After years of experimentation, the managers of financial institutions found that these loan portfolios, if properly underwritten and managed, could be profitable. In fact, a Federal Reserve study found that, generally, CRA-related lending activity was at least somewhat profitable and usually did not involve disproportionately higher levels of default (Avery, Bostic, and Canner, 2000; see also Board of Governors, 1993). Moreover, community groups and nonprofit organizations began to take a more businesslike, market-oriented approach to local economic development, leading them to establish more-formalized and more-productive partnerships with banks. Community groups provided information to financial institutions on the needs of lower-income communities for credit and services, offered financial education and counseling services to community members, and referred "bankable" customers to partner banks. Specialized community development banks and financial institutions with the mission of providing financial services and credit to lower-income communities and families emerged and grew. Policy developments bolstered the infrastructure and funding of community development lending organizations. Notably, the passage of the Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI) Act of 1994 created the CDFI Fund at the Department of Treasury. The expansion of CDFIs provided banks with access to new opportunities to finance community economic development. Other initiatives, such as the federal Low Income Housing Tax Credit and New Markets Tax Credit programs provided vehicles for investing in affordable housing development and economic revitalization in distressed communities. Even as CRA-related lending became more extensive and more market-based, concerns were expressed about the implementation of the law. Financial institutions complained about compliance costs (Elliehausen, 1998). Both bankers and community groups criticized the CRA examination procedures as emphasizing process over results, arguing that the examination criteria were too subjective and that a more-quantitative system for evaluating institutions' CRA performance should be developed. In response to these criticisms, President Clinton in 1993 directed the agencies that implement CRA to review and revise the regulations, with the goals of clarifying performance standards, making examinations and evaluations more consistent, and reducing the compliance burden. The CRA regulations adopted in 1995 established for large institutions a three-pronged test based on performance in the areas of lending, investments, and services. While the regulations placed the greatest emphasis on lending, they encouraged innovative approaches to addressing community development credit needs. Several provisions were included to reduce compliance costs, among them a new rule that allowed small banks to meet their requirements by means of a streamlined examination focused on lending activities.9 When the new regulations were adopted, the agencies committed themselves to reviewing the regulations in 2002 to assess their effectiveness. The promised review made use of extensive public comment and scholarly research on the efficacy of CRA programs. In their comments on the proposed revisions to the rules, bankers and community organizations generally agreed that the fundamental elements of the regulations were sound and that the agencies should maintain the overall structure of the 1995 regulations, although each group raised a number of specific issues. Findings from the research by Board staff members, in combination with the public comments, led the agencies to propose new definitions for "small" banks, which would be subject only to a lending test to assess compliance with the CRA, and for "intermediate small" banks, which would be subject to a lending test as well as a new and more-flexible community development test (Avery, Canner, Mok, and Sokolov, 2005). In addition, the research underscored the benefit of expanding the definition of "community development" to include activities benefiting middle-income communities in distressed rural areas and in disaster areas. The final rule was adopted in July 2005. In each of the major regulatory revisions, the goal of the regulators has been to increase the effectiveness of the CRA in promoting the economic development of lower-income communities while reducing the associated compliance burden. Again, making progress toward achieving these goals has been made easier by the flexibility of the original statute, which has allowed the regulators to adapt the rules to changing market and economic circumstances and to give financial institutions the latitude to meet their CRA obligations in diverse and cost-effective ways. Has the CRA achieved its objectives? Research on the CRA has tended to find positive net effects, but the results are not uniform. A paper by Board staff members compared census tracts just above and below the low- and moderate-income threshold, finding that the tracts below the threshold had higher homeownership rates, higher growth in owner-occupied units, and lower vacancy rates than would have otherwise been predicted (Avery, Calem, and Canner, 2003). An analysis by Harvard's Joint Center for Housing Studies concluded that the CRA has expanded access to residential mortgages for lower-income borrowers, but that research also finds that the CRA's effect is diminishing as mortgage lending by nonbank institutions expands (Apgar and Duda, 2003). Yet another review concludes that the CRA has been effective in helping to overcome market failures and reduce discrimination at a relatively low cost, precisely because the CRA sets forth a flexible standard rather than a rule (Barr, 2005). However, some critical studies have argued that the CRA has been ineffective in addressing discrimination and market failures and that its social costs outweigh its benefits (see, for example, Hylton, 2006, and Barr, 2005). The CRA is clearly far from perfect. Although its objectives are broad and ambitious, its net effects on lower-income neighborhoods are difficult to measure with precision.10Addressing CRA responsibilities also imposes costs on financial institutions. It appears that, at least in some instances, the CRA has served as a catalyst, inducing banks to enter underserved markets that they might otherwise have ignored. At its most successful, the CRA may have had a multiplier effect, supplementing its direct impact by stimulating new market-based, profit-driven economic activity in lower-income neighborhoods. The Future of the CRAAs we look forward, the CRA will have to continue evolving to reflect the ongoing changes in financial markets and in the economy more generally. I will conclude by flagging just a few of the issues that will remain important for the implementation and the effect of CRA. First, for some institutions the concept of the "local community" is no longer as clear as it was when the CRA was enacted. Today, some institutions are not identified with a particular community but are regional or national in scope, which inevitably makes the definition of the relevant assessment areas somewhat difficult. Moreover, to an increasing extent, banks use nontraditional avenues--the Internet, for example--to interact with customers, in some cases avoiding a bricks-and-mortar presence altogether. To date, defining "local community" for the purposes of CRA assessment has been manageable as most banks still lend in local communities where they have deposit-taking facilities or branches. However, if these trends continue, defining a "local community" may become increasingly difficult, and the concept eventually may require reconsideration by regulators or even the Congress. Second, changes in the structure of the financial industry have resulted in many financial transactions that fell under the CRA umbrella in 1977 having become increasingly the province of nondepositories not subject to CRA, including companies owned by banks or bank holding companies. Holding companies' nonbank affiliates, for instance, can be included in the CRA assessment of the banking institution at the discretion of the bank but need not be. Most mortgages are now packaged by brokers, and nearly two in three mortgages are originated by nondepositories not covered by the CRA.11Nonbank institutions, such as payday lenders, check cashers, and remittance agents, are important sources of financial services in low- and moderate-income communities. In some cases, nonbank service providers offer convenience to customers but at prices that have raised concerns (Carr and Schuetz, 2001, and Barr, 2004). Some observers have suggested extending the CRA to nonbank providers, but this proposal neglects a fundamental premise of the CRA legislation--that banks incur special obligations in exchange for the advantages conferred by their charters, such as deposit insurance. Of course, the CRA is not the only tool for addressing such issues, should it be determined that consumers are not adequately protected in their dealings with nonbanks. The CRA may nevertheless have some role to play; for example, a possible question to consider is whether increasing the focus on services by banking institutions might encourage them to compete more actively with nonbank providers in lower-income neighborhoods. Third, access to credit in lower-income communities is obviously much greater today than when the CRA was enacted. This greater access has had tangible benefits, such as the increase in homeownership rates (Joint Center for Housing Studies, 2006). However, recent problems in mortgage markets illustrate that an underlying assumption of the CRA--thatmorelending equalsbetteroutcomes for local communities may not always hold.12Whether, and if so, how to try to differentiate "good" from "bad" lending in the CRA context is an issue that is likely to challenge us for some time. One possible strategy is to place more weight in CRA examinations on factors such as whether an institution provides services complementary to lending--for example, counseling and financial education. The CRA was created to help ensure lower-income communities have access to credit and financial services. When it passed the legislation, the Congress could not have foreseen the extensive changes in financial markets and the economy that have occurred over the past thirty years; thus, the decision to write the statute broadly and with considerable flexibility appears wise in retrospect. In implementing the law, the banking agencies have tried to learn from market developments, from research, and from the comments of financial institutions, consumers, and other interested parties. The regulations have thus changed over time in response to the changing financial landscape and as we have learned more about what works and what doesn't. We do not know how the economy and the financial system will change in coming decades, but it is safe to assume that change will be rapid. Considerable creativity and flexibility will thus be necessary to ensure that the CRA continues to assist community economic development without placing an undue burden on financial institutions. ReferencesAmel, Dean F., and Daniel G. Keane (1986). "State Laws Affecting Commercial Bank Branching, Multibank Holding Company Expansion, and Interstate Banking,"Issues in Bank Regulation, vol. 10 (Autumn), pp. 30-40.Apgar, William, and Mark Duda (2003)."The Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the Community Reinvestment Act: Past Accomplishments and Future Regulatory Challenges" (209 KB PDF),FRBNY Economic Policy Review, vol. 9 (June), pp. 169-91.Avery, Robert B., Raphael W. Bostic, and Glenn B. Canner (2000)."CRA Special Lending Programs" (115 KB PDF),Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 86 (November), pp. 711-31.Avery, Robert B., Kenneth P. Brevoort, and Glenn B. Canner (2006)."Higher-Priced Home Lending and the 2005 HMDA Data" (580 KB PDF),Federal Reserve Bulletin(vol. 92), www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin.Avery, Robert B., Paul S. Calem, and Glenn B. Canner (2003)."The Effects of the Community Reinvestment Act on Local Communities" (89 KB PDF)paper presented at "Sustainable Community Development: What Works, What Doesn't and Why,"a conference sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 27-28.Avery, Robert B., Glenn B. Canner, Shannon C. Mok, and Dan S. Sokolov (2005)."Community Banks and Rural Development: Research Relating to Proposals to Revise the Regulations that Implement the Community Reinvestment Act" (149 KB PDF),Federal Reserve Bulletin(vol. 91), www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin.Barr, Michael S. (2004)."Banking the Poor,"Yale Journal on Regulation, vol. 21 (Winter), pp. 121-237.Barr, Michael S. (2005)."Credit Where It Counts: The Community Reinvestment Act and Its Critics" (558 KB PDF),New YorkUniversityLaw Review, vol. 80 (May), pp. 513-652.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (forthcoming).The Effects of Credit Scores and Credit-Based Insurance Scores on the Availability and Affordability of Financial Products.Washington: Board of Governors.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2000).The Performance and Profitability of CRA-Related Lending. Washington: Board of Governors, July.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1993).Report to the Congress on Community Development Lending by Depository Institutions.Washington: Board of Governors, October.Carr, James H., and Jenny Schuetz (2001).Financial Services in Distressed Communities: Framing the Issue, Finding Solutions(188 KB PDF). Washington: Fannie Mae Foundation.Chomsisengphet, Souphala, and Anthony Pennington-Cross (2006)."The Evolution of the Subprime Market" (553 KB PDF),Federal Reserve Bank of St. LouisReview, vol. 88 (January/February), pp. 31-56.Elliehausen, Gregory (1998).The Cost of Banking Regulation: A Review of the Evidence, Staff Study 171. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April.Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (1992). "A Citizens Guide to CRA," Washington: FFIEC, June, pp. 3-5.Federal Home Loan Bank Board (1937). "Appraisal Methods and Policies,"Federal Home Loan Bank Review, vol. 3 (4), pp. 110-13, 120.Garwood, Griffith L., and Dolores S. Smith (1993)."The Community Reinvestment Act: Evolution and Current Issues,"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 79 (April), pp. 251-67.Gramlich, Edward M. (2007).America's Second Housing Boom. Washington: The Urban Institute, UI Press.Hiller, Amy (2003)."Redlining and the Home Owners' Loan Corporation,"Journal of Urban History, vol. 29 (May), pp. 207-9.Hylton, Keith (2006)."Development Lending and the Community Reinvestment Act,"Law and Economic Working Paper Series 06-07. Boston: Boston University School of Law.Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University (2006).The State of the Nation's Housing. Cambridge, Mass.: JCHS.Lacker, Jeffrey M. (1995)."Neighborhoods and Banking,"Federal Reserve Bank of RichmondEconomic Quarterly, vol. 81 (Spring), pp. 13-38.Lang, William W., and Leonard I. Nakamura (1993). "A Model of Redlining,"Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 33 (Spring), pp. 223-34.Ling, David C., and Susan M. Wachter (1998). "Information Externalities and Home Mortgage Underwriting,"Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 44 (November), pp. 317-32.McNeil, Charles R., and Denise M. Rechter (1980). "The Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980,"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 66 (June), pp. 444-53.Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of Thrift Supervision, and National Credit Union Association (2006)."Federal Financial Regulatory Agencies Issue Final Guidance on Nontraditional Mortgage Product Risks,"press release, September 29, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20070929a.htm.United States Commission on Civil Rights (1961). "Report on Housing," Washington: Government Printing Office.U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (2006)."HUD's Regulation of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,"HUD, www.hud.gov/offices/hsg/gse/gse.cfm.Footnotes1.The Home Owners' Loan Corporation (HOLC) was a New Deal agency established in 1933 to help stabilize real estate that had depreciated during the Depression and to refinance mortgage debt of economically distressed homeowners. It granted fifteen-year mortgage loans at 5 percent interest to some 1 million homeowners between August 1933 and June 1936, the period it was authorized to originate new loans (Hiller, 2003).Return to text2.Debate continues on the relative importance of racial bias and economic factors for explaining redlining and similar practices (see Lacker, 1995).Return to text3.The Federal Reserve's Flow of Funds accounts did not even record private securitization activity until the early 1980s, and purchases by federal housing agencies, which were focused on government-backed loans and lower-risk conventional loans, represented less than 1 percent of total outstanding home mortgage debt in the years preceding enactment of the CRA.Return to text4.Analysis of decennial census and Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data indicates that lower-income areas have about half the number of owner-occupied homes and home purchase loans in a given year than do higher-income areas.Return to text5.Although information from the period before the CRA is not available, a review of credit records from one of the national credit-reporting agencies today supports this conjecture, as it finds that individuals in lower-income areas have, on average, substantially shorter credit histories and only about half as many credit accounts. Also, nearly 40 percent of the individuals in lower-income census tracts cannot be scored, a proportion nearly three times that found in higher-income areas. This information comes from analysis by staff members of the Federal Reserve Board in conjunction with a report to the Congress (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, forthcoming).Return to text6.The low-cost summary measures of credit history that have gained widespread market acceptance today did not emerge until 1989, when Fair Isaac and Company developed the FICO score.Return to text7.For a listing of these rules, see Amel and Keane (1986).Return to text8.Examinations were conducted to evaluate an institution's compliance in five performance areas, comprising twelve assessment factors. The examination culminated in the assignment of a rating (Outstanding, Satisfactory, Needs to Improve, or Substantial Noncompliance) and a written report that became part of the supervisory record for the institution.Return to text9.The agencies sought to offer banks some flexibility in choosing an examination strategy that suited their business models. The 1995 regulations gave banks the option to submit a strategic plan for complying with CRA in lieu of the standard approach to examination. A community development test was offered to wholesale and limited-purpose banks as a standard for their compliance. The agencies also required that examiners evaluate a bank's CRA record within a performance context that considered socioeconomic factors and market conditions within the institution's service area.Return to text10.Distinguishing with certainty the effects that the CRA had on "CRA-type" activity from the effects of simultaneous regulatory and market changes over this period has not been possible. It is highly likely that these factors have interacted with one another to affect consumers.Return to text11.TheNational Association of Mortgage Brokersreports that 68 percent of home loan originations involve mortgage brokers. In 2005, 63 percent of mortgages were originated by mortgage companies. (Of the mortgage companies, 70 percent were independent; the rest were affiliated with depository institutions.) The remaining 37 percent were originated by depositories directly: 21.6 percent by commercial banks, 12.9 percent by savings institutions, and 2.5 percent by credit unions (see Avery, Brevoort, and Canner, 2006).Return to text12.These concerns are reflected in theInteragency Guidance on Nontraditional Mortgage Product Risks(Office of the Controller of the Currency and others, 2006), as well as recently issued requests for public comment on the expansion of that guidance. For further discussion of the emergence of the subprime mortgage market, see Gramlich, 2007.Return to text References Amel, Dean F., and Daniel G. Keane (1986). "State Laws Affecting Commercial Bank Branching, Multibank Holding Company Expansion, and Interstate Banking,"Issues in Bank Regulation, vol. 10 (Autumn), pp. 30-40. Apgar, William, and Mark Duda (2003)."The Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the Community Reinvestment Act: Past Accomplishments and Future Regulatory Challenges" (209 KB PDF),FRBNY Economic Policy Review, vol. 9 (June), pp. 169-91. Avery, Robert B., Raphael W. Bostic, and Glenn B. Canner (2000)."CRA Special Lending Programs" (115 KB PDF),Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 86 (November), pp. 711-31. Avery, Robert B., Kenneth P. Brevoort, and Glenn B. Canner (2006)."Higher-Priced Home Lending and the 2005 HMDA Data" (580 KB PDF),Federal Reserve Bulletin(vol. 92), www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin. Avery, Robert B., Paul S. Calem, and Glenn B. Canner (2003)."The Effects of the Community Reinvestment Act on Local Communities" (89 KB PDF)paper presented at "Sustainable Community Development: What Works, What Doesn't and Why,"a conference sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 27-28. Avery, Robert B., Glenn B. Canner, Shannon C. Mok, and Dan S. Sokolov (2005)."Community Banks and Rural Development: Research Relating to Proposals to Revise the Regulations that Implement the Community Reinvestment Act" (149 KB PDF),Federal Reserve Bulletin(vol. 91), www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin. Barr, Michael S. (2004)."Banking the Poor,"Yale Journal on Regulation, vol. 21 (Winter), pp. 121-237. Barr, Michael S. (2005)."Credit Where It Counts: The Community Reinvestment Act and Its Critics" (558 KB PDF),New YorkUniversityLaw Review, vol. 80 (May), pp. 513-652. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (forthcoming).The Effects of Credit Scores and Credit-Based Insurance Scores on the Availability and Affordability of Financial Products.Washington: Board of Governors. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2000).The Performance and Profitability of CRA-Related Lending. Washington: Board of Governors, July. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1993).Report to the Congress on Community Development Lending by Depository Institutions.Washington: Board of Governors, October. Carr, James H., and Jenny Schuetz (2001).Financial Services in Distressed Communities: Framing the Issue, Finding Solutions(188 KB PDF). Washington: Fannie Mae Foundation. Chomsisengphet, Souphala, and Anthony Pennington-Cross (2006)."The Evolution of the Subprime Market" (553 KB PDF),Federal Reserve Bank of St. LouisReview, vol. 88 (January/February), pp. 31-56. Elliehausen, Gregory (1998).The Cost of Banking Regulation: A Review of the Evidence, Staff Study 171. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April. Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (1992). "A Citizens Guide to CRA," Washington: FFIEC, June, pp. 3-5. Federal Home Loan Bank Board (1937). "Appraisal Methods and Policies,"Federal Home Loan Bank Review, vol. 3 (4), pp. 110-13, 120. Garwood, Griffith L., and Dolores S. Smith (1993)."The Community Reinvestment Act: Evolution and Current Issues,"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 79 (April), pp. 251-67. Gramlich, Edward M. (2007).America's Second Housing Boom. Washington: The Urban Institute, UI Press. Hiller, Amy (2003)."Redlining and the Home Owners' Loan Corporation,"Journal of Urban History, vol. 29 (May), pp. 207-9. Hylton, Keith (2006)."Development Lending and the Community Reinvestment Act,"Law and Economic Working Paper Series 06-07. Boston: Boston University School of Law. Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University (2006).The State of the Nation's Housing. Cambridge, Mass.: JCHS. Lacker, Jeffrey M. (1995)."Neighborhoods and Banking,"Federal Reserve Bank of RichmondEconomic Quarterly, vol. 81 (Spring), pp. 13-38. Lang, William W., and Leonard I. Nakamura (1993). "A Model of Redlining,"Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 33 (Spring), pp. 223-34. Ling, David C., and Susan M. Wachter (1998). "Information Externalities and Home Mortgage Underwriting,"Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 44 (November), pp. 317-32. McNeil, Charles R., and Denise M. Rechter (1980). "The Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980,"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 66 (June), pp. 444-53. Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of Thrift Supervision, and National Credit Union Association (2006)."Federal Financial Regulatory Agencies Issue Final Guidance on Nontraditional Mortgage Product Risks,"press release, September 29, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20070929a.htm. United States Commission on Civil Rights (1961). "Report on Housing," Washington: Government Printing Office. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (2006)."HUD's Regulation of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,"HUD, www.hud.gov/offices/hsg/gse/gse.cfm. Footnotes 1.The Home Owners' Loan Corporation (HOLC) was a New Deal agency established in 1933 to help stabilize real estate that had depreciated during the Depression and to refinance mortgage debt of economically distressed homeowners. It granted fifteen-year mortgage loans at 5 percent interest to some 1 million homeowners between August 1933 and June 1936, the period it was authorized to originate new loans (Hiller, 2003).Return to text 2.Debate continues on the relative importance of racial bias and economic factors for explaining redlining and similar practices (see Lacker, 1995).Return to text 3.The Federal Reserve's Flow of Funds accounts did not even record private securitization activity until the early 1980s, and purchases by federal housing agencies, which were focused on government-backed loans and lower-risk conventional loans, represented less than 1 percent of total outstanding home mortgage debt in the years preceding enactment of the CRA.Return to text 4.Analysis of decennial census and Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data indicates that lower-income areas have about half the number of owner-occupied homes and home purchase loans in a given year than do higher-income areas.Return to text 5.Although information from the period before the CRA is not available, a review of credit records from one of the national credit-reporting agencies today supports this conjecture, as it finds that individuals in lower-income areas have, on average, substantially shorter credit histories and only about half as many credit accounts. Also, nearly 40 percent of the individuals in lower-income census tracts cannot be scored, a proportion nearly three times that found in higher-income areas. This information comes from analysis by staff members of the Federal Reserve Board in conjunction with a report to the Congress (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, forthcoming).Return to text 6.The low-cost summary measures of credit history that have gained widespread market acceptance today did not emerge until 1989, when Fair Isaac and Company developed the FICO score.Return to text 7.For a listing of these rules, see Amel and Keane (1986).Return to text 8.Examinations were conducted to evaluate an institution's compliance in five performance areas, comprising twelve assessment factors. The examination culminated in the assignment of a rating (Outstanding, Satisfactory, Needs to Improve, or Substantial Noncompliance) and a written report that became part of the supervisory record for the institution.Return to text 9.The agencies sought to offer banks some flexibility in choosing an examination strategy that suited their business models. The 1995 regulations gave banks the option to submit a strategic plan for complying with CRA in lieu of the standard approach to examination. A community development test was offered to wholesale and limited-purpose banks as a standard for their compliance. The agencies also required that examiners evaluate a bank's CRA record within a performance context that considered socioeconomic factors and market conditions within the institution's service area.Return to text 10.Distinguishing with certainty the effects that the CRA had on "CRA-type" activity from the effects of simultaneous regulatory and market changes over this period has not been possible. It is highly likely that these factors have interacted with one another to affect consumers.Return to text11.TheNational Association of Mortgage Brokersreports that 68 percent of home loan originations involve mortgage brokers. In 2005, 63 percent of mortgages were originated by mortgage companies. (Of the mortgage companies, 70 percent were independent; the rest were affiliated with depository institutions.) The remaining 37 percent were originated by depositories directly: 21.6 percent by commercial banks, 12.9 percent by savings institutions, and 2.5 percent by credit unions (see Avery, Brevoort, and Canner, 2006).Return to text 12.These concerns are reflected in theInteragency Guidance on Nontraditional Mortgage Product Risks(Office of the Controller of the Currency and others, 2006), as well as recently issued requests for public comment on the expansion of that guidance. For further discussion of the emergence of the subprime mortgage market, see Gramlich, 2007.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress Chairman Schumer, Vice Chairman Maloney, Representative Saxton, and other members of the Committee, thank you for inviting me here this morning to present an update on the outlook for the U.S. economy. I will begin with a discussion of real economic activity and then turn to inflation. Economic growth in the United States has slowed in recent quarters, reflecting in part the economy’s transition from the rapid rate of expansion experienced over the preceding years to a more sustainable pace of growth. Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at an annual rate of roughly 2 percent in the second half of 2006 and appears to be expanding at a similar rate early this year. The principal source of the slowdown in economic growth that began last spring has been the substantial correction in the housing market. Following an extended boom in housing, the demand for homes began to weaken in mid-2005. By the middle of 2006, sales of both new and existing homes had fallen about 15 percent below their peak levels. Homebuilders responded to the fall in demand by sharply curtailing construction. Even so, the inventory of unsold homes has risen to levels well above recent historical norms. Because of the decline in housing demand, the pace of house-price appreciation has slowed markedly, with some markets experiencing outright price declines. The near-term prospects for the housing market remain uncertain. Sales of new and existing homes were about flat, on balance, during the second half of last year. So far this year, sales of existing homes have held up, as have other indicators of demand such as mortgage applications for home purchase, and mortgage rates remain relatively low. However, sales of new homes have fallen, and continuing declines in starts have not yet led to meaningful reductions in the inventory of homes for sale. Even if the demand for housing falls no further, weakness in residential construction is likely to remain a drag on economic growth for a time as homebuilders try to reduce their inventories of unsold homes to more normal levels. Developments in subprime mortgage markets raise some additional questions about the housing sector. Delinquency rates on variable-interest-rate loans to subprime borrowers, which account for a bit less than 10 percent of all mortgages outstanding, have climbed sharply in recent months. The flattening in home prices has contributed to the increase in delinquencies by making refinancing more difficult for borrowers with little home equity. In addition, a large increase in early defaults on recently originated subprime variable-rate mortgages casts serious doubt on the adequacy of the underwriting standards for these products, especially those originated over the past year or so. As a result of this deterioration in loan performance, investors have increased their scrutiny of the credit quality of securitized mortgages, and lenders in turn are evidently tightening the terms and standards applied in the subprime mortgage market. Although the turmoil in the subprime mortgage market has created severe financial problems for many individuals and families, the implications of these developments for the housing market as a whole are less clear. The ongoing tightening of lending standards, although an appropriate market response, will reduce somewhat the effective demand for housing, and foreclosed properties will add to the inventories of unsold homes. At this juncture, however, the impact on the broader economy and financial markets of the problems in the subprime market seems likely to be contained. In particular, mortgages to prime borrowers and fixed-rate mortgages to all classes of borrowers continue to perform well, with low rates of delinquency. We will continue to monitor this situation closely. Business spending has also slowed recently. Expenditures on capital equipment declined in the fourth quarter of 2006 and early this year. Much of the weakness in recent months has been in types of capital goods used heavily by the construction and motor vehicle industries, but we have seen some softening in the demand for other types of capital goods as well. Although some of this pullback can be explained by the recent moderation in the growth of output, the magnitude of the slowdown has been somewhat greater than would be expected given the normal evolution of the business cycle. In addition, inventory levels in some industries--again, most notably in industries linked to construction and motor vehicle production--rose over the course of last year, leading some firms to cut production to better align inventories with sales. Recent indicators suggest that the inventory adjustment process may have largely run its course in the motor vehicle sector, but remaining imbalances in some other industries may continue to impose some restraint on industrial production for a time. Despite the recent weak readings, we expect business investment in equipment and software to grow at a moderate pace this year, supported by high rates of profitability, strong business balance sheets, relatively low interest rates and credit spreads, and continued expansion of output and sales. Investment in nonresidential structures (such as office buildings, factories, and retail space) should also continue to expand, although not at the unusually rapid pace of 2006. Thus far, the weakness in housing and in some parts of manufacturing does not appear to have spilled over to any significant extent to other sectors of the economy. Employment has continued to expand as job losses in manufacturing and residential construction have been more than offset by gains in other sectors, notably health care, leisure and hospitality, and professional and technical services, and unemployment remains low by historical standards. The continuing increases in employment, together with some pickup in real wages, have helped sustain consumer spending, which increased at a brisk pace during the second half of last year and has continued to be well maintained so far this year. Growth in consumer spending should continue to support the economic expansion in coming quarters. In addition, fiscal policy at both the federal and the state and local levels should impart a small stimulus to economic activity this year. Outside the United States, economic activity in our major trading partners has continued to grow briskly. The strength of demand abroad has helped to spur strong growth in U.S. real exports, which rose about 9 percent last year, and a robust world economy should continue to provide opportunities for U.S. exporters this year. Growth in U.S. real imports slowed to about 3 percent in 2006, in part reflecting a drop in real terms in imports of crude oil and petroleum products. Despite the improvements in trade performance, the U.S. current account deficit remains large, averaging 6-1/2 percent of nominal GDP during 2006. Overall, the economy appears likely to continue to expand at a moderate pace over coming quarters. As the inventory of unsold new homes is worked off, the drag from residential investment should wane. Consumer spending appears solid, and business investment seems likely to post moderate gains. This forecast is subject to a number of risks. To the downside, the correction in the housing market could turn out to be more severe than we currently expect, perhaps exacerbated by problems in the subprime sector. Moreover, we could yet see greater spillover from the weakness in housing to employment and consumer spending than has occurred thus far. The possibility that the recent weakness in business investment will persist is an additional downside risk. To the upside, consumer spending--which has proved quite resilient despite the housing downturn and increases in energy prices--might continue to grow at a brisk pace, stimulating a more-rapid economic expansion than we currently anticipate. Let me now turn to the inflation situation. Overall consumer price inflation has come down since last year, primarily as a result of the deceleration of consumers’ energy costs. The consumer price index (CPI) increased 2.4 percent over the twelve months ending in February, down from 3.6 percent a year earlier. Core inflation slowed modestly in the second half of last year, but recent readings have been somewhat elevated and the level of core inflation remains uncomfortably high. For example, core CPI inflation over the twelve months ending in February was 2.7 percent, up from 2.1 percent a year earlier. Another measure of core inflation that we monitor closely, based on the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy, shows a similar pattern. Core inflation, which is a better measure of the underlying inflation trend than overall inflation, seems likely to moderate gradually over time. Despite recent increases in the price of crude oil, energy prices are below last year’s peak. If energy prices remain near current levels, greater stability in the costs of producing non-energy goods and services will reduce pressure on core inflation over time. Of course, the prices of oil and other commodities are very difficult to predict, and they remain a source of considerable uncertainty in the inflation outlook. Increases in rents--both market rent and owners' equivalent rent--account for a substantial part of the increase in core inflation over the past year. The acceleration in rents may have resulted in part from a shift in demand toward rental housing as families found homeownership less financially attractive. Rents should begin to decelerate as the demand for owner-occupied housing stabilizes and the supply of rental units increases. However, the extent and timing of that expected slowing is not yet clear. Another significant factor influencing medium-term trends in inflation is the public’s expectations of inflation. These expectations have an important bearing on whether transitory influences on prices, such as changes in energy costs, become embedded in wage and price decisions and so leave a lasting imprint on the rate of inflation. It is encouraging that inflation expectations appear to be contained. Although core inflation seems likely to moderate gradually over time, the risks to this forecast are to the upside. In particular, upward pressure on inflation could materialize if final demand were to exceed the underlying productive capacity of the economy for a sustained period. The rate of resource utilization is high, as can be seen most clearly in the tightness of the labor market. Indeed, anecdotal reports suggest that businesses are having difficulty recruiting well-qualified workers in a range of occupations. Measures of labor compensation, though still growing at a moderate pace, have shown some signs of acceleration over the past year, likely in part the result of tight labor market conditions. To be sure, faster growth in nominal labor compensation does not necessarily portend higher inflation. Increases in compensation may be offset by higher labor productivity or absorbed--at least for a time--by a narrowing of firms’ profit margins rather than passed on to consumers in the form of higher prices. In these circumstances, gains in nominal compensation would translate into gains in real compensation as well. Underlying productivity trends appear generally favorable, despite the recent slowing in some measures, and the markup of prices over unit labor costs is high by historical standards, so such an outcome is certainly possible. Moreover, if the economy grows at a moderate pace for a time, as seems most likely, pressures on resource utilization should ease. However, a less benign possibility is that tight product markets might allow firms to pass some or all of their higher labor costs through to prices. In this case, increases in nominal compensation would not translate into increased purchasing power for workers but would add to inflation pressures. Thus, the high level of resource utilization remains an important upside risk to continued progress in reducing inflation. In regard to monetary policy, the Federal Open Market Committee has left its target for the federal funds rate unchanged, at 5-1/4 percent, since last June. To date, the incoming data have supported the view that the current stance of policy is likely to foster sustainable economic growth and a gradual ebbing in core inflation. Because core inflation is above the levels most conducive to the achievement of sustainable growth and price stability, the Committee indicated in the statement following its recent meeting that its predominant policy concern remains the risk that inflation will fail to moderate as expected. However, the uncertainties around the outlook have increased somewhat in recent weeks. Consequently, the Committee also indicated that future policy decisions will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information. Thank you. I would be happy to take your questions.
The Federal Reserve Board and the New York State Banking Department on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Banco de la Nación Argentina, Buenos Aires, Argentina; the bank’s branch in New York, New York; the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; and the New York State Banking Department. The Written Agreement addresses Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money laundering compliance policies and practices at Banco de la Nación Argentina’s New York branch. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the New York State Banking Department on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Intesa Sanpaolo S.p.A., Turin, Italy; the bank’s branch at 1 William Street in New York, New York; the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; and the New York State Banking Department. The Written Agreement addresses Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money laundering compliance policies and practices at Intesa Sanpaolo S.p.A.’s New York branch. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among the North Valley Bank, Zanesville, Ohio, the Ohio Division of Financial Institutions and the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.