Five federal agencies on Friday issued a final statement on the complex structured finance activities of financial institutions. The statement describes the types of internal controls and risk management procedures that should help financial institutions identify, manage, and address the heightened legal and reputational risks that may arise from certain complex structured finance transactions (CSFTs). The final statement is substantially similar to the revised statement issued for comment in May 2006, but has been modified in certain respects to address comments received on the revised statement. Like the proposal issued in May, the final statement takes a risk- and principles-based approach to addressing the risks CSFTs may pose to institutions and focuses on those CSFTs that may present elevated levels of legal or reputational risk to institutions. The final statement was issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision and the Securities and Exchange Commission. The statement represents supervisory guidance for institutions supervised by the four banking agencies and a policy statement for institutions supervised by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Because the statement focuses on sound practices related to elevated risk CSFTs -- transactions that typically are conducted by a limited number of large financial institutions -- it will not affect or apply to the vast majority of financial institutions, including most small institutions. The final statement is attached and will be published in the Federal Register shortly.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday approved changes to itsPolicy on Payments System Riskthat revise the Board's expectations for systemically important payments and settlement systems subject to its authority and update and clarify the policy with regard to central counterparties. Under the revised policy, systemically important payments and settlement systems subject to the Board's authority are expected to complete and disclose publicly self-assessments against the principles and minimum standards in the policy. The self-assessment should be reviewed and approved by the system's senior management and board of directors upon completion and made readily available to the public. In addition, a self-assessment should be updated following material changes to the system or its environment and, at a minimum, reviewed by the system every two years. The Board expects each systemically important system subject to its authority to complete and publish its initial self-assessment by December 31, 2007. The Board will communicate directly with each system expected to complete a self-assessment. The revisions also incorporate theRecommendations for Central Counterpartiesdeveloped by the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems of the central banks of the Group of Ten countries and the Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions. These recommendations will serve as the Board's minimum standards for central counterparties identified as systemically important and subject to the Board's authority. This change is consistent with past revisions that updated the policy in light of new international risk management standards for payments and securities settlement systems. The Board's notice is attached.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Allied Social Science Association Annual Meeting, Chicago, Illinois The Federal Reserve, like many central banks, is engaged in a wide range of activities beyond the making of monetary policy. For example, the Fed plays a critical role in the U.S. payments system, both as an overseer and as a provider of wholesale and retail payments services; it has substantial responsibilities in the area of consumer protection, including rule-writing and enforcement; it promotes financial stability; and, together with other agencies, it supervises both large and small banking organizations. In this talk I will consider the case for one of these activities--namely, the supervision of the banking system--being conducted, at least in part, by the U.S. central bank. In some countries, such as the United Kingdom and Japan, the responsibility for supervising banks (as well as financial institutions and financial markets more generally) has been assigned to a single financial supervisory agency, rather than to the central bank. In the euro area, even as the European Central Bank has assumed responsibility for monetary policy, some national central banks or other national authorities have retained substantial supervisory powers. Various other institutional arrangements exist around the world, including the more traditional model in which the central bank also serves as a supervisor of the banking system. In light of these alternative models, does it make sense for the Federal Reserve to supervise banking organizations? At a conceptual level, the discussion of whether the central bank should also act as a supervisor has focused on issues of incentives and efficiency. With respect to incentives, one question that has been raised is whether assigning both macroeconomic and supervisory goals to a single institution might not lead to conflicts of interest. Some writers have argued, for example, that a central bank with supervisory responsibilities might, at times, be hesitant to impose appropriate monetary restraint out of concern for possible adverse effects on banks (Goodhart and Schoenmaker, 1995). On the other hand, if macroeconomic and supervisory goals are interdependent, a single agency responsible for both objectives might be better able to take those interdependencies into account than could multiple agencies, each charged with a single goal (Wall and Eisenbeis, 1999; Bernanke, 2001). For example, Alan Greenspan has argued along these lines that "a single regulator with a narrow view of safety and soundness and with no responsibility for the macroeconomic implications of its decisions would inevitably have a long-term bias against risk-taking and innovation (Greenspan, 1994, p. 130)." The issue of the efficiency of combining central banking and supervision in one agency boils down to whether that combination entails significant economies (or diseconomies) of scope (Goodhart, 2000; Mishkin, 2001; Haubrich and Thomson, 2005). For instance, if supervisory activities yield information that is useful for carrying out monetary policy or other central bank functions (or vice versa) and this information cannot be obtained easily through interagency cooperation, then granting some supervisory authority to the central bank may lead to better outcomes. By the same token, if economies of scope are outweighed by the benefits of specialization--arising, for example, from increased organizational focus, the development of more specialized expertise, or a reduction in regulatory overlap--then the cause of efficiency may be better served by separating supervision from central banking.1 Abstract arguments can take us only so far, however. Because financial markets, political systems, and regulatory objectives vary across countries and because initial conditions are influenced by historical accident, no single institutional structure seems likely to be best in all cases (Dixit, 1996). Therefore, I will avoid generalizations today and restrict my attention to the current arrangements in the United States. In the U.S. context, the various issues that have been raised concerning institutional incentives seem unlikely to be determining factors in a consideration of the preferred regulatory structure; indeed, the side of the debate on which they would weigh is uncertain. In particular, U.S. monetary policy has been quite successful for some time, and I am not aware of any evidence that monetary-policy decisions have been distorted because of the Fed’s supervisory role. The issue of efficiency is less easy to dismiss, however. The U.S. bank regulatory system is complex and in some respects duplicative, and though removing supervisory authority from the Fed would leave much of this complexity intact, it would produce a slightly simpler allocation of supervisory responsibilities. We can thus narrow the question I posed at the beginning, of whether the Fed should supervise banks, to the question of whether the Fed’s supervisory role generates economies of scope of sufficient social benefit to outweigh any associated costs. In the remainder of my remarks, I will discuss some economies of scope arising from the combination of bank supervision and other central bank responsibilities. Although I will touch on a number of complementarities between these activities, my focus will be the benefits of the Fed’s supervisory authority for the execution of one of its core functions: the prevention and management of financial crises. In particular, I will argue that the Fed’s ability to deal with diverse and hard-to-predict threats to financial stability depends critically on the information, expertise, and powers that it holds by virtue of being both a bank supervisor and a central bank. The Federal Reserve’s supervisory authorityAs a starting point, some background on the Federal Reserve’s supervisory authority may be helpful. The Federal Reserve shares the responsibility for regulating and supervising the U.S. financial system with a number of federal and state government agencies, including the other banking agencies, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. The Fed, along with state authorities, supervises state member banks (that is, state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System). In addition, it supervises the U.S. operations of foreign banks and, in some cases, the foreign operations of U.S. banks. The Federal Reserve also serves as the umbrella supervisor of all bank holding companies and financial holding companies, which gives the U.S. central bank broad oversight responsibilities for these banking organizations. However, the bank and nonbank subsidiaries of such holding companies are often supervised by agencies other than the Fed. Supervisory responsibility is determined by the type of charter held by the supervised company and by the principle of functional regulation, under which the identity of the primary supervisor depends on the nature of the financial activity being carried out. For example, the commercial banking activities of holding-company subsidiaries with national bank charters are supervised by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), whereas securities activities in nonbank subsidiaries are under the jurisdiction of the SEC. The Fed cooperates with the OCC, the SEC, and other supervisors in determining the financial condition of the consolidated organization. The Fed’s supervisory responsibilities require extensive engagement at both the policymaking and the operational levels. In the policy arena, the Fed provides technical support to the Congress on legislation related to banking and financial markets and sometimes advocates specific measures (such as prompt corrective action for troubled depositories); along with other agencies, it represents the United States in international forums to develop and negotiate various standards (such as bank capital standards); it collaborates with other agencies (or, in some cases, has sole authority) to develop regulations and supervisory guidance that implement the banking and consumer protection laws; and, working with other agencies as appropriate, it develops norms and practices for supervisors and examiners. At the operational level, the Federal Reserve System (including the twelve regional Federal Reserve Banks) works closely with other agencies to examine banking organizations and to ensure that they operate in a safe and sound manner and comply with the relevant laws and regulations. The Federal Reserve’s supervisory activities give the institution access to a wealth of information about the banking system. For example, the Fed’s examination staff collects and analyzes information on each supervised organization’s management structure, lines of business, financial condition, internal controls, risk‑management practices, operational vulnerabilities, and much else. Moreover, the Fed’s supervisory activities provide it with a window onto financial institutions that it does not regulate and onto developments in the broader financial markets. I have already mentioned the Fed’s role as the umbrella supervisor, which affords it access to information (as well as direct or back-up examination authority) for all holding-company subsidiaries, nonbank organizations as well as banks. Its supervisory activities also allow the Fed to obtain useful information about the financial companies that do business with the banking organizations it supervises. For example, some large banks are heavily engaged in lending and providing various services to hedge funds and other private pools of capital. In the process of ensuring that banks prudently manage these counterparty relationships, Fed staff members, collaborating with their colleagues from other agencies, learn a great deal about the business practices, investment strategies, and emerging trends in this industry.2Finally, many large banking organizations are sophisticated participants in financial markets, including the markets for derivatives and securitized assets. In monitoring and analyzing the activities of these banks, the Fed obtains valuable information about trends and current developments in these markets. Together with the knowledge obtained through its monetary-policy and payments activities, information gained through its supervisory activities gives the Fed an exceptionally broad and deep understanding of developments in financial markets and financial institutions. The benefits of the Fed’s supervisory authority for its non-supervisory activitiesThe extensive information and the expertise that the Fed gains in the process of supervising banks are useful for carrying out many of the central bank’s non-supervisory activities. The benefits of supervisory information formonetary policyare perhaps the most debated. The research literature has focused on whether information drawn from bank examinations is helpful in assessing the economic outlook and thus in formulating monetary policy. The results have been mixed (Peek, Rosengren, and Tootell, 1999; Feldman and others, 2003). Some evidence suggests that supervisory information is likely to be most useful for monetary policymaking in times of financial stress. For example, the Federal Reserve’s experience suggests that such information was helpful in evaluating the availability of credit in the early 1990s, when some banks’ lending was constrained by their limited capital (Bernanke and Lown, 1991; Greenspan, 1994). More generally, monetary policy is certainly aided by the anecdotal information on regional economic conditions that Reserve Bank business and community contacts, including numerous bankers, provide. Many of these contacts are fostered by the extensive interaction between the Reserve Banks and the banks in their Districts. The Federal Reserve’soversight of the payments systemis another critical central banking function. In contrast to the situation in some other countries, the Federal Reserve lacks explicit legal authority to oversee systemically important payments systems. Instead, the Federal Reserve’s powers in this area derive to a considerable extent from its bank supervisory authority. Notably, some key institutions providing clearing and settlement services hold bank charters that place them under Federal Reserve oversight.3In its capacity as a bank supervisor, the Fed can obtain detailed information from these institutions about their operations and risk-management practices and can take action as needed to address risks and deficiencies. The Fed is also either the direct or umbrella supervisor of several large commercial banks that are critical to the payments system through their clearing and settlement activities.4 As I have mentioned, the Fed also has an operational role in the payments system. In particular, Fedwire--a system that the Fed operates for transmitting large-value payments--is a critical component of the U.S. financial infrastructure. The operation of Fedwire and related payments systems often involves large short-term credit exposures to system participants (reflecting so-called daylight overdrafts). The Fed also extends overnight credit to depository institutions through the discount window. The Fed’smanagement of credit riskassociated with these various forms of short-term lending relies heavily on supervisory information. In normal times, this information often is obtained from other banking agencies. When a financial institution is under considerable stress, however, it is helpful to have available in-house supervisors who can independently assess the borrowing institution and evaluate its collateral.5 I have described several ways in which the Fed’s supervisory authority assists it in performing its other functions. In my view, however, the greatest external benefits of the Fed’s supervisory activities are those related to the institution’s role in preventing and managing financial crises. Bank supervision and the prevention and management of financial crisesAlthough the Federal Reserve is today best known to the public as the agency responsible for monetary policy, the Fed was founded in 1913 largely in response to the periodic episodes of banking panics and other forms of financial instability that had plagued the U.S. economy during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963).6Today, the Fed retains its key role in the prevention and mitigation of financial crises, for a number of reasons. First, the Fed has unique powers to provide liquidity to the financial system, through means that include open-market purchases, discount-window loans, and intra-day overdrafts. Second, as I have noted, the Fed is a key player in the payments system, functioning both as an overseer of systemically important clearing-and-settlement systems and as a major provider of payments services. Problems in the execution of payments--arising from institutions’ uncertainties about the financial condition of their counterparties, failures of the payments infrastructure, or both--have been central features of a number of U.S. financial crises. Even in situations in which the payments system has continued to function normally, the information the Fed has gleaned from its payment activities has been helpful for understanding and managing financial stresses. Third, the Federal Reserve has developed extensive international relationships and has worked closely with foreign central banks and, as a consequence of its responsibility for the supervision of cross-border banking operations, with foreign supervisors. These relationships have proved useful in past crises, and are likely to be even more critical in the future as the globalization of finance continues. Fourth, the Fed’s responsibilities for macroeconomic stability provide it with both a strong incentive and the knowledge to prevent or mitigate financial disruptions that threaten to spill over into the broader economy (Mishkin, 2000). Finally, the wide scope of the Fed’s activities in financial markets--including not only bank supervision and its roles in the payments system but also the interaction with primary dealers and the monitoring of capital markets associated with the making of monetary policy--has given the Fed a uniquely broad expertise in evaluating and responding to emerging financial strains. Financial stability is strengthened both by taking steps to prevent financial crises and by managing crises effectively if they occur. To make crises less likely, over the years the Federal Reserve has worked effectively with the Congress, other supervisors, and financial market participants to develop statutory, regulatory, and other measures.7The Fed has also worked with other supervisors and with financial institutions to support the development of practices that limit systemic risk. For example, over the past year and a half, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has collaborated with the private sector and with other regulators to strengthen the infrastructure that supports the credit derivatives market. Very rapid growth in the volume of trading in that market in recent years had led to substantial backlogs of unconfirmed trades. As a result of the cooperative efforts of market participants and regulators, these backlogs have been cut sharply, reducing the risk that incomplete trading records could complicate the evaluation of firms’ positions and financial conditions in a crisis. A number of other cross-cutting initiatives are under way, including, for example, a coordinated review of how major firms use stress-testing techniques to measure their credit and market risks. As the financial system becomes more complex, more global, and more interconnected, public-private collaborations that transcend national borders and cut across types of institutions, markets, and financial instruments will become increasingly valuable. The Fed will continue to initiate and support such efforts. Because of the Fed’s unique perspective on issues of financial stability--a perspective based on statutory authority, historical experience, and an appreciation of the links between financial and macroeconomic stability--the participation of the U.S. central bank in collective efforts to prevent financial crises seems highly desirable. The Federal Reserve’s supervisory authority is useful in helping the institution to more effectively identify issues and potential problems, by giving it a "seat at the table" that allows it to be heard on these issues, and by increasing its contact and influence with financial-market participants and other supervisors. In short, the Fed’s supervisory powers help both to give it a voice in policy discussions concerning financial stability and to increase the quality of its contributions to those discussions. With strong private-sector institutions and good public policies in place, episodes of severe financial stress should be relatively infrequent. When financial problems do develop, however, the Fed and other policymakers face the important threshold question of whether public action is warranted; in particular, they must weigh the expected benefits of taking action against the possibility that such action will encourage excessive private risk-taking in the future (the moral hazard problem). To minimize the moral hazard problem, policymakers should act only in those cases in which it seems likely that inaction would risk systemic problems with the potential to damage the broader economy; and if they act, they should do so in ways that disturb market outcomes as little as possible. In those cases when policymakers choose to respond to an actual or potential crisis, however, the actions taken should be informed, timely, and effective. From the Fed’s perspective, the ability to act effectively in a financial crisis is greatly enhanced by its ongoing supervisory role. Such events can involve significant and unpredictable interdependencies across institutions, markets, and the real economy and, in some cases, breakdowns in communications or in the financial infrastructure. In a situation of financial stress, the Federal Reserve’s supervisory function helps it to obtain timely and reliable information on conditions in the banking sector, the payments system, and the capital markets, while helping the Fed maintain the in-house expertise necessary to gather and evaluate such information quickly and to make sound judgments about possible policy responses. Moreover, the Fed’s ongoing relationships with the financial firms it supervises, as well as with other supervisors, can ease communications and improve cooperation in a crisis, leading to more effective crisis management. It is true that, in some episodes of financial stress, important information was provided voluntarily by securities firms and other organizations over which the Federal Reserve has limited or no regulatory authority, or by other supervisors; moreover, some of the expertise that proved most valuable was derived from the Fed’s non-supervisory activities. Nevertheless, examination authority and a knowledgeable and experienced examination staff have often proved essential. After the September 11 terrorist attacks, for example, Federal Reserve examiners were sent to the backup sites of the large banking firms that had been affected. These staff members proved crucial in discerning what was happening in a highly confused and uncertain situation. The information they obtained helped the Fed assess the damage that had been done, think through the potential implications for financial markets, and evaluate possible remedial actions. Perhaps the most important remedial action taken by the Fed in the wake of the September 11 attacks was its provision of massive amounts of liquidity, which helped avoid logjams in the payments system and ensure that credit for the financial system and the economy would be available as needed. Methods of providing liquidity included open-market purchases, intra-day overdrafts that were well above normal levels, discount-window lending, the crediting of banks on regular schedules for checks in process of collection, securities lending, and currency swaps that allowed foreign central banks to provide dollar liquidity to financial institutions in their own countries (Ferguson, 2003). In undertaking these steps, the Federal Reserve benefited from its knowledge of the liquidity management practices of key institutions, their funding positions, and their financial conditions, as well as from its ability to evaluate the collateral provided by institutions requesting funds. This information and expertise, gained in part through its supervisory role, allowed the Fed to supply the needed liquidity efficiently and without undue risk. Most financial crises do not involve loss of human life and damage to physical infrastructure of the sort that occurred on September 11, 2001. But even in the case of purely financial events, the Fed’s supervisory powers give it the knowledge (and, in some cases, the influence) needed to work with other supervisors and the private sector to help resolve the situation. In the aftermath of the 1987 stock market crash, for example, the Fed drew on its supervisory experience to evaluate the funding and credit risks facing major banking organizations. On-site examiners obtained timely information on potentially significant lending losses and liquidity pressures. Besides issuing a public statement that the discount window was available to provide liquidity, Federal Reserve officials contacted senior managers of major banks--many of whom had ongoing relationships with the Fed as the result of supervisory interactions--to discuss the situation. These discussions encouraged the banks, when it was consistent with appropriate risk management, to make credit available to securities firms, allowing them to make necessary payments and avoiding possible payment gridlock (SEC, 1988; Greenspan, 1994). The Fed undertook similar discussions with other supervisors and with financial firms in response to the failure of Drexel Burnham Lambert in 1990 and the collapse of Long Term Capital Management (LTCM) in 1998. As the condition of Drexel deteriorated, other firms became less willing to trade with it, making it difficult to wind down its positions in an orderly manner (Breeden, 1990). Because of the Federal Reserve’s ongoing supervisory relationships with the main clearing banks and its detailed knowledge of the payments system, the Fed was able to address the banks’ concerns and facilitate the liquidation of Drexel’s positions (Greenspan, 1994). In the case of LTCM, the Federal Reserve had the credibility with large financial firms to facilitate a discussion, from which emerged a private-sector solution that helped to avoid potential market disruptions (Greenspan, 1998).8 A general point that emerges from many of these examples is that financial crises and panics often involve problems of coordination and collective action (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983). The job of the crisis manager in such cases is to assist in solving these coordination problems and to help all parties arrive at a cooperative solution. The market information, the wide-ranging expertise, and the relationships that the Fed has developed in part through its supervisory activities have been invaluable in allowing the central bank to act as an "honest broker" in such situations. I have focused today on the benefits of the Fed’s supervisory role for its other central bank responsibilities, but the reverse is also true: The Fed’s non-supervisory activities help it to be a better supervisor, which in turn promotes financial stability. For example, in its conduct of monetary policy, the Federal Reserve monitors financial market developments closely and interacts regularly with the primary dealers in government securities. The knowledge thus gained has improved the Fed’s ability to understand and evaluate banks’ financial-market activities. The Fed’s capital-market expertise is also useful in the regulatory process. For example, the Federal Reserve made substantial contributions to the revisions to the Market Risk Amendment to the Basel I Capital Accord, under which the capital charge for banks’ trading assets is more closely tied to the market risk of their overall portfolios. ConclusionHow best to preserve financial stability is a complex subject with a long history, and my remarks today have touched lightly or not at all on some central questions--among them, how to determine when financial events justify public action and how the responsibilities for maintaining financial stability should be allocated among private and public actors. Also, I should be clear that my purpose today is not to make a comprehensive case that our current regulatory structure is ideal. To the contrary, we should always be looking for ways to make supervision more effective and less burdensome. My point today is a narrower one: that the supervisory authority of the Fed has significant collateral benefits in helping it carry out its responsibilities for financial stability. In particular, the information, expertise, and powers that the Fed derives from its supervisory authority enhance its ability to contribute to efforts to prevent financial crises; and, when financial stresses emerge and public action is warranted, the Fed is able to respond more quickly, more effectively, and in a more informed way than would otherwise be possible. Yogi Berra reminded us that prediction is very hard, especially about the future. In that spirit, the Federal Reserve continues to work actively to prepare for the possibility of financial stress. For example, we have created cross-disciplinary teams of experts--including staff drawn from bank supervision--to monitor financial developments and to consider possible crisis scenarios and the appropriate policy responses. We have worked with other agencies both here and abroad to improve our abilities to communicate and coordinate in a crisis situation. We also continue to take measures to ensure that our communications, information systems, and policy processes will remain viable should critical infrastructure be disrupted. The Federal Reserve has established a strong record of promoting financial stability, and we will continue to work to ensure the vibrancy and resilience of the U.S. financial system. References Bernanke, Ben (2001). "Comment," in Frederic Mishkin, ed.,Prudential Supervision: What Works and What Doesn’t, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 293-297. __________ (2006). "Hedge Funds and Systemic Risk," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s 2006 Financial Markets Conference, Sea Island, Georgia, May 16. Bernanke, Ben and Cara Lown (1991). "The Credit Crunch,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,2:1991, pp. 205-39. Breeden, Richard (1990). Testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, United States Senate, March 2. Diamond, Douglas and Philip Dybvig (1983). "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 91 (June), pp. 401-19. Dixit, Avinash (1996).The Making of Economic Policy: A Transaction-Cost Politics Perspective. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Feldman, Ron J., Jan Kim, Preston Miller, and Jason E. Schmidt (2003). "Are Banking Supervisory Data Useful for Macroeconomic Forecasts?"The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, vol. 3 (Contributions), article 3. Ferguson, Roger (2003). "September 11, the Federal Reserve, and the Financial System," speech delivered at Vanderbilt University, February 5. Friedman, Milton and Anna Schwartz (1963).A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960: Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Greenspan, Alan (1994). Testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, United States Senate, March 2. Available in Board of Governors,Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 80 (May), pp. 382-85. __________(1998).Testimonybefore the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, October 1. Goodhart, Charles (2000). "The Organizational Structure of Banking Supervision," Occasional Papers, no.1, Basel Switzerland: Financial Stability Institute, November. Goodhart, Charles and Dirk Shoenmaker (1995). "Should the Functions of Monetary Policy and Banking Supervision Be Separated?"OxfordEconomic Papers, vol. 47 (October), pp. 539-560. Haubrich, Joseph G. (1996). "Combining Bank Supervision and Monetary Policy," Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland,Economic Commentary, vol. 11, pp. 1-9. Haubrich, Joseph G. and James B. Thomson (2005). "Umbrella Supervision and the Role of the Central Bank," Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Policy Discussion Paper no. 11, December. McDonough, William J. (1998).Statementbefore the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, October 1. Mishkin, Frederic (2000). "What Should Central Banks Do? (101 KB PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of St. LouisReview, vol.82 (November/December), pp. 1-14. __________ (2001). "Prudential Supervision: Why Is It Important and What Are the Issues?" in Frederic Mishkin, ed.,Prudential Supervision: What Works and What Doesn’t, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Peek, Joe, Eric S. Rosengren, and Geoffrey M. B. Tootell (1999). "Using Bank Supervisory Data to Improve Macroeconomic Forecasts," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,New EnglandEconomic Review, September/October, pp. 21-32. Securities and Exchange Commission, Division of Market Regulation (1988).The October 1987 Market Break: A Report, Washington: The Commission, February. Wall, Larry and Robert A. Eisenbeis (1999). "Financial Regulatory Structure and the Resolution of Conflicting Goals,"Journal of Financial Services Research, vol.16 (December), pp. 223-45. Footnotes 1.Charles Goodhart has suggested that separating monetary-policy and supervisory functions may have the benefit of eliminating the risk that poor supervisory performance could adversely affect the central bank’s reputation for competence, thereby affecting its ability to perform its other responsibilities, including monetary policy (Goodhart, 2000). See also Haubrich (1996).Return to text 2.Bernanke (2006) explains the usefulness of the "indirect regulation" approach to hedge funds. This approach avoids the costs of direct regulation by relying on the self-interest of hedge-fund counterparties and investors to exert market discipline on these organizations.Return to text 3.These institutions include the Depository Trust Company (a state member institution) and the CLS Bank International (an Edge Act corporation).Return to text 4.In principle, legislation to give the Federal Reserve direct oversight authority over systemically important payments systems could reduce the Fed’s need to rely on its bank supervisory powers in this area. However, the Fed’s supervisory activities also provide it with information about payments systems from the vantage points of system users (that is, the banks that make and receive payments), providing useful additional perspectives both on the functioning of the payments systems themselves and on the risks to banks and other financial institutions that arise in the process of clearing and settling transactions.Return to text 5.Indeed, the Congress, in the FDIC Improvement Act of 1991, imposed a heightened level of scrutiny on lending to troubled institutions. In particular, if the Federal Reserve extends credit to a bank more than 5 days after the bank becomes critically undercapitalized or to an undercapitalized bank for more than 60 days out of a 120-day period, the Federal Reserve Board may be liable for a portion of any consequent increase in FDIC resolution costs [12 U.S.C. § 347b(b)]. In such situations, the Fed needs the capacity to evaluate whether such loans are appropriate--a task requiring considerable information and expertise on the operation of troubled banks and the resolution process.Return to text 6.The first sentence of the Federal Reserve Act assigned the new central bank the responsibilities of furnishing an elastic currency, affording a means of rediscounting commercial paper, and establishing more effective supervision of banking. Each of these responsibilities was closely tied to the goal of preventing or ameliorating financial panics; in particular, the furnishing of an elastic currency and the rediscounting of commercial paper both involved the provision of liquidity to the financial system as needed to avoid seasonal or other financial stresses.Return to text 7.For example, the Federal Reserve has supported, and sometimes helped to craft, clarifications of the legal framework that underpins financial contracts, which are critical when contracts must be unwound in a crisis. In the regulatory and supervisory areas, the Fed has helped to develop risk-sensitive bank capital standards and encouraged banks to continue upgrading their methods for measuring and managing risk.Return to text 8.In both the Drexel and LTCM episodes, the Federal Reserve initially detected the firms’ problems through either market surveillance or its interactions with primary dealers, rather than through banking supervision. Once the problems were known, considerable information came from the troubled firms themselves (Breeden, 1990; McDonough, 1998). However, that information was supplemented, and to an extent validated, with information received from banking institutions under the Federal Reserve’s supervisory authority. In contrast, in the 1987 crash, when the crisis was not centered on a single firm but instead involved widespread concerns about securities firms’ access to bank credit, the Fed placed greater reliance on information obtained through its supervisory authority.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board named ten new members to its Consumer Advisory Council for three-year terms and designated a new Chair and Vice Chair of the Council for 2007. The Council advises the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under the Consumer Credit Protection Act and on other matters in the area of consumer financial services. The Council meets three times a year in Washington, D.C. Lisa Sodeika was designated Chair; her term runs through December 2007. Ms. Sodeika is Executive Vice President of Corporate Affairs for HSBC North America Holdings, Inc. Tony Brown was designated Vice Chair; his term on the Council ends in December 2008. Mr. Brown is President and Chief Executive Officer of Uptown Consortium, Inc. The ten new members are: Jason EngelCosta Mesa, California Mr. Engel serves as Vice President and Assistant General Counsel for Experian where he provides primary legal support for Experian's North American regulatory compliance program. In this role he provides advice on various laws and regulations affecting Experian and its customers, including the Fair Credit Reporting Act, Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act privacy and safeguards regulations, the Patriot Act, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, federal and state telemarketing regulation, and numerous state credit reporting, privacy, and data security laws. In addition to overseeing the company's internal compliance implementation efforts, Mr. Engel also provides support for Experian's government relations group by providing policy analysis of existing and proposed legislation. Mr. Engel was Experian's lead attorney in the creation of VantageScoreTM, the first credit scoring model to be developed jointly by the national credit reporting companies. Joe FalkMiami, Florida Mr. Falk is a consultant with the law firm Akerman Senterfitt where he provides consulting services and expertise on lending, brokering, insurance, and general business matters. He is the current legislative chairman and a past president of the National Association of Mortgage Brokers. Mr. Falk is knowledgeable on a wide array of regulatory and legislative issues and has testified before Congress on a variety of matters. He was the 2006 recipient of NAMB's Leadership Award and has served on the NAMB Board since 1995. Mr. Falk volunteers his time to affordable housing and mortgage education efforts within his community. Since 2004 he has served as an appointed member of the Miami Dade County Affordable Housing Advisory Board and regularly teaches mortgage continuing education classes throughout Florida. He is also Vice Chairman of the Board of the Miami Science Museum (a Smithsonian affiliate). Louise J. GissendanerCleveland, Ohio Ms. Gissendaner is Senior Vice President and Director of Community Development for the Northeastern Ohio affiliate of Fifth Third Bank, a state member bank headquartered in Cincinnati with assets over $105.8 billion and a presence in ten states. She serves on the management team and is primarily responsible for managing the bank's community reinvestment reporting and goal setting. She is also responsible for directing community development sponsorships and foundation grant opportunities to community organizations throughout Northeastern Ohio and Western Pennsylvania. Ms. Gissendaner has extensive knowledge in the areas of regulatory compliance, community development lending, and CRA-related activities. Prior to working at Fifth Third, Ms. Gissendaner served as Vice President and Community Reinvestment Officer at the Ohio affiliate of Banc One Corporation. She currently serves on the board of Cleveland Action to Support Housing (C.A.S.H.), is Board Chair of the Akron Urban League, and is the founder and president of Sankofa Fine Art Plus. Patricia HassonPhiladelphia, Pennsylvania Ms. Hasson is President of the Consumer Credit Counseling Service of Delaware Valley, Inc., a nonprofit service organization dedicated to positively impacting human lives and communities through comprehensive consumer credit education, counseling, asset building, and debt reduction programs without regard to economic status. In this role she provides vision and direction for the development and administration of agency initiatives, programs, policy formulation, legislative agenda, and public relations efforts. Ms. Hasson understands the needs of consumers with credit issues and also understands the bankers' perspective due to her years in the banking industry managing a large credit card portfolio, most recently at Corestates Bank of Delaware, now part of Wachovia. She has worked with the Philadelphia Reserve Bank's Payments Card Center on a paper about the credit counseling industry and is a visible leader in the Philadelphia business and community development arena. She has participated on the Pennsylvania Governor's Task Force for Working Families, the PNC Bank Community Advisory Committee, and has been part of the small business board of the Greater Philadelphia Chamber of Commerce. The Philadelphia Business Journal and the National Association of Women Business Owners recently honored her with a 2006 Women of Distinction Award. Thomas JamesChicago, Illinois Mr. James serves as the Senior Assistant Attorney General in the Office of the Illinois Attorney General where he holds the position of Consumer Counsel. In recent years he has concentrated on predatory lending issues, credit-related issues, and on litigation against institutions and individuals who have engaged in various forms of equity stripping, particularly in the home loan and mortgage lending industry. As a regulator, he has worked extensively in drafting legislation with not-for-profit organizations, major community banking associations, and financial companies. Mr. James has been a member of the Consumer Fraud Bureau since 1998 and has extensive knowledge of major federal and state consumer protection statutes. He helped draft the Illinois Payday Reform Act of 2005, the Illinois High Cost Home Loan Act of 2004, and the Illinois Foreclosure Rescue Fraud Act of 2007. Prior to working in the Office of the Attorney General, he worked as a housing counselor for the Leadership Council for Metropolitan Open Communities where he assisted public housing tenants in relocating to privately-owned residential units. Mr. James received his Juris Doctor in 1981 from Boalt Hall School of Law at the University of California, Berkeley, and is admitted to the practice of law in Illinois and California. Edna SawadyOrange, Ohio Ms. Sawady is Managing Director and leader of the Under-Banked practice at Market Innovations Inc. (MII), a niche consulting firm headquartered in Boston specializing in assessing the likely business results of innovative ideas. Before joining MII, Ms. Sawady held various strategy development and operating roles at Key Corp, one of the nation's largest bank-based financial services companies headquartered in Cleveland, Ohio. Throughout her tenure at Key, Ms. Sawady led numerous large-scale change initiatives. In her most recent role as the segment executive for low- and moderate-income and ethnic client segments, she led strategy development and oversaw the evolution of the segments' business practices. Before that, Ms. Sawady served as the Chief Operating Officer of Community Development Banking. In that capacity, she led the development and initial implementation of Key's pioneering approach to serving the financial needs of low-wealth consumers. Prior to that role, she held the position of Chief Strategist for Key's consumer bank. She is a board member of New Directions, an organization serving chemically dependent adolescents, and a past board member of New Life Community, an organization providing holistic support and transitional housing for homeless, jobless families. H. Cooke SunooLos Angeles, California Mr. Sunoo is Director of the Asian Pacific Islander Small Business Program, a broad nonprofit consortium of Los Angeles community development groups whose mission is to assist the development of small and micro businesses by providing business training and credit counseling services. In his role as director he is responsible for overseeing all aspects of program implementation and development. Mr. Sunoo was previously a project manager for the Los Angeles Community Redevelopment Agency where he successfully managed the Little Tokyo, Koreatown, and Hollywood redevelopment projects. He was a member of Governor Gray Davis' Small Business Reform Task Force and the Congressional Minority Small Business Summit, and is a member of the Wells Fargo Community Board where he has actively been involved as a community reviewer of the bank's CRA activities and HMDA reviews. Mr. Sunoo also sits on the Board of Directors of the Asian Pacific American Revolving Loan Fund, and is a founding board member of the LA Loan Portal, a cooperative effort of non-profit community development groups assisting small businesses, commercial banks, and other lending institutions. Stergios "Terry" TheologidesIrvine, California Mr. Theologides is a senior executive for New Century Financial Corporation, which is one of the leading nonprime mortgage companies in the country. New Century is a publicly traded company that has in excess of 200 offices and produces more than $50 billion of mortgages. Mr. Theologides is well versed in products, performance, regulatory compliance, HMDA and fair lending issues. His area of management includes legal, regulatory compliance, privacy, security, and public affairs. In this role he has reached out to advocacy and community groups, trade associations, and has testified on a national bill related to predatory lending. Mr. Theologides is a member of the mortgage finance council for the National Community Reinvestment Coalition and is currently a member of a Blue Ribbon Panel assisting Harvard University's Joint Center for Housing with a study on race and risk. Linda TinneyDenver, Colorado Ms. Tinney has developed and managed community development, fair lending, community relations, corporate contributions, and volunteer programs for over twenty years in banks with assets from $300 million to $217 billion. In her current role she serves as Vice President, Community Development for the West Metro Region with responsibility for U.S. Bank's community development activities in several large, western metropolitan markets, including Seattle, Portland, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Las Vegas, Phoenix, and Denver among others. She leads her team in creating and facilitating strategies and initiatives to increase affordable housing and economic development lending and investment, particularly lending to low- and moderate-income persons and areas, and small businesses, and financial education. Ms. Tinney is a member of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's Community Development Advisory Council, a group she was appointed to due to her extensive knowledge on community and economic development issues as well as consumer financial issues. In 2006, she received theHousing Star Award for Housing Funder of the Yearon behalf of U.S. Bank from the organization Housing Denver. Luz UrrutiaRoswell, Georgia Ms. Urrutia is President and Chief Operating Officer of Banuestra Financial Corporation, a financial services company with twelve offices throughout metro Atlanta. Banuestra offers a full array of non-traditional and traditional financial products targeted to unbanked and underbanked Latino immigrants. Ms. Urrutia's responsibilities include oversight of company operations, credit, compliance, sales and marketing, customer service, product development, training and community outreach. Prior to joining Banuestra, she was a Senior Vice President with Wachovia for eighteen years in various positions in the Corporate Bank, Treasury Services, Capital Markets, Risk Management, Operations, and Retail Divisions. Most recently, she was Senior Vice President for the Global Services Department of Wachovia, a position in which she developed and implemented several domestic and international strategic alliances in the U.S. and overseas. Ms. Urrutia led efforts in Wachovia's expansion into Canada and Mexico, and also initiated several other relationships in European markets. This past year she was awarded theCommunity Banker of the Year Award for Advocacyby American Banker. Ms. Urrutia serves on the board of The Center for Financial Services Innovation, an affiliate of ShoreBank Corporation. Council members whose terms continue through 2007 are: Stella AdamsExecutive DirectorNorth Carolina Fair Housing CenterDurham, North Carolina Faith L. AndersonVice President-Legal Compliance and General CounselAmerican Airlines Federal Credit UnionFort Worth, Texas Carolyn CarterAttorneyNational Consumer Law CenterGettysburg, Pennsylvania Michael CookVice President of Finance and Assistant TreasurerWal-Mart Stores, Inc.Bentonville, Arkansas Donald S. CurrieExecutive DirectorCommunity Development Corporation of BrownsvilleBrownsville, Texas Kurt EggertProfessor of Law and Director of Clinical Legal EducationChapman University School of LawOrange, California Deborah HickokChief Executive Officer and PresidentACH Commerce, LLCOoltewah, Tennessee Anselmo VillarrealExecutive DirectorLa Casa de Esperanza, Inc.Waukesha, Wisconsin Marva E. WilliamsSenior Vice PresidentWoodstock InstituteChicago, Illinois Council members whose terms continue through 2008 are: Dorothy BridgesChief Executive Officer and PresidentFranklin National Bank of MinneapolisMinneapolis, Minnesota Sarah LudwigDirectorNeighborhood Economic Development Advocacy ProjectNew York, New York Mark K. MetzSenior Vice President and Deputy General CounselWachovia CorporationCharlotte, North Carolina Lance MorganPresidentHo-Chunk, IncorporatedWinnebago Tribe of NebraskaWinnebago, Nebraska Joshua PeirezSenior Vice president and Associate General CounselMasterCard InternationalPurchase, New York Anna McDonald RentschlerBSA OfficerCentral BancompanyJefferson City, Missouri Faith Arnold SchwartzSenior Vice President Government, Housing and IndustryOption One Mortgage CorporationWashington, District of Columbia Edward SivakDirector of Policy and EvaluationEnterprise Corporation of the DeltaJackson, Mississippi Alan WhiteSupervising AttorneyCommunity Legal ServicesPhiladelphia, Pennsylvania
Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the Eller College of Management Distinguished Speaker Series, Tucson, Arizona To begin, I would like to thank Dean Portney and everyone at the Eller College of Management here at The University of Arizona for the invitation to speak this evening. I know that this audience includes both experienced business leaders as well as students preparing to apply the knowledge they have learned in the classroom to the real world. Accordingly, my remarks will first touch on the economic outlook. Then, I will offer some thoughts on the challenges facing consumers as they navigate today’s changing mortgage loan market.Economic OutlookEconomic activity slowed in the middle part of last year. After rising at an annual rate of 3-1/4 percent over the previous two years, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at an annual rate of 2.6 percent in the second quarter of last year. Real GDP growth in the second half of last year slowed after accounting for some measurement difficulties in the automotive sector. Despite the recent slowing in output, however, resource utilization remains relatively high by historical standards and thus continues to be a potential source of upward pressure on inflation.In the aftermath of the 2001 recession, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) eased monetary policy substantially. However, the degree of easing in place in 2003 and 2004 was clearly unsustainable. Since mid-2004, the FOMC has gradually moved monetary policy from an accommodative stance to a more neutral position. As a consequence, the elements now appear to be in place for some easing of resource utilization rates over the next year or so and a reduction in inflationary pressures. However, substantial uncertainty surrounds the near-term outlook. In determining the future path of interest rates, the FOMC will be guided by the incoming data on both output and prices, so let’s begin by reviewing recent developments.Economic ActivityThe slowdown in the growth of real GDP since last spring largely reflects a cooling of the housing market: Sales of both new and existing homes dropped sharply after their peak in the summer of 2005, the inventory of unsold homes has soared, and the number of single-family and multifamily housing starts has fallen nearly 30 percent since the beginning of last year. At the same time, homes are appreciating more slowly and in some markets prices are even declining.Nonetheless, a variety of factors should help limit any remaining contraction in housing demand. For example, despite the 4-1/4 percentage point increase in short-term interest rates over the past three years, the interest rate on a thirty-year fixed-rate mortgage has increased only about 1/2 percentage point, and borrowing costs continue to be relatively low. The ongoing growth in employment and real incomes and the recent increase in the stock market wealth of households should also support the demand for housing. Indeed, the latest data on home sales and consumer homebuying attitudes suggest that the demand for housing may be stabilizing. While much of the downshift in the housing market appears to have occurred already, some further softening in housing starts may yet lie ahead as the inventory of unsold homes is reduced to appropriate levels.That said, it is encouraging that the recent weakness in residential construction does not appear to have spilled over to other sectors. For instance, employment has been growing nicely in nonresidential construction, even as it has shrunk in the residential sector. In addition, consumer confidence currently stands a good bit above its long-run average and consumption is still being fueled by past house-price gains, which raised household wealth. This contrasts with previous slowdowns in the housing market, which have typically coincided with widespread economic weakness.Although the slowdown in the housing market has so far done little to reduce consumer outlays, other factors do appear to have had a damping effect. In particular, consumption likely was restrained earlier this year by the rise in energy prices, which took a large bite out of household budgets. The rise in energy prices over the past few years has also affected the auto sector, most notably by reducing the demand for gas-guzzling automobiles, such as sport-utility vehicles and trucks. As a result of this decreased demand and other factors, inventories of these types of vehicles rose in the second half of last year. In response, domestic automakers cut production. However, the latest data on auto sales and scheduled new-vehicle production suggest that the drag from the inventory correction in this sector may be easing.Offsetting influences on consumption should support continued growth of consumer spending. The slowing in the appreciation of house prices will likely reduce the impetus to consumer spending from this source, while recent increases in stock market values, declines in energy prices and strong employment and wage growth should spur consumption.In the business sector, spending on nonresidential construction has been particularly robust. Expenditures on drilling and mining structures have increased rapidly in response to high prices for natural gas and crude oil. Investment in other types of structures, such as offices and commercial buildings, has also been strong. Data for October and November indicate that although the growth rate of nonresidential investment moderated substantially in the fourth quarter of last year, it still remained healthy by historical standards.Spending on equipment and software grew quite rapidly from mid-2004 to mid-2006, but appears to have advanced at a substantially slower pace in the second half of last year. The recent stepdown in the growth of business sales likely had a damping influence on capital spending, and, in fact, business sentiment has moved down in the past year. However, some backlog of unfilled orders for capital goods such as industrial machinery and other types of heavy equipment remains, which should help support spending in the near term. Moreover, the demand for information technology equipment is likely to be well maintained, in part because of the recent introduction of a new generation of microprocessing chips and more-efficient large servers.Current financial conditions are also supportive of business spending. Corporate balance sheets are strong and flush with cash, profits are strong, and broad stock price indexes are up appreciably since the beginning of last year. At the same time, yield spreads on corporate bonds across the ratings spectrum have been low, supported by the strong balance sheets and robust profits.InflationWhat are the implications of current economic activity on inflation prospects? Consumer prices excluding food and energy accelerated through last summer--the core inflation rate was 2.4 percent over the four quarters ending in the third quarter of last year, up from 2.0 percent for the same period a year before.1The more recent monthly readings have been more favorable--core prices rose 2.2 percent over the twelve months through last November, only a touch higher than the 2.1 percent rise over the previous twelve months, and this morning’s latest figures on the Consumer Price Index (CPI) suggest that this pattern continued into December. Nevertheless, the risk to inflation continues to be on the upside until we see further confirmation in this trend toward moderation.In thinking about the macroeconomic consequences of inflation, it makes sense to look at the core rate, which excludes the prices of energy and food, when the focus is on the short run. This is because temporary shocks to food and energy prices typically don’t translate into changes in inflationary pressure. However, if these shocks persist, they may have an effect on core inflation and, more generally, on the economic behavior of households and businesses. Core inflation can be affected when the price changes are propagated along the production chain--say from oil prices to the prices of chemicals and ultimately to the prices of goods made with those chemicals. In addition, shocks to food and energy prices may affect inflation expectations. Thus, we also pay attention to broader measures of inflation.All things considered, the scene appears to be set for a deceleration in prices. One contributing factor is likely to be the slowing in economic activity I already discussed, which should ease the overall pressure on resources. Another important factor affecting the inflation outlook is household and business expectations for inflation. As best we can judge, inflation expectations appear to be well contained: Measures of longer-term inflation expectations, based on surveys and on a comparison of yields on nominal and inflation-indexed government debt, have remained within the ranges in which they have fluctuated in recent years. Finally, the recent decline in energy prices, if sustained, should reduce cost pressures along the production chain.But a decline in the inflation rate is not assured. Outside of the housing and automotive sectors, growth remains sound and labor markets remain tight, especially for skilled workers. The unemployment rate began to decline in the second half of 2003 and by the fourth quarter of last year stood at a relatively low 4-1/2 percent. With labor markets comparatively tight by historical standards, unit labor costs have accelerated over the past year, and firms may pass on some of these higher costs to consumers. However, strong business profit margins, which are currently well above their historical averages, could act as a shock absorber if cost strains were to intensify. All told, in my judgment, inflation appears poised to decelerate in coming months as energy prices stabilize and resource pressures ease. But the risks to that outlook seem tilted toward the upside.The Federal Reserve and Consumer ProtectionMy remarks on the economic outlook discussed developments in housing markets, but now I would like to delve into a specific area of mortgage lending: consumer awareness and understanding of changes in mortgage markets. Given its role as the central bank, a banking supervisor, and a consumer protection regulator for financial services, the Federal Reserve takes a multifaceted approach to understanding the consumer financial services market. Thus, we recognize the importance of homeownership in building household wealth and we monitor the safety and soundness of mortgage underwriting practices. We also write regulations that help ensure consumers understand the characteristics of financial services and products and that they receive the protections available for these services and products.Since the 1960s, Congress has enacted several laws to ensure that consumers receive comprehensive information and fair treatment in a broad range of financial transactions. These laws protect consumers in transactions involving credit and debit card accounts; automated teller machine transactions and other electronic fund transfers; deposit account activities; automobile leases; mortgages and home equity loans; and lines of credit and other unsecured credit. Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve a considerable role in ensuring that consumers are protected under these laws. For example, the Federal Reserve writes rules to implement the Truth in Lending Act, which Congress enacted to ensure that consumers receive clear information about credit terms and costs. The Federal Reserve is also responsible for rules that implement fair lending laws, such as the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, which prohibits discrimination in credit transactions. In addition, we work with other federal agencies to write joint rules, for example, to ensure that consumers’ financial privacy is protected.The Federal Reserve also examines state member banks and foreign banking organizations and exercises its umbrella supervisory authority with respect to bank and financial holding companies to address compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. The Federal Reserve is committed to vigorous enforcement of those laws.Further, the Federal Reserve develops consumer education materials, recognizing that well-educated consumers are better able to protect themselves in financial transactions. Clearly, to choose wisely from the variety of products and providers available, consumers must have the financial knowledge to navigate today’s increasingly complex financial services marketplace.For example, the Federal Reserve and the Office of Thrift Supervision just revised theConsumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages (CHARM)to include additional information about nontraditional mortgage products. The CHARM booklet is an important means for delivering information about alternative adjustable rate mortgage products to consumers because creditors are required to provide a copy of the booklet to each consumer who receives an application for an ARM. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it can be useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples that illustrate how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase over the term of the loan.The Federal Reserve also published a consumer education brochure titled:Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?. The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan and is available in printed form and in electronic form on the Federal Reserve’s website, along with other consumer mortgage informationFinally, the Federal Reserve engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand the financial services market and consumer behavior and the best approaches for assisting consumers. We sponsor consumer and industry surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules.Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text Economic OutlookEconomic activity slowed in the middle part of last year. After rising at an annual rate of 3-1/4 percent over the previous two years, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at an annual rate of 2.6 percent in the second quarter of last year. Real GDP growth in the second half of last year slowed after accounting for some measurement difficulties in the automotive sector. Despite the recent slowing in output, however, resource utilization remains relatively high by historical standards and thus continues to be a potential source of upward pressure on inflation. In the aftermath of the 2001 recession, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) eased monetary policy substantially. However, the degree of easing in place in 2003 and 2004 was clearly unsustainable. Since mid-2004, the FOMC has gradually moved monetary policy from an accommodative stance to a more neutral position. As a consequence, the elements now appear to be in place for some easing of resource utilization rates over the next year or so and a reduction in inflationary pressures. However, substantial uncertainty surrounds the near-term outlook. In determining the future path of interest rates, the FOMC will be guided by the incoming data on both output and prices, so let’s begin by reviewing recent developments. Economic ActivityThe slowdown in the growth of real GDP since last spring largely reflects a cooling of the housing market: Sales of both new and existing homes dropped sharply after their peak in the summer of 2005, the inventory of unsold homes has soared, and the number of single-family and multifamily housing starts has fallen nearly 30 percent since the beginning of last year. At the same time, homes are appreciating more slowly and in some markets prices are even declining. Nonetheless, a variety of factors should help limit any remaining contraction in housing demand. For example, despite the 4-1/4 percentage point increase in short-term interest rates over the past three years, the interest rate on a thirty-year fixed-rate mortgage has increased only about 1/2 percentage point, and borrowing costs continue to be relatively low. The ongoing growth in employment and real incomes and the recent increase in the stock market wealth of households should also support the demand for housing. Indeed, the latest data on home sales and consumer homebuying attitudes suggest that the demand for housing may be stabilizing. While much of the downshift in the housing market appears to have occurred already, some further softening in housing starts may yet lie ahead as the inventory of unsold homes is reduced to appropriate levels. That said, it is encouraging that the recent weakness in residential construction does not appear to have spilled over to other sectors. For instance, employment has been growing nicely in nonresidential construction, even as it has shrunk in the residential sector. In addition, consumer confidence currently stands a good bit above its long-run average and consumption is still being fueled by past house-price gains, which raised household wealth. This contrasts with previous slowdowns in the housing market, which have typically coincided with widespread economic weakness. Although the slowdown in the housing market has so far done little to reduce consumer outlays, other factors do appear to have had a damping effect. In particular, consumption likely was restrained earlier this year by the rise in energy prices, which took a large bite out of household budgets. The rise in energy prices over the past few years has also affected the auto sector, most notably by reducing the demand for gas-guzzling automobiles, such as sport-utility vehicles and trucks. As a result of this decreased demand and other factors, inventories of these types of vehicles rose in the second half of last year. In response, domestic automakers cut production. However, the latest data on auto sales and scheduled new-vehicle production suggest that the drag from the inventory correction in this sector may be easing. Offsetting influences on consumption should support continued growth of consumer spending. The slowing in the appreciation of house prices will likely reduce the impetus to consumer spending from this source, while recent increases in stock market values, declines in energy prices and strong employment and wage growth should spur consumption.In the business sector, spending on nonresidential construction has been particularly robust. Expenditures on drilling and mining structures have increased rapidly in response to high prices for natural gas and crude oil. Investment in other types of structures, such as offices and commercial buildings, has also been strong. Data for October and November indicate that although the growth rate of nonresidential investment moderated substantially in the fourth quarter of last year, it still remained healthy by historical standards.Spending on equipment and software grew quite rapidly from mid-2004 to mid-2006, but appears to have advanced at a substantially slower pace in the second half of last year. The recent stepdown in the growth of business sales likely had a damping influence on capital spending, and, in fact, business sentiment has moved down in the past year. However, some backlog of unfilled orders for capital goods such as industrial machinery and other types of heavy equipment remains, which should help support spending in the near term. Moreover, the demand for information technology equipment is likely to be well maintained, in part because of the recent introduction of a new generation of microprocessing chips and more-efficient large servers.Current financial conditions are also supportive of business spending. Corporate balance sheets are strong and flush with cash, profits are strong, and broad stock price indexes are up appreciably since the beginning of last year. At the same time, yield spreads on corporate bonds across the ratings spectrum have been low, supported by the strong balance sheets and robust profits.InflationWhat are the implications of current economic activity on inflation prospects? Consumer prices excluding food and energy accelerated through last summer--the core inflation rate was 2.4 percent over the four quarters ending in the third quarter of last year, up from 2.0 percent for the same period a year before.1The more recent monthly readings have been more favorable--core prices rose 2.2 percent over the twelve months through last November, only a touch higher than the 2.1 percent rise over the previous twelve months, and this morning’s latest figures on the Consumer Price Index (CPI) suggest that this pattern continued into December. Nevertheless, the risk to inflation continues to be on the upside until we see further confirmation in this trend toward moderation.In thinking about the macroeconomic consequences of inflation, it makes sense to look at the core rate, which excludes the prices of energy and food, when the focus is on the short run. This is because temporary shocks to food and energy prices typically don’t translate into changes in inflationary pressure. However, if these shocks persist, they may have an effect on core inflation and, more generally, on the economic behavior of households and businesses. Core inflation can be affected when the price changes are propagated along the production chain--say from oil prices to the prices of chemicals and ultimately to the prices of goods made with those chemicals. In addition, shocks to food and energy prices may affect inflation expectations. Thus, we also pay attention to broader measures of inflation.All things considered, the scene appears to be set for a deceleration in prices. One contributing factor is likely to be the slowing in economic activity I already discussed, which should ease the overall pressure on resources. Another important factor affecting the inflation outlook is household and business expectations for inflation. As best we can judge, inflation expectations appear to be well contained: Measures of longer-term inflation expectations, based on surveys and on a comparison of yields on nominal and inflation-indexed government debt, have remained within the ranges in which they have fluctuated in recent years. Finally, the recent decline in energy prices, if sustained, should reduce cost pressures along the production chain.But a decline in the inflation rate is not assured. Outside of the housing and automotive sectors, growth remains sound and labor markets remain tight, especially for skilled workers. The unemployment rate began to decline in the second half of 2003 and by the fourth quarter of last year stood at a relatively low 4-1/2 percent. With labor markets comparatively tight by historical standards, unit labor costs have accelerated over the past year, and firms may pass on some of these higher costs to consumers. However, strong business profit margins, which are currently well above their historical averages, could act as a shock absorber if cost strains were to intensify. All told, in my judgment, inflation appears poised to decelerate in coming months as energy prices stabilize and resource pressures ease. But the risks to that outlook seem tilted toward the upside.The Federal Reserve and Consumer ProtectionMy remarks on the economic outlook discussed developments in housing markets, but now I would like to delve into a specific area of mortgage lending: consumer awareness and understanding of changes in mortgage markets. Given its role as the central bank, a banking supervisor, and a consumer protection regulator for financial services, the Federal Reserve takes a multifaceted approach to understanding the consumer financial services market. Thus, we recognize the importance of homeownership in building household wealth and we monitor the safety and soundness of mortgage underwriting practices. We also write regulations that help ensure consumers understand the characteristics of financial services and products and that they receive the protections available for these services and products.Since the 1960s, Congress has enacted several laws to ensure that consumers receive comprehensive information and fair treatment in a broad range of financial transactions. These laws protect consumers in transactions involving credit and debit card accounts; automated teller machine transactions and other electronic fund transfers; deposit account activities; automobile leases; mortgages and home equity loans; and lines of credit and other unsecured credit. Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve a considerable role in ensuring that consumers are protected under these laws. For example, the Federal Reserve writes rules to implement the Truth in Lending Act, which Congress enacted to ensure that consumers receive clear information about credit terms and costs. The Federal Reserve is also responsible for rules that implement fair lending laws, such as the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, which prohibits discrimination in credit transactions. In addition, we work with other federal agencies to write joint rules, for example, to ensure that consumers’ financial privacy is protected.The Federal Reserve also examines state member banks and foreign banking organizations and exercises its umbrella supervisory authority with respect to bank and financial holding companies to address compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. The Federal Reserve is committed to vigorous enforcement of those laws.Further, the Federal Reserve develops consumer education materials, recognizing that well-educated consumers are better able to protect themselves in financial transactions. Clearly, to choose wisely from the variety of products and providers available, consumers must have the financial knowledge to navigate today’s increasingly complex financial services marketplace.For example, the Federal Reserve and the Office of Thrift Supervision just revised theConsumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages (CHARM)to include additional information about nontraditional mortgage products. The CHARM booklet is an important means for delivering information about alternative adjustable rate mortgage products to consumers because creditors are required to provide a copy of the booklet to each consumer who receives an application for an ARM. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it can be useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples that illustrate how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase over the term of the loan.The Federal Reserve also published a consumer education brochure titled:Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?. The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan and is available in printed form and in electronic form on the Federal Reserve’s website, along with other consumer mortgage informationFinally, the Federal Reserve engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand the financial services market and consumer behavior and the best approaches for assisting consumers. We sponsor consumer and industry surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules.Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text In the business sector, spending on nonresidential construction has been particularly robust. Expenditures on drilling and mining structures have increased rapidly in response to high prices for natural gas and crude oil. Investment in other types of structures, such as offices and commercial buildings, has also been strong. Data for October and November indicate that although the growth rate of nonresidential investment moderated substantially in the fourth quarter of last year, it still remained healthy by historical standards.Spending on equipment and software grew quite rapidly from mid-2004 to mid-2006, but appears to have advanced at a substantially slower pace in the second half of last year. The recent stepdown in the growth of business sales likely had a damping influence on capital spending, and, in fact, business sentiment has moved down in the past year. However, some backlog of unfilled orders for capital goods such as industrial machinery and other types of heavy equipment remains, which should help support spending in the near term. Moreover, the demand for information technology equipment is likely to be well maintained, in part because of the recent introduction of a new generation of microprocessing chips and more-efficient large servers.Current financial conditions are also supportive of business spending. Corporate balance sheets are strong and flush with cash, profits are strong, and broad stock price indexes are up appreciably since the beginning of last year. At the same time, yield spreads on corporate bonds across the ratings spectrum have been low, supported by the strong balance sheets and robust profits.InflationWhat are the implications of current economic activity on inflation prospects? Consumer prices excluding food and energy accelerated through last summer--the core inflation rate was 2.4 percent over the four quarters ending in the third quarter of last year, up from 2.0 percent for the same period a year before.1The more recent monthly readings have been more favorable--core prices rose 2.2 percent over the twelve months through last November, only a touch higher than the 2.1 percent rise over the previous twelve months, and this morning’s latest figures on the Consumer Price Index (CPI) suggest that this pattern continued into December. Nevertheless, the risk to inflation continues to be on the upside until we see further confirmation in this trend toward moderation.In thinking about the macroeconomic consequences of inflation, it makes sense to look at the core rate, which excludes the prices of energy and food, when the focus is on the short run. This is because temporary shocks to food and energy prices typically don’t translate into changes in inflationary pressure. However, if these shocks persist, they may have an effect on core inflation and, more generally, on the economic behavior of households and businesses. Core inflation can be affected when the price changes are propagated along the production chain--say from oil prices to the prices of chemicals and ultimately to the prices of goods made with those chemicals. In addition, shocks to food and energy prices may affect inflation expectations. Thus, we also pay attention to broader measures of inflation.All things considered, the scene appears to be set for a deceleration in prices. One contributing factor is likely to be the slowing in economic activity I already discussed, which should ease the overall pressure on resources. Another important factor affecting the inflation outlook is household and business expectations for inflation. As best we can judge, inflation expectations appear to be well contained: Measures of longer-term inflation expectations, based on surveys and on a comparison of yields on nominal and inflation-indexed government debt, have remained within the ranges in which they have fluctuated in recent years. Finally, the recent decline in energy prices, if sustained, should reduce cost pressures along the production chain.But a decline in the inflation rate is not assured. Outside of the housing and automotive sectors, growth remains sound and labor markets remain tight, especially for skilled workers. The unemployment rate began to decline in the second half of 2003 and by the fourth quarter of last year stood at a relatively low 4-1/2 percent. With labor markets comparatively tight by historical standards, unit labor costs have accelerated over the past year, and firms may pass on some of these higher costs to consumers. However, strong business profit margins, which are currently well above their historical averages, could act as a shock absorber if cost strains were to intensify. All told, in my judgment, inflation appears poised to decelerate in coming months as energy prices stabilize and resource pressures ease. But the risks to that outlook seem tilted toward the upside.The Federal Reserve and Consumer ProtectionMy remarks on the economic outlook discussed developments in housing markets, but now I would like to delve into a specific area of mortgage lending: consumer awareness and understanding of changes in mortgage markets. Given its role as the central bank, a banking supervisor, and a consumer protection regulator for financial services, the Federal Reserve takes a multifaceted approach to understanding the consumer financial services market. Thus, we recognize the importance of homeownership in building household wealth and we monitor the safety and soundness of mortgage underwriting practices. We also write regulations that help ensure consumers understand the characteristics of financial services and products and that they receive the protections available for these services and products.Since the 1960s, Congress has enacted several laws to ensure that consumers receive comprehensive information and fair treatment in a broad range of financial transactions. These laws protect consumers in transactions involving credit and debit card accounts; automated teller machine transactions and other electronic fund transfers; deposit account activities; automobile leases; mortgages and home equity loans; and lines of credit and other unsecured credit. Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve a considerable role in ensuring that consumers are protected under these laws. For example, the Federal Reserve writes rules to implement the Truth in Lending Act, which Congress enacted to ensure that consumers receive clear information about credit terms and costs. The Federal Reserve is also responsible for rules that implement fair lending laws, such as the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, which prohibits discrimination in credit transactions. In addition, we work with other federal agencies to write joint rules, for example, to ensure that consumers’ financial privacy is protected.The Federal Reserve also examines state member banks and foreign banking organizations and exercises its umbrella supervisory authority with respect to bank and financial holding companies to address compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. The Federal Reserve is committed to vigorous enforcement of those laws.Further, the Federal Reserve develops consumer education materials, recognizing that well-educated consumers are better able to protect themselves in financial transactions. Clearly, to choose wisely from the variety of products and providers available, consumers must have the financial knowledge to navigate today’s increasingly complex financial services marketplace.For example, the Federal Reserve and the Office of Thrift Supervision just revised theConsumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages (CHARM)to include additional information about nontraditional mortgage products. The CHARM booklet is an important means for delivering information about alternative adjustable rate mortgage products to consumers because creditors are required to provide a copy of the booklet to each consumer who receives an application for an ARM. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it can be useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples that illustrate how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase over the term of the loan.The Federal Reserve also published a consumer education brochure titled:Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?. The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan and is available in printed form and in electronic form on the Federal Reserve’s website, along with other consumer mortgage informationFinally, the Federal Reserve engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand the financial services market and consumer behavior and the best approaches for assisting consumers. We sponsor consumer and industry surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules.Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text Spending on equipment and software grew quite rapidly from mid-2004 to mid-2006, but appears to have advanced at a substantially slower pace in the second half of last year. The recent stepdown in the growth of business sales likely had a damping influence on capital spending, and, in fact, business sentiment has moved down in the past year. However, some backlog of unfilled orders for capital goods such as industrial machinery and other types of heavy equipment remains, which should help support spending in the near term. Moreover, the demand for information technology equipment is likely to be well maintained, in part because of the recent introduction of a new generation of microprocessing chips and more-efficient large servers.Current financial conditions are also supportive of business spending. Corporate balance sheets are strong and flush with cash, profits are strong, and broad stock price indexes are up appreciably since the beginning of last year. At the same time, yield spreads on corporate bonds across the ratings spectrum have been low, supported by the strong balance sheets and robust profits.InflationWhat are the implications of current economic activity on inflation prospects? Consumer prices excluding food and energy accelerated through last summer--the core inflation rate was 2.4 percent over the four quarters ending in the third quarter of last year, up from 2.0 percent for the same period a year before.1The more recent monthly readings have been more favorable--core prices rose 2.2 percent over the twelve months through last November, only a touch higher than the 2.1 percent rise over the previous twelve months, and this morning’s latest figures on the Consumer Price Index (CPI) suggest that this pattern continued into December. Nevertheless, the risk to inflation continues to be on the upside until we see further confirmation in this trend toward moderation.In thinking about the macroeconomic consequences of inflation, it makes sense to look at the core rate, which excludes the prices of energy and food, when the focus is on the short run. This is because temporary shocks to food and energy prices typically don’t translate into changes in inflationary pressure. However, if these shocks persist, they may have an effect on core inflation and, more generally, on the economic behavior of households and businesses. Core inflation can be affected when the price changes are propagated along the production chain--say from oil prices to the prices of chemicals and ultimately to the prices of goods made with those chemicals. In addition, shocks to food and energy prices may affect inflation expectations. Thus, we also pay attention to broader measures of inflation.All things considered, the scene appears to be set for a deceleration in prices. One contributing factor is likely to be the slowing in economic activity I already discussed, which should ease the overall pressure on resources. Another important factor affecting the inflation outlook is household and business expectations for inflation. As best we can judge, inflation expectations appear to be well contained: Measures of longer-term inflation expectations, based on surveys and on a comparison of yields on nominal and inflation-indexed government debt, have remained within the ranges in which they have fluctuated in recent years. Finally, the recent decline in energy prices, if sustained, should reduce cost pressures along the production chain.But a decline in the inflation rate is not assured. Outside of the housing and automotive sectors, growth remains sound and labor markets remain tight, especially for skilled workers. The unemployment rate began to decline in the second half of 2003 and by the fourth quarter of last year stood at a relatively low 4-1/2 percent. With labor markets comparatively tight by historical standards, unit labor costs have accelerated over the past year, and firms may pass on some of these higher costs to consumers. However, strong business profit margins, which are currently well above their historical averages, could act as a shock absorber if cost strains were to intensify. All told, in my judgment, inflation appears poised to decelerate in coming months as energy prices stabilize and resource pressures ease. But the risks to that outlook seem tilted toward the upside.The Federal Reserve and Consumer ProtectionMy remarks on the economic outlook discussed developments in housing markets, but now I would like to delve into a specific area of mortgage lending: consumer awareness and understanding of changes in mortgage markets. Given its role as the central bank, a banking supervisor, and a consumer protection regulator for financial services, the Federal Reserve takes a multifaceted approach to understanding the consumer financial services market. Thus, we recognize the importance of homeownership in building household wealth and we monitor the safety and soundness of mortgage underwriting practices. We also write regulations that help ensure consumers understand the characteristics of financial services and products and that they receive the protections available for these services and products.Since the 1960s, Congress has enacted several laws to ensure that consumers receive comprehensive information and fair treatment in a broad range of financial transactions. These laws protect consumers in transactions involving credit and debit card accounts; automated teller machine transactions and other electronic fund transfers; deposit account activities; automobile leases; mortgages and home equity loans; and lines of credit and other unsecured credit. Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve a considerable role in ensuring that consumers are protected under these laws. For example, the Federal Reserve writes rules to implement the Truth in Lending Act, which Congress enacted to ensure that consumers receive clear information about credit terms and costs. The Federal Reserve is also responsible for rules that implement fair lending laws, such as the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, which prohibits discrimination in credit transactions. In addition, we work with other federal agencies to write joint rules, for example, to ensure that consumers’ financial privacy is protected.The Federal Reserve also examines state member banks and foreign banking organizations and exercises its umbrella supervisory authority with respect to bank and financial holding companies to address compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. The Federal Reserve is committed to vigorous enforcement of those laws.Further, the Federal Reserve develops consumer education materials, recognizing that well-educated consumers are better able to protect themselves in financial transactions. Clearly, to choose wisely from the variety of products and providers available, consumers must have the financial knowledge to navigate today’s increasingly complex financial services marketplace.For example, the Federal Reserve and the Office of Thrift Supervision just revised theConsumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages (CHARM)to include additional information about nontraditional mortgage products. The CHARM booklet is an important means for delivering information about alternative adjustable rate mortgage products to consumers because creditors are required to provide a copy of the booklet to each consumer who receives an application for an ARM. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it can be useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples that illustrate how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase over the term of the loan.The Federal Reserve also published a consumer education brochure titled:Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?. The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan and is available in printed form and in electronic form on the Federal Reserve’s website, along with other consumer mortgage informationFinally, the Federal Reserve engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand the financial services market and consumer behavior and the best approaches for assisting consumers. We sponsor consumer and industry surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules.Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text Current financial conditions are also supportive of business spending. Corporate balance sheets are strong and flush with cash, profits are strong, and broad stock price indexes are up appreciably since the beginning of last year. At the same time, yield spreads on corporate bonds across the ratings spectrum have been low, supported by the strong balance sheets and robust profits.InflationWhat are the implications of current economic activity on inflation prospects? Consumer prices excluding food and energy accelerated through last summer--the core inflation rate was 2.4 percent over the four quarters ending in the third quarter of last year, up from 2.0 percent for the same period a year before.1The more recent monthly readings have been more favorable--core prices rose 2.2 percent over the twelve months through last November, only a touch higher than the 2.1 percent rise over the previous twelve months, and this morning’s latest figures on the Consumer Price Index (CPI) suggest that this pattern continued into December. Nevertheless, the risk to inflation continues to be on the upside until we see further confirmation in this trend toward moderation.In thinking about the macroeconomic consequences of inflation, it makes sense to look at the core rate, which excludes the prices of energy and food, when the focus is on the short run. This is because temporary shocks to food and energy prices typically don’t translate into changes in inflationary pressure. However, if these shocks persist, they may have an effect on core inflation and, more generally, on the economic behavior of households and businesses. Core inflation can be affected when the price changes are propagated along the production chain--say from oil prices to the prices of chemicals and ultimately to the prices of goods made with those chemicals. In addition, shocks to food and energy prices may affect inflation expectations. Thus, we also pay attention to broader measures of inflation.All things considered, the scene appears to be set for a deceleration in prices. One contributing factor is likely to be the slowing in economic activity I already discussed, which should ease the overall pressure on resources. Another important factor affecting the inflation outlook is household and business expectations for inflation. As best we can judge, inflation expectations appear to be well contained: Measures of longer-term inflation expectations, based on surveys and on a comparison of yields on nominal and inflation-indexed government debt, have remained within the ranges in which they have fluctuated in recent years. Finally, the recent decline in energy prices, if sustained, should reduce cost pressures along the production chain.But a decline in the inflation rate is not assured. Outside of the housing and automotive sectors, growth remains sound and labor markets remain tight, especially for skilled workers. The unemployment rate began to decline in the second half of 2003 and by the fourth quarter of last year stood at a relatively low 4-1/2 percent. With labor markets comparatively tight by historical standards, unit labor costs have accelerated over the past year, and firms may pass on some of these higher costs to consumers. However, strong business profit margins, which are currently well above their historical averages, could act as a shock absorber if cost strains were to intensify. All told, in my judgment, inflation appears poised to decelerate in coming months as energy prices stabilize and resource pressures ease. But the risks to that outlook seem tilted toward the upside.The Federal Reserve and Consumer ProtectionMy remarks on the economic outlook discussed developments in housing markets, but now I would like to delve into a specific area of mortgage lending: consumer awareness and understanding of changes in mortgage markets. Given its role as the central bank, a banking supervisor, and a consumer protection regulator for financial services, the Federal Reserve takes a multifaceted approach to understanding the consumer financial services market. Thus, we recognize the importance of homeownership in building household wealth and we monitor the safety and soundness of mortgage underwriting practices. We also write regulations that help ensure consumers understand the characteristics of financial services and products and that they receive the protections available for these services and products.Since the 1960s, Congress has enacted several laws to ensure that consumers receive comprehensive information and fair treatment in a broad range of financial transactions. These laws protect consumers in transactions involving credit and debit card accounts; automated teller machine transactions and other electronic fund transfers; deposit account activities; automobile leases; mortgages and home equity loans; and lines of credit and other unsecured credit. Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve a considerable role in ensuring that consumers are protected under these laws. For example, the Federal Reserve writes rules to implement the Truth in Lending Act, which Congress enacted to ensure that consumers receive clear information about credit terms and costs. The Federal Reserve is also responsible for rules that implement fair lending laws, such as the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, which prohibits discrimination in credit transactions. In addition, we work with other federal agencies to write joint rules, for example, to ensure that consumers’ financial privacy is protected.The Federal Reserve also examines state member banks and foreign banking organizations and exercises its umbrella supervisory authority with respect to bank and financial holding companies to address compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. The Federal Reserve is committed to vigorous enforcement of those laws.Further, the Federal Reserve develops consumer education materials, recognizing that well-educated consumers are better able to protect themselves in financial transactions. Clearly, to choose wisely from the variety of products and providers available, consumers must have the financial knowledge to navigate today’s increasingly complex financial services marketplace.For example, the Federal Reserve and the Office of Thrift Supervision just revised theConsumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages (CHARM)to include additional information about nontraditional mortgage products. The CHARM booklet is an important means for delivering information about alternative adjustable rate mortgage products to consumers because creditors are required to provide a copy of the booklet to each consumer who receives an application for an ARM. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it can be useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples that illustrate how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase over the term of the loan.The Federal Reserve also published a consumer education brochure titled:Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?. The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan and is available in printed form and in electronic form on the Federal Reserve’s website, along with other consumer mortgage informationFinally, the Federal Reserve engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand the financial services market and consumer behavior and the best approaches for assisting consumers. We sponsor consumer and industry surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules.Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text InflationWhat are the implications of current economic activity on inflation prospects? Consumer prices excluding food and energy accelerated through last summer--the core inflation rate was 2.4 percent over the four quarters ending in the third quarter of last year, up from 2.0 percent for the same period a year before.1The more recent monthly readings have been more favorable--core prices rose 2.2 percent over the twelve months through last November, only a touch higher than the 2.1 percent rise over the previous twelve months, and this morning’s latest figures on the Consumer Price Index (CPI) suggest that this pattern continued into December. Nevertheless, the risk to inflation continues to be on the upside until we see further confirmation in this trend toward moderation.In thinking about the macroeconomic consequences of inflation, it makes sense to look at the core rate, which excludes the prices of energy and food, when the focus is on the short run. This is because temporary shocks to food and energy prices typically don’t translate into changes in inflationary pressure. However, if these shocks persist, they may have an effect on core inflation and, more generally, on the economic behavior of households and businesses. Core inflation can be affected when the price changes are propagated along the production chain--say from oil prices to the prices of chemicals and ultimately to the prices of goods made with those chemicals. In addition, shocks to food and energy prices may affect inflation expectations. Thus, we also pay attention to broader measures of inflation.All things considered, the scene appears to be set for a deceleration in prices. One contributing factor is likely to be the slowing in economic activity I already discussed, which should ease the overall pressure on resources. Another important factor affecting the inflation outlook is household and business expectations for inflation. As best we can judge, inflation expectations appear to be well contained: Measures of longer-term inflation expectations, based on surveys and on a comparison of yields on nominal and inflation-indexed government debt, have remained within the ranges in which they have fluctuated in recent years. Finally, the recent decline in energy prices, if sustained, should reduce cost pressures along the production chain.But a decline in the inflation rate is not assured. Outside of the housing and automotive sectors, growth remains sound and labor markets remain tight, especially for skilled workers. The unemployment rate began to decline in the second half of 2003 and by the fourth quarter of last year stood at a relatively low 4-1/2 percent. With labor markets comparatively tight by historical standards, unit labor costs have accelerated over the past year, and firms may pass on some of these higher costs to consumers. However, strong business profit margins, which are currently well above their historical averages, could act as a shock absorber if cost strains were to intensify. All told, in my judgment, inflation appears poised to decelerate in coming months as energy prices stabilize and resource pressures ease. But the risks to that outlook seem tilted toward the upside.The Federal Reserve and Consumer ProtectionMy remarks on the economic outlook discussed developments in housing markets, but now I would like to delve into a specific area of mortgage lending: consumer awareness and understanding of changes in mortgage markets. Given its role as the central bank, a banking supervisor, and a consumer protection regulator for financial services, the Federal Reserve takes a multifaceted approach to understanding the consumer financial services market. Thus, we recognize the importance of homeownership in building household wealth and we monitor the safety and soundness of mortgage underwriting practices. We also write regulations that help ensure consumers understand the characteristics of financial services and products and that they receive the protections available for these services and products.Since the 1960s, Congress has enacted several laws to ensure that consumers receive comprehensive information and fair treatment in a broad range of financial transactions. These laws protect consumers in transactions involving credit and debit card accounts; automated teller machine transactions and other electronic fund transfers; deposit account activities; automobile leases; mortgages and home equity loans; and lines of credit and other unsecured credit. Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve a considerable role in ensuring that consumers are protected under these laws. For example, the Federal Reserve writes rules to implement the Truth in Lending Act, which Congress enacted to ensure that consumers receive clear information about credit terms and costs. The Federal Reserve is also responsible for rules that implement fair lending laws, such as the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, which prohibits discrimination in credit transactions. In addition, we work with other federal agencies to write joint rules, for example, to ensure that consumers’ financial privacy is protected.The Federal Reserve also examines state member banks and foreign banking organizations and exercises its umbrella supervisory authority with respect to bank and financial holding companies to address compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. The Federal Reserve is committed to vigorous enforcement of those laws.Further, the Federal Reserve develops consumer education materials, recognizing that well-educated consumers are better able to protect themselves in financial transactions. Clearly, to choose wisely from the variety of products and providers available, consumers must have the financial knowledge to navigate today’s increasingly complex financial services marketplace.For example, the Federal Reserve and the Office of Thrift Supervision just revised theConsumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages (CHARM)to include additional information about nontraditional mortgage products. The CHARM booklet is an important means for delivering information about alternative adjustable rate mortgage products to consumers because creditors are required to provide a copy of the booklet to each consumer who receives an application for an ARM. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it can be useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples that illustrate how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase over the term of the loan.The Federal Reserve also published a consumer education brochure titled:Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?. The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan and is available in printed form and in electronic form on the Federal Reserve’s website, along with other consumer mortgage informationFinally, the Federal Reserve engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand the financial services market and consumer behavior and the best approaches for assisting consumers. We sponsor consumer and industry surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules.Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text In thinking about the macroeconomic consequences of inflation, it makes sense to look at the core rate, which excludes the prices of energy and food, when the focus is on the short run. This is because temporary shocks to food and energy prices typically don’t translate into changes in inflationary pressure. However, if these shocks persist, they may have an effect on core inflation and, more generally, on the economic behavior of households and businesses. Core inflation can be affected when the price changes are propagated along the production chain--say from oil prices to the prices of chemicals and ultimately to the prices of goods made with those chemicals. In addition, shocks to food and energy prices may affect inflation expectations. Thus, we also pay attention to broader measures of inflation.All things considered, the scene appears to be set for a deceleration in prices. One contributing factor is likely to be the slowing in economic activity I already discussed, which should ease the overall pressure on resources. Another important factor affecting the inflation outlook is household and business expectations for inflation. As best we can judge, inflation expectations appear to be well contained: Measures of longer-term inflation expectations, based on surveys and on a comparison of yields on nominal and inflation-indexed government debt, have remained within the ranges in which they have fluctuated in recent years. Finally, the recent decline in energy prices, if sustained, should reduce cost pressures along the production chain.But a decline in the inflation rate is not assured. Outside of the housing and automotive sectors, growth remains sound and labor markets remain tight, especially for skilled workers. The unemployment rate began to decline in the second half of 2003 and by the fourth quarter of last year stood at a relatively low 4-1/2 percent. With labor markets comparatively tight by historical standards, unit labor costs have accelerated over the past year, and firms may pass on some of these higher costs to consumers. However, strong business profit margins, which are currently well above their historical averages, could act as a shock absorber if cost strains were to intensify. All told, in my judgment, inflation appears poised to decelerate in coming months as energy prices stabilize and resource pressures ease. But the risks to that outlook seem tilted toward the upside.The Federal Reserve and Consumer ProtectionMy remarks on the economic outlook discussed developments in housing markets, but now I would like to delve into a specific area of mortgage lending: consumer awareness and understanding of changes in mortgage markets. Given its role as the central bank, a banking supervisor, and a consumer protection regulator for financial services, the Federal Reserve takes a multifaceted approach to understanding the consumer financial services market. Thus, we recognize the importance of homeownership in building household wealth and we monitor the safety and soundness of mortgage underwriting practices. We also write regulations that help ensure consumers understand the characteristics of financial services and products and that they receive the protections available for these services and products.Since the 1960s, Congress has enacted several laws to ensure that consumers receive comprehensive information and fair treatment in a broad range of financial transactions. These laws protect consumers in transactions involving credit and debit card accounts; automated teller machine transactions and other electronic fund transfers; deposit account activities; automobile leases; mortgages and home equity loans; and lines of credit and other unsecured credit. Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve a considerable role in ensuring that consumers are protected under these laws. For example, the Federal Reserve writes rules to implement the Truth in Lending Act, which Congress enacted to ensure that consumers receive clear information about credit terms and costs. The Federal Reserve is also responsible for rules that implement fair lending laws, such as the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, which prohibits discrimination in credit transactions. In addition, we work with other federal agencies to write joint rules, for example, to ensure that consumers’ financial privacy is protected.The Federal Reserve also examines state member banks and foreign banking organizations and exercises its umbrella supervisory authority with respect to bank and financial holding companies to address compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. The Federal Reserve is committed to vigorous enforcement of those laws.Further, the Federal Reserve develops consumer education materials, recognizing that well-educated consumers are better able to protect themselves in financial transactions. Clearly, to choose wisely from the variety of products and providers available, consumers must have the financial knowledge to navigate today’s increasingly complex financial services marketplace.For example, the Federal Reserve and the Office of Thrift Supervision just revised theConsumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages (CHARM)to include additional information about nontraditional mortgage products. The CHARM booklet is an important means for delivering information about alternative adjustable rate mortgage products to consumers because creditors are required to provide a copy of the booklet to each consumer who receives an application for an ARM. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it can be useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples that illustrate how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase over the term of the loan.The Federal Reserve also published a consumer education brochure titled:Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?. The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan and is available in printed form and in electronic form on the Federal Reserve’s website, along with other consumer mortgage informationFinally, the Federal Reserve engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand the financial services market and consumer behavior and the best approaches for assisting consumers. We sponsor consumer and industry surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules.Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text All things considered, the scene appears to be set for a deceleration in prices. One contributing factor is likely to be the slowing in economic activity I already discussed, which should ease the overall pressure on resources. Another important factor affecting the inflation outlook is household and business expectations for inflation. As best we can judge, inflation expectations appear to be well contained: Measures of longer-term inflation expectations, based on surveys and on a comparison of yields on nominal and inflation-indexed government debt, have remained within the ranges in which they have fluctuated in recent years. Finally, the recent decline in energy prices, if sustained, should reduce cost pressures along the production chain.But a decline in the inflation rate is not assured. Outside of the housing and automotive sectors, growth remains sound and labor markets remain tight, especially for skilled workers. The unemployment rate began to decline in the second half of 2003 and by the fourth quarter of last year stood at a relatively low 4-1/2 percent. With labor markets comparatively tight by historical standards, unit labor costs have accelerated over the past year, and firms may pass on some of these higher costs to consumers. However, strong business profit margins, which are currently well above their historical averages, could act as a shock absorber if cost strains were to intensify. All told, in my judgment, inflation appears poised to decelerate in coming months as energy prices stabilize and resource pressures ease. But the risks to that outlook seem tilted toward the upside.The Federal Reserve and Consumer ProtectionMy remarks on the economic outlook discussed developments in housing markets, but now I would like to delve into a specific area of mortgage lending: consumer awareness and understanding of changes in mortgage markets. Given its role as the central bank, a banking supervisor, and a consumer protection regulator for financial services, the Federal Reserve takes a multifaceted approach to understanding the consumer financial services market. Thus, we recognize the importance of homeownership in building household wealth and we monitor the safety and soundness of mortgage underwriting practices. We also write regulations that help ensure consumers understand the characteristics of financial services and products and that they receive the protections available for these services and products.Since the 1960s, Congress has enacted several laws to ensure that consumers receive comprehensive information and fair treatment in a broad range of financial transactions. These laws protect consumers in transactions involving credit and debit card accounts; automated teller machine transactions and other electronic fund transfers; deposit account activities; automobile leases; mortgages and home equity loans; and lines of credit and other unsecured credit. Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve a considerable role in ensuring that consumers are protected under these laws. For example, the Federal Reserve writes rules to implement the Truth in Lending Act, which Congress enacted to ensure that consumers receive clear information about credit terms and costs. The Federal Reserve is also responsible for rules that implement fair lending laws, such as the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, which prohibits discrimination in credit transactions. In addition, we work with other federal agencies to write joint rules, for example, to ensure that consumers’ financial privacy is protected.The Federal Reserve also examines state member banks and foreign banking organizations and exercises its umbrella supervisory authority with respect to bank and financial holding companies to address compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. The Federal Reserve is committed to vigorous enforcement of those laws.Further, the Federal Reserve develops consumer education materials, recognizing that well-educated consumers are better able to protect themselves in financial transactions. Clearly, to choose wisely from the variety of products and providers available, consumers must have the financial knowledge to navigate today’s increasingly complex financial services marketplace.For example, the Federal Reserve and the Office of Thrift Supervision just revised theConsumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages (CHARM)to include additional information about nontraditional mortgage products. The CHARM booklet is an important means for delivering information about alternative adjustable rate mortgage products to consumers because creditors are required to provide a copy of the booklet to each consumer who receives an application for an ARM. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it can be useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples that illustrate how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase over the term of the loan.The Federal Reserve also published a consumer education brochure titled:Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?. The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan and is available in printed form and in electronic form on the Federal Reserve’s website, along with other consumer mortgage informationFinally, the Federal Reserve engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand the financial services market and consumer behavior and the best approaches for assisting consumers. We sponsor consumer and industry surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules.Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text But a decline in the inflation rate is not assured. Outside of the housing and automotive sectors, growth remains sound and labor markets remain tight, especially for skilled workers. The unemployment rate began to decline in the second half of 2003 and by the fourth quarter of last year stood at a relatively low 4-1/2 percent. With labor markets comparatively tight by historical standards, unit labor costs have accelerated over the past year, and firms may pass on some of these higher costs to consumers. However, strong business profit margins, which are currently well above their historical averages, could act as a shock absorber if cost strains were to intensify. All told, in my judgment, inflation appears poised to decelerate in coming months as energy prices stabilize and resource pressures ease. But the risks to that outlook seem tilted toward the upside.The Federal Reserve and Consumer ProtectionMy remarks on the economic outlook discussed developments in housing markets, but now I would like to delve into a specific area of mortgage lending: consumer awareness and understanding of changes in mortgage markets. Given its role as the central bank, a banking supervisor, and a consumer protection regulator for financial services, the Federal Reserve takes a multifaceted approach to understanding the consumer financial services market. Thus, we recognize the importance of homeownership in building household wealth and we monitor the safety and soundness of mortgage underwriting practices. We also write regulations that help ensure consumers understand the characteristics of financial services and products and that they receive the protections available for these services and products.Since the 1960s, Congress has enacted several laws to ensure that consumers receive comprehensive information and fair treatment in a broad range of financial transactions. These laws protect consumers in transactions involving credit and debit card accounts; automated teller machine transactions and other electronic fund transfers; deposit account activities; automobile leases; mortgages and home equity loans; and lines of credit and other unsecured credit. Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve a considerable role in ensuring that consumers are protected under these laws. For example, the Federal Reserve writes rules to implement the Truth in Lending Act, which Congress enacted to ensure that consumers receive clear information about credit terms and costs. The Federal Reserve is also responsible for rules that implement fair lending laws, such as the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, which prohibits discrimination in credit transactions. In addition, we work with other federal agencies to write joint rules, for example, to ensure that consumers’ financial privacy is protected.The Federal Reserve also examines state member banks and foreign banking organizations and exercises its umbrella supervisory authority with respect to bank and financial holding companies to address compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. The Federal Reserve is committed to vigorous enforcement of those laws.Further, the Federal Reserve develops consumer education materials, recognizing that well-educated consumers are better able to protect themselves in financial transactions. Clearly, to choose wisely from the variety of products and providers available, consumers must have the financial knowledge to navigate today’s increasingly complex financial services marketplace.For example, the Federal Reserve and the Office of Thrift Supervision just revised theConsumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages (CHARM)to include additional information about nontraditional mortgage products. The CHARM booklet is an important means for delivering information about alternative adjustable rate mortgage products to consumers because creditors are required to provide a copy of the booklet to each consumer who receives an application for an ARM. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it can be useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples that illustrate how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase over the term of the loan.The Federal Reserve also published a consumer education brochure titled:Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?. The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan and is available in printed form and in electronic form on the Federal Reserve’s website, along with other consumer mortgage informationFinally, the Federal Reserve engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand the financial services market and consumer behavior and the best approaches for assisting consumers. We sponsor consumer and industry surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules.Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text The Federal Reserve and Consumer ProtectionMy remarks on the economic outlook discussed developments in housing markets, but now I would like to delve into a specific area of mortgage lending: consumer awareness and understanding of changes in mortgage markets. Given its role as the central bank, a banking supervisor, and a consumer protection regulator for financial services, the Federal Reserve takes a multifaceted approach to understanding the consumer financial services market. Thus, we recognize the importance of homeownership in building household wealth and we monitor the safety and soundness of mortgage underwriting practices. We also write regulations that help ensure consumers understand the characteristics of financial services and products and that they receive the protections available for these services and products.Since the 1960s, Congress has enacted several laws to ensure that consumers receive comprehensive information and fair treatment in a broad range of financial transactions. These laws protect consumers in transactions involving credit and debit card accounts; automated teller machine transactions and other electronic fund transfers; deposit account activities; automobile leases; mortgages and home equity loans; and lines of credit and other unsecured credit. Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve a considerable role in ensuring that consumers are protected under these laws. For example, the Federal Reserve writes rules to implement the Truth in Lending Act, which Congress enacted to ensure that consumers receive clear information about credit terms and costs. The Federal Reserve is also responsible for rules that implement fair lending laws, such as the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, which prohibits discrimination in credit transactions. In addition, we work with other federal agencies to write joint rules, for example, to ensure that consumers’ financial privacy is protected.The Federal Reserve also examines state member banks and foreign banking organizations and exercises its umbrella supervisory authority with respect to bank and financial holding companies to address compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. The Federal Reserve is committed to vigorous enforcement of those laws.Further, the Federal Reserve develops consumer education materials, recognizing that well-educated consumers are better able to protect themselves in financial transactions. Clearly, to choose wisely from the variety of products and providers available, consumers must have the financial knowledge to navigate today’s increasingly complex financial services marketplace.For example, the Federal Reserve and the Office of Thrift Supervision just revised theConsumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages (CHARM)to include additional information about nontraditional mortgage products. The CHARM booklet is an important means for delivering information about alternative adjustable rate mortgage products to consumers because creditors are required to provide a copy of the booklet to each consumer who receives an application for an ARM. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it can be useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples that illustrate how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase over the term of the loan.The Federal Reserve also published a consumer education brochure titled:Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?. The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan and is available in printed form and in electronic form on the Federal Reserve’s website, along with other consumer mortgage informationFinally, the Federal Reserve engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand the financial services market and consumer behavior and the best approaches for assisting consumers. We sponsor consumer and industry surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules.Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text Since the 1960s, Congress has enacted several laws to ensure that consumers receive comprehensive information and fair treatment in a broad range of financial transactions. These laws protect consumers in transactions involving credit and debit card accounts; automated teller machine transactions and other electronic fund transfers; deposit account activities; automobile leases; mortgages and home equity loans; and lines of credit and other unsecured credit. Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve a considerable role in ensuring that consumers are protected under these laws. For example, the Federal Reserve writes rules to implement the Truth in Lending Act, which Congress enacted to ensure that consumers receive clear information about credit terms and costs. The Federal Reserve is also responsible for rules that implement fair lending laws, such as the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, which prohibits discrimination in credit transactions. In addition, we work with other federal agencies to write joint rules, for example, to ensure that consumers’ financial privacy is protected.The Federal Reserve also examines state member banks and foreign banking organizations and exercises its umbrella supervisory authority with respect to bank and financial holding companies to address compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. The Federal Reserve is committed to vigorous enforcement of those laws.Further, the Federal Reserve develops consumer education materials, recognizing that well-educated consumers are better able to protect themselves in financial transactions. Clearly, to choose wisely from the variety of products and providers available, consumers must have the financial knowledge to navigate today’s increasingly complex financial services marketplace.For example, the Federal Reserve and the Office of Thrift Supervision just revised theConsumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages (CHARM)to include additional information about nontraditional mortgage products. The CHARM booklet is an important means for delivering information about alternative adjustable rate mortgage products to consumers because creditors are required to provide a copy of the booklet to each consumer who receives an application for an ARM. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it can be useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples that illustrate how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase over the term of the loan.The Federal Reserve also published a consumer education brochure titled:Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?. The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan and is available in printed form and in electronic form on the Federal Reserve’s website, along with other consumer mortgage informationFinally, the Federal Reserve engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand the financial services market and consumer behavior and the best approaches for assisting consumers. We sponsor consumer and industry surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules.Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text The Federal Reserve also examines state member banks and foreign banking organizations and exercises its umbrella supervisory authority with respect to bank and financial holding companies to address compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. The Federal Reserve is committed to vigorous enforcement of those laws.Further, the Federal Reserve develops consumer education materials, recognizing that well-educated consumers are better able to protect themselves in financial transactions. Clearly, to choose wisely from the variety of products and providers available, consumers must have the financial knowledge to navigate today’s increasingly complex financial services marketplace.For example, the Federal Reserve and the Office of Thrift Supervision just revised theConsumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages (CHARM)to include additional information about nontraditional mortgage products. The CHARM booklet is an important means for delivering information about alternative adjustable rate mortgage products to consumers because creditors are required to provide a copy of the booklet to each consumer who receives an application for an ARM. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it can be useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples that illustrate how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase over the term of the loan.The Federal Reserve also published a consumer education brochure titled:Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?. The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan and is available in printed form and in electronic form on the Federal Reserve’s website, along with other consumer mortgage informationFinally, the Federal Reserve engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand the financial services market and consumer behavior and the best approaches for assisting consumers. We sponsor consumer and industry surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules.Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text Further, the Federal Reserve develops consumer education materials, recognizing that well-educated consumers are better able to protect themselves in financial transactions. Clearly, to choose wisely from the variety of products and providers available, consumers must have the financial knowledge to navigate today’s increasingly complex financial services marketplace.For example, the Federal Reserve and the Office of Thrift Supervision just revised theConsumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages (CHARM)to include additional information about nontraditional mortgage products. The CHARM booklet is an important means for delivering information about alternative adjustable rate mortgage products to consumers because creditors are required to provide a copy of the booklet to each consumer who receives an application for an ARM. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it can be useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples that illustrate how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase over the term of the loan.The Federal Reserve also published a consumer education brochure titled:Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?. The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan and is available in printed form and in electronic form on the Federal Reserve’s website, along with other consumer mortgage informationFinally, the Federal Reserve engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand the financial services market and consumer behavior and the best approaches for assisting consumers. We sponsor consumer and industry surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules.Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text For example, the Federal Reserve and the Office of Thrift Supervision just revised theConsumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages (CHARM)to include additional information about nontraditional mortgage products. The CHARM booklet is an important means for delivering information about alternative adjustable rate mortgage products to consumers because creditors are required to provide a copy of the booklet to each consumer who receives an application for an ARM. Because the booklet is provided at this early stage in the process, it can be useful in encouraging consumers to ask brokers and lenders the right questions to decide if this type of loan is right for them. The booklet explains such features as payment shock and negative amortization. It also provides numerical examples that illustrate how consumers' payments can change and how their loan balances may increase over the term of the loan.The Federal Reserve also published a consumer education brochure titled:Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?. The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan and is available in printed form and in electronic form on the Federal Reserve’s website, along with other consumer mortgage informationFinally, the Federal Reserve engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand the financial services market and consumer behavior and the best approaches for assisting consumers. We sponsor consumer and industry surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules.Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text The Federal Reserve also published a consumer education brochure titled:Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Option-Payment ARMs--Are They for You?. The brochure is designed to assist consumers who are shopping for a mortgage loan and is available in printed form and in electronic form on the Federal Reserve’s website, along with other consumer mortgage informationFinally, the Federal Reserve engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand the financial services market and consumer behavior and the best approaches for assisting consumers. We sponsor consumer and industry surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules.Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text Finally, the Federal Reserve engages in numerous outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand the financial services market and consumer behavior and the best approaches for assisting consumers. We sponsor consumer and industry surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing, in addition to considering the public comments on proposed rules.Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text Recently, the Federal Reserve has engaged in outreach to a broad group of interested parties regarding nontraditional mortgages. Our Consumer Advisory Council, which includes consumer advocates and industry representatives, provided us with valuable information about nontraditional mortgage products during development of the interagency guidance. In addition, the Federal Reserve held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending during the summer of 2006. One of the principal purposes of the hearings was to gather information to inform the Federal Reserve’s review of its Truth in Lending rules. A significant portion of the hearings was devoted to discussing nontraditional mortgage products, and in particular, whether consumers receive adequate information about these products. The hearings explored research on consumer behavior in shopping for mortgage loans and included discussions about the challenges in designing disclosures to more effectively communicate loan terms and risks to consumers. We will consider this information in developing plans and recommendations for revising the Truth in Lending rules, which require all creditors to provide consumers with disclosures about loan terms.Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text Many financial products are very sophisticated credit transactions, and the disclosures describing them are also complex and highly technical; which can be difficult for some consumers to understand. To address this issue, the Federal Reserve is focusing in a more rigorous way on determining the effectiveness of disclosures. We conduct extensive consumer testing to determine what information is most important to consumers, when it is most useful for consumers to receive it, what language and formats work best, and how disclosures can be simplified, and better organized, to reduce complexity and information overload. To that end, the Federal Reserve uses design consultants to assist in developing model disclosures that are most likely to be effective in communicating vital credit information to consumers. The Federal Reserve also uses consumer testing to assist in developing model disclosure forms, and we draw from research done by respected behavioral economists.For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text For example, when considering some regulatory changes related to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the Federal Reserve used consumer focus group testing to develop useful and timely disclosures for employees whose pay is received in the form of a payroll card (a card that works much like a traditional debit card). The Federal Reserve is also engaging in extensive consumer testing of credit card disclosures required by the Truth in Lending Act, and has found those interactions with consumers instructive in revising disclosures to be more meaningful to consumers in today’s complex and highly prolific credit card market.Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text Mortgage LendingI now want to discuss developments in mortgage loan products. Last September, the federal financial institution regulators issued supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages. These mortgages include interest-only loans that allow consumers to defer the payment of principal and make only interest payments for an initial period. They also include adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with a payment option, allowing consumers to make “minimum payments” of less than the accrued interest. The result of such a loan structure is that the amount owed can increase even as the borrower makes payments, a circumstance known as negative amortization. Over time, the payments for these loans must be adjusted upward to catch up with fully indexed interest rates and/or paydowns (amortization) of the balance owed, often significantly, which sometimes results in what some call “payment shock.” Sometimes borrowers can refinance out of these loans, but that may cost them a serious prepayment penalty and reduce the amount of equity that they have built up in their home. The complexity of these products contrasts with traditional thirty-year fixed-rate loans, in which consumers have equal monthly payments that are sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal, and with which borrowers are generally familiar.To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text To be clear, nontraditional mortgages certainly serve a useful purpose when used appropriately. These products have increased the range of financing options available to consumers and have grown in popularity over the past few years. Some consumers may benefit from these products’ more flexible payment options. For example, consumers with seasonal or irregular income or who expect their incomes to increase are more likely to be able to absorb the increase in payments in the near term of the loan.But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text But nontraditional mortgage loan products can be complex and may not be appropriate for everyone. Concerns have been raised that consumers are not getting clear and balanced information about the risks and features of interest-only and payment option ARMs. These products have been advertised and promoted based on their initially low monthly payments when compared with traditional mortgage products. By focusing on initial monthly payments without appropriate understanding of how the payments can vary over time or that minimum payments may actually increase the amount owed, many consumers have become financially overextended.Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text Mortgage lenders are no longer limited in the size of their mortgage lending activities by the amount of available funding on their balance sheets. Mortgages are now routinely sold to institutions who securitize mortgages by aggregating them with other loans into pools. These mortgage-backed securities are held by banks, pension funds, mutual funds, and other investors both in the United States and internationally. This diversity of funding sources makes it possible for lenders to structure products that meet the various needs of borrowers, and still be able to mitigate the risks they may take on if the loan were held on their balance sheets. As a result, the mortgage lending industry continually adapts to consumer requirements and investor preferences for loan securitization structures.A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text A mortgage is generally the largest financial obligation a consumer enters into. The initial costs, the cost over the life of the mortgage, and the costs to prepay and refinance can be significant. Having a wide variety of mortgage types assists consumers in finding a way to finance the purchase of a home that best meets their own financial and lifestyle requirements. But the growing complexity of products makes it a bigger challenge for borrowers to understand the characteristics of competing products. This is where shopping among a couple of lenders and a couple of different products can help the consumer understand the features of different loan types. .When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text When looking at different loan products, consumers should consider how long they plan to own their home, expectations of future income, their stage of life cycle, and broader financial obligations in choosing among mortgage alternatives. For example, if consumers want to pay off their mortgages before retirement, they must determine if the monthly payment will fully amortize the loan by the target date. If homeowners plan to move in three years, then they should compare prepayment penalties, if any, and interest rates among their mortgage alternatives.But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text But some consumers do not actively shop for a lender or a mortgage, and they do not compare loan terms in light of their personal circumstances. Instead they rely on one lender and accept the mortgage loan presented to them. Mortgages that are appropriate for one borrower, however, may create problems for another. For example, some mortgages have low initial interest rates and monthly payments. But increases come later as the “teaser period” ends and payments rise to begin pay down of principal. Borrowers whose budgets make the initial payment just manageable may have difficulty meeting these significant jumps in monthly payments and so are at risk of defaulting on their mortgages and losing their home.By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text By shopping among lenders and products, consumers are also better able to determine whether a given loan feature is really an advantage. For example, some lenders have recently been more willing to waive proof of income when making a mortgage. But, they may charge a higher interest rate to cover the risk that the borrower may not be able to afford the mortgage. The customer however may save interest cost by making the effort to provide copies of tax returns and pay stubs. Another example is that some lenders do not require their borrowers to pay their property tax and hazard insurance premiums into an escrow account. Consumers need to ask lenders if their monthly payments will include funds for such an escrow account. If not, borrowers need to separately set aside savings to meet these obligations.Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text Lenders, for their part, should make it possible for consumers to engage in shopping for a mortgage. As I noted, last September the federal financial institution regulators issued interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, which included both a focus on safe and sound lending practices as well as on consumer awareness and consumer protection. The guidance focuses on the responsibility of lenders to provide consumers with clear and balanced information at crucial decision-making points about the benefits and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. Accordingly, the interagency guidance describes recommended practices for financial institutions in communicating with consumers while they are shopping, not just upon submission of an application or at loan consummation. Specifically, the guidance recommends that institutions’ promotional materials and descriptions of these products include information about, among other things, potential increases in consumers’ payment obligations and the potential consequences of increasing principal loan balances and decreasing home equity. The guidance also recommends that institutions alert consumers to the amount of any prepayment penalty that may be imposed if the consumer refinances the mortgage.ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text ConclusionI hope that my remarks today provided a useful snapshot of the current economic outlook. Outside of housing and the automotive sector, the economy is strong and employment is growing. The surge in housing construction that occurred in 2004-2005 was not sustainable, and we are now well along in adjusting housing construction to more comfortable levels.Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks.Footnotes1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text Inflation continues to run at a pace above my comfort level. The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to moderate inflation. Monetary policy works with long lags and so the economy is still reacting to our past actions. Given the strong growth in most sectors of the economy, the risks to inflation are still on the upside. In addition to giving some thoughts on the economy, I felt it was useful to offer a summary of the role that the Federal Reserve plays in consumer protection, using the current example of nontraditional mortgages. Clearly, the Federal Reserve believes in promoting consumer awareness and maintaining consumer protection so that users of financial products fully understand those products and their associated risks. Footnotes 1.The numbers cited here refer to the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), excluding food and energy, as published by the Commerce Department in the national income and product accounts.Return to text
Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the National Credit Union Administration 2007 Risk Mitigation Summit Good morning. I would like to thank Vice Chairman Rodney Hood and the National Credit Union Administration for the invitation to speak at the 2007 Risk Mitigation Summit. Given the continuing challenges in risk management facing banks and credit unions, this event is certainly topical. Having once been a chief risk officer at a commercial bank, I find it particularly interesting to address this group in my current role as supervisor and central banker. I hope my past private-sector experience adds a useful perspective on our current regulatory and supervisory policies. Today I would like to focus on the topic of enterprise risk management. I am pleased to see more and more sessions at conferences devoted to risk management, analyzing its different facets and exploring ways to tailor it to specific institutions and situations. Indeed, there is a growing understanding that sound risk management should be an integral part of running any type of business. A key theme I would like to highlight today is that all financial institutions should seek ways to strengthen risk management, but that the specific methods for improving risk management should depend on the size and level of complexity of the institution. In my remarks today I will offer some general remarks about enterprise risk management, or ERM, and then look at mortgage lending as a particular example. Of course, mortgage lending is but one area in which ERM has application--other current examples include information security, credit derivatives, and overall portfolio management. Based on some recent observations, mortgage lending certainly is an area in which we believe financial institutions and supervisors have learned some key lessons about risk management. These lessons demonstrate how sound risk management can also increase business efficiency and profitability. General Thoughts on Enterprise Risk ManagementThe financial services industry continues to evolve to meet the challenges posed by emerging technologies and business processes, new financial instruments, the growing scale and scope of financial institutions, and changing regulatory frameworks. A successful enterprise risk-management process can help an organization meet many of these challenges by providing a framework within which managers can explicitly consider how the organization's risk exposures are changing, determine the amount of risk they are willing to accept, and ensure that they have the appropriate risk mitigants and controls in place to limit risk to targeted levels. Of course, ERM is a fairly broad topic, one that can mean different things to different people. For our purposes here today, I will define ERM as a process that enables management to deal effectively with uncertainty and the associated risk and opportunity, enhancing the capacity to build stakeholder value. Borrowing from ERM literature, I would say that ERM includes: aligning the entity's risk appetite and strategies;enhancing the rigor of the entity's risk-response decisions;reducing the frequency and severity of operational surprises and losses;identifying and managing multiple and cross-enterprise risks;proactively seizing on the opportunities presented to the entity; andimproving the effectiveness of the entity's capital deployment.Some of you are probably familiar with the ERM framework published more than two years ago by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, or COSO. The COSO framework provides a useful way of looking at ERM and helps generate further discussion.In the COSO framework, ERM consists of eight interrelated components, which are derived from the way management runs an enterprise and integrated with the management process: (1) internal environment, (2) objective setting, (3) event identification, (4) risk assessment, (5) risk response, (6) control activities, (7) information and communication, and (8) monitoring. Each of these components is described in more detail in the COSO literature.Notably, the COSO framework states explicitly that although its components do not function identically across entities, its principles should apply to institutions of all sizes. Small and midsize entities, for example, may choose to apply the framework in a less formal and less structured way and scale it to their own needs--as long as quality is maintained. This explicitness about the universal applicability of principles underscores the message from financial institution supervisors that sound risk management is expected of every institution, and that it should reflect an institution's size and level of complexity. As most of you know, running a smaller or less complex institution presents different types of challenges and requires a risk-management framework appropriately tailored to the institution. For example, many smaller organizations face the challenge of ensuring independent review of processes and decisions because their officers and staff members often have multiple responsibilities, which can result in conflicts of interest.For smaller organizations, ERM can provide a framework to strategically assess how risks are changing. That is, risk should be considered as part of the annual budgeting and strategic planning processes. Very often most of the planning process focuses on "the most likely" outcome. Using a risk-management framework that considers other, less likely outcomes leads management and the board of directors to consider how the types of risks and the amount of risk are expected to change to implement the plan. While smaller organizations will not find it practical to try to quantify many of these changes, the direction of change in and of itself is very important in the planning process. For example, while a new product or sales initiative may be expected to increase profitability, if the level of risk is expected to rise significantly, management and the board should discuss whether the returns are sufficient to compensate for the higher risk exposures.If the risk assessment indicates that returns are not expected to compensate for the higher risk exposures, an institution may want to consider risk mitigation. This entails an understanding of the key risk drivers and a determination of what could be done to minimize their impact. For example, a new loan product may increase interest rate risk if the asset/liability rate sensitivity increases. An institution could consider restructuring the duration of its investment portfolio, selling loans to other investors, or initiating a campaign to attract deposits with a repricing structure closer to the loan product--all of which could reduce the interest rate risk.Institutions are also finding that technology and business process changes are a growing source of risk exposures--what we call operational risk. Operational risk data, which support the Basel II capital initiative, show that the second most prominent cause of losses are due to breakdowns in execution, delivery, and process management. Organizations who wish to mitigate these types of risk often use design review, quality management, or change control processes to identify potential sources of risk early in the design and implementation process. Quality control is generally less expensive to design into a new process than correcting an error or rebuilding the system after a problem has occurred. While the old saying of total quality control management that "quality is free" may not literally be true in all cases, most organizations have learned that designing quality into the process not only reduces development and operating costs, it also improves service quality and customer satisfaction.The examples I have just given reflect interest rate and operational risks. An enterprise-wide risk-management approach can help management consider these various types of risk jointly. That is, an organization should be aware of whether the drivers of various risk types tend to make those risks move up and down together, or whether they move independently. If the risks are correlated, then, in the aggregate, risks could rise above the risk appetite of management and the board, and they may have to consider changes in the business plan. For example, a decline in interest rates may increase interest-rate risk if it causes fixed-rate loans to be prepaid unexpectedly. Additionally, the interest rate drop may stimulate a surge in new loan originations and that could cause lending staff to make errors as it copes with the increased workload. On the other hand, breakdowns in loan underwriting standards due to the retirement of an experienced loan manager who is replaced by an unproven lender can occur throughout the interest rate cycle.I have purposely chosen to describe ERM activities that are part of other processes. I think this is the practical way for smaller organizations to implement ERM. Small organizations cannot afford to have dedicated staff and quantitative models of all forms of risk. By adding steps to existing management practices, management can lower implementation costs, but more importantly can increase attention on risk management by staff throughout the organization. That is, whether someone is designing a new branch office, shipping tapes to a backup site for storage, developing the layout for a newspaper ad, or training new employees, they will consciously think about risk as one of the elements of that business activity. Increased risk awareness by staff throughout the enterprise is integral to managing risk successfully.Having made some general points, I would now like to turn to the topic of mortgage lending to highlight the importance of ERM. While details of these recent observations pertain to mortgage lending, they can also be applied to risk management in general.Risk Management in Mortgage LendingEffectively managing the risk associated with mortgage lending involves much more than prudent underwriting. Experienced risk managers understand the need to carefully consider the risks should the housing market slow, interest rates change, or unemployment rise. These include the risks that borrowers will not have sufficient income in the future to manage substantial payment increases and that continued home price appreciation may not provide a sufficient equity cushion to minimize losses in foreclosure. In addition, an accumulation of portfolio concentrations could leave an institution exposed in a downturn. Lenders specializing in subprime loans, for example, have endured a string of bad news recently, including increasing loan delinquency and foreclosure rates and the shutdown of some lenders that could not operate profitably in a slower origination environment.In a broader sense, mortgage lending can present many types of risk for the enterprise as a whole, including credit, market, reputational, legal, and compliance risks. Therefore, while mortgage lending has been a very profitable business for many financial institutions recently, they need to understand the full set of risks associated with their mortgage lending business, including the consequences of adverse outcomes. For this reason, mortgage lending should be folded into the broader ERM process at any organization.Nontraditional Mortgage ProductsLast September, the federal banking agencies, including the NCUA, issued guidance on the risks associated with nontraditional mortgage lending. Supervisors are concerned that current risk-management practices may not fully address the entire set of risks inherent in nontraditional mortgages--risks that could be heightened by current market conditions.Nontraditional mortgage loans are those that allow borrowers to defer repayment of principal and, in some cases, interest. Over the past few years, there has been a large increase in nontraditional mortgage products, including interest-only (IO) loans, for which the borrower pays no loan principal for the first few years of the loan, and payment-option adjustable-rate mortgages (option ARMs), for which the borrower has flexible payment options--and which could result in negative amortization. These types of mortgages are estimated to have accounted for about one-third of all U.S. mortgage originations in 2006, compared with less than one-tenth just a few years earlier.Nontraditional mortgage products have been available for many years; however, they have historically been offered to higher-income borrowers. More recently, nontraditional mortgages have been offered to a wider spectrum of consumers, including consumers who may be less able to afford the jump in monthly payments common in these types of mortgages and may not fully recognize their embedded risks. Subprime borrowers are more likely to experience an unmanageable payment shock during the life of the loan, meaning that they may be more likely to default on the loan.Supervisors have also observed that lenders are increasingly combining nontraditional mortgage loans with "risk layering" practices--such as by not evaluating the borrower's ability to meet increasing monthly payments when amortization begins or when interest rates on adjustable rate mortgages rise due to indexing or at the end of a "teaser" rate period. We are also seeing more frequent use of limited or no documentation in evaluating an applicant's income and assets. Although some lenders may have used elements of nontraditional mortgage products successfully in the past, the recent easing of traditional underwriting controls and the sale of some types of nontraditional products to subprime borrowers may generate losses on these products greater than has been observed in the past. Additionally, information from other sources seems to indicate that more borrowers are purchasing real estate with no equity down payment by using simultaneous second liens. The greater prevalence of risk-layering practices and sales of nontraditional mortgage products to nonprime borrowers have occurred in the past few years as competition for borrowers and declining profit margins has prompted lenders to loosen their credit standards to maintain loan volume in a slowing environment.The industry trends I have just described, taken together, were what led the Federal Reserve, NCUA, and the other banking agencies to issue guidance on nontraditional mortgage products last September. The guidance emphasizes that an institution's risk-management processes should allow it to adequately identify, measure, monitor, and control the full set of risks associated with these products. It reminds lenders of the importance of assessing a borrower's ability to repay the loan, both now and when amortization begins and interest rates rise. Nontraditional mortgage products warrant a bank having strong risk-management standards as well as adequate capital and loan-loss reserves. Further, bankers should consider the impact of prepayment penalties for ARMs. Lenders should provide enough information so that borrowers clearly understand, before choosing a product or payment option, the terms of and risks associated with these loans, particularly the extent to which monthly payments may rise and negative amortization may increase the amount owed above the amount originally borrowed.Subprime Mortgage LendingThe agencies' guidance on nontraditional mortgage products did not specifically address mortgage lending to subprime borrowers--although, as noted, nontraditional mortgage products are sometimes offered to subprime borrowers. Both lenders and supervisors are aware of the benefits of subprime lending to homeowners, and both have an interest in ensuring that the market remains viable over the longer term. To ensure that viability, it is important to maintain sound underwriting standards and product terms as well as sufficient consumer protection practices. Therefore, subprime mortgage lending continues to be an area that supervisors monitor closely.While overall mortgage delinquency rates remain low by historical standards, they have been increasing in recent months, especially in the subprime sector. Performance deterioration is most notable in the more recent vintages. Many industry observers believe the poor performance of more recently originated subprime loans is due primarily to looser underwriting standards, including limited or no verification of borrower income and high loan-to-value transactions. Subprime lending has certainly created homeownership opportunities for borrowers with weaker or less certain credit histories. But because of the increased risk profile, lenders need to be especially diligent in maintaining prudent underwriting standards and in promoting manageable loan terms and sufficient consumer disclosure practices. Further, as part of an ERM process, as lenders design more complex products they need to identify ways to clearly communicate the product features and risks to their customers.Subprime mortgages typically carry higher interest rates than prime loans. It is not uncommon to find margins of 600 basis points or more on adjustable rate subprime loans after the expiration of a teaser rate. Not surprisingly, some borrowers are unable to keep up with their mortgage payments once these payments fully adjust. In some cases, if alternative financing cannot be found, borrowers may be forced to sell their home or enter foreclosure. And given prepayment penalties, home price appreciation slowing significantly and capital market investors becoming more conservative, some borrowers may be having more difficultly in refinancing to avoid foreclosure.Supervisors are discussing what can be done to ensure that these types of loans are being originated in a safe and sound manner and that consumers are being provided with clear and balanced information so that they can fully understand the terms and risks of these products. Subprime loan underwriting, when done prudently, should reflect all relevant credit factors, including the borrower's ability to service the debt. In the current environment, risk managers should review policies governing the use of loans with limited or no documentation and simultaneous-second mortgages. Lenders that do not account for tax and insurance burdens in assessing borrower qualifications should understand the associated risks. It may even be prudent to escrow tax and insurance payments to ensure that the collateral is adequately protected from physical casualty losses as well as tax liens, or the lender should inform borrowers what should be set aside to meet the periodic insurance and tax payments on their homes if these payments are not already included in their total monthly mortgage payment.ConclusionAll financial institutions need sound risk-management practices. An enterprise-wide approach is appropriate for setting objectives across the organization, instilling a culture attuned to risk, and ensuring that key activities and risks are being monitored regularly. Clearly, there is always an opportunity to improve upon enterprise risk-management strategies and strengthening the discipline to implement those strategies effectively. But vigilance is critical, too, since problems can sometimes quickly arise in a business line or unit that has presented no past difficulties. Accordingly, it is always helpful to evaluate the "what if" scenarios even for the most pristine of business units.But the manner in which risk-management challenges are addressed can--and should--vary across institutions, based on their size, complexity, and individual risk profile. In many cases, it simply does not make sense for small organizations to adopt the most sophisticated risk-management practices; however, that does not absolve such smaller institutions of their responsibility to improve risk management. Additionally, as supervisors, we want to ensure that institutions are not only identifying, measuring, and managing their risks but are also developing and maintaining appropriate corporate governance structures appropriate for their business activities and risk taking. Our hope is that the guidance we offer on these various topics is becoming more consistent with financial institutions' own risk-management practices.Today I have used the example of mortgage lending to stress the importance of ERM, but there are obviously many other areas to which ERM applies. We believe that the recently issued guidance on nontraditional mortgage products contains helpful reminders and recommendations for institutions using those products, ensuring that they recognize the full set of risks involved.As a final point, I would like to stress that supervisors at all five federal banking agencies, including the NCUA and the Federal Reserve, aim to implement the guidance as consistently as possible across institutions, since we do understand institutions' concerns about this issue. Of course, it is always a challenge to ensure that guidance is applied consistently throughout the industry, especially when institution-specific factors--such as portfolio concentrations and individual risk-management practices--might affect the manner in which the guidance needs to be applied to individual organizations. But we have already begun to undertake efforts across our agencies, including extensive communication and coordination, so that institutions are not subjected to needlessly differing treatment. Some of you are probably familiar with the ERM framework published more than two years ago by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, or COSO. The COSO framework provides a useful way of looking at ERM and helps generate further discussion. In the COSO framework, ERM consists of eight interrelated components, which are derived from the way management runs an enterprise and integrated with the management process: (1) internal environment, (2) objective setting, (3) event identification, (4) risk assessment, (5) risk response, (6) control activities, (7) information and communication, and (8) monitoring. Each of these components is described in more detail in the COSO literature. Notably, the COSO framework states explicitly that although its components do not function identically across entities, its principles should apply to institutions of all sizes. Small and midsize entities, for example, may choose to apply the framework in a less formal and less structured way and scale it to their own needs--as long as quality is maintained. This explicitness about the universal applicability of principles underscores the message from financial institution supervisors that sound risk management is expected of every institution, and that it should reflect an institution's size and level of complexity. As most of you know, running a smaller or less complex institution presents different types of challenges and requires a risk-management framework appropriately tailored to the institution. For example, many smaller organizations face the challenge of ensuring independent review of processes and decisions because their officers and staff members often have multiple responsibilities, which can result in conflicts of interest. For smaller organizations, ERM can provide a framework to strategically assess how risks are changing. That is, risk should be considered as part of the annual budgeting and strategic planning processes. Very often most of the planning process focuses on "the most likely" outcome. Using a risk-management framework that considers other, less likely outcomes leads management and the board of directors to consider how the types of risks and the amount of risk are expected to change to implement the plan. While smaller organizations will not find it practical to try to quantify many of these changes, the direction of change in and of itself is very important in the planning process. For example, while a new product or sales initiative may be expected to increase profitability, if the level of risk is expected to rise significantly, management and the board should discuss whether the returns are sufficient to compensate for the higher risk exposures. If the risk assessment indicates that returns are not expected to compensate for the higher risk exposures, an institution may want to consider risk mitigation. This entails an understanding of the key risk drivers and a determination of what could be done to minimize their impact. For example, a new loan product may increase interest rate risk if the asset/liability rate sensitivity increases. An institution could consider restructuring the duration of its investment portfolio, selling loans to other investors, or initiating a campaign to attract deposits with a repricing structure closer to the loan product--all of which could reduce the interest rate risk. Institutions are also finding that technology and business process changes are a growing source of risk exposures--what we call operational risk. Operational risk data, which support the Basel II capital initiative, show that the second most prominent cause of losses are due to breakdowns in execution, delivery, and process management. Organizations who wish to mitigate these types of risk often use design review, quality management, or change control processes to identify potential sources of risk early in the design and implementation process. Quality control is generally less expensive to design into a new process than correcting an error or rebuilding the system after a problem has occurred. While the old saying of total quality control management that "quality is free" may not literally be true in all cases, most organizations have learned that designing quality into the process not only reduces development and operating costs, it also improves service quality and customer satisfaction. The examples I have just given reflect interest rate and operational risks. An enterprise-wide risk-management approach can help management consider these various types of risk jointly. That is, an organization should be aware of whether the drivers of various risk types tend to make those risks move up and down together, or whether they move independently. If the risks are correlated, then, in the aggregate, risks could rise above the risk appetite of management and the board, and they may have to consider changes in the business plan. For example, a decline in interest rates may increase interest-rate risk if it causes fixed-rate loans to be prepaid unexpectedly. Additionally, the interest rate drop may stimulate a surge in new loan originations and that could cause lending staff to make errors as it copes with the increased workload. On the other hand, breakdowns in loan underwriting standards due to the retirement of an experienced loan manager who is replaced by an unproven lender can occur throughout the interest rate cycle. I have purposely chosen to describe ERM activities that are part of other processes. I think this is the practical way for smaller organizations to implement ERM. Small organizations cannot afford to have dedicated staff and quantitative models of all forms of risk. By adding steps to existing management practices, management can lower implementation costs, but more importantly can increase attention on risk management by staff throughout the organization. That is, whether someone is designing a new branch office, shipping tapes to a backup site for storage, developing the layout for a newspaper ad, or training new employees, they will consciously think about risk as one of the elements of that business activity. Increased risk awareness by staff throughout the enterprise is integral to managing risk successfully. Having made some general points, I would now like to turn to the topic of mortgage lending to highlight the importance of ERM. While details of these recent observations pertain to mortgage lending, they can also be applied to risk management in general. Risk Management in Mortgage LendingEffectively managing the risk associated with mortgage lending involves much more than prudent underwriting. Experienced risk managers understand the need to carefully consider the risks should the housing market slow, interest rates change, or unemployment rise. These include the risks that borrowers will not have sufficient income in the future to manage substantial payment increases and that continued home price appreciation may not provide a sufficient equity cushion to minimize losses in foreclosure. In addition, an accumulation of portfolio concentrations could leave an institution exposed in a downturn. Lenders specializing in subprime loans, for example, have endured a string of bad news recently, including increasing loan delinquency and foreclosure rates and the shutdown of some lenders that could not operate profitably in a slower origination environment. In a broader sense, mortgage lending can present many types of risk for the enterprise as a whole, including credit, market, reputational, legal, and compliance risks. Therefore, while mortgage lending has been a very profitable business for many financial institutions recently, they need to understand the full set of risks associated with their mortgage lending business, including the consequences of adverse outcomes. For this reason, mortgage lending should be folded into the broader ERM process at any organization. Nontraditional Mortgage ProductsLast September, the federal banking agencies, including the NCUA, issued guidance on the risks associated with nontraditional mortgage lending. Supervisors are concerned that current risk-management practices may not fully address the entire set of risks inherent in nontraditional mortgages--risks that could be heightened by current market conditions. Nontraditional mortgage loans are those that allow borrowers to defer repayment of principal and, in some cases, interest. Over the past few years, there has been a large increase in nontraditional mortgage products, including interest-only (IO) loans, for which the borrower pays no loan principal for the first few years of the loan, and payment-option adjustable-rate mortgages (option ARMs), for which the borrower has flexible payment options--and which could result in negative amortization. These types of mortgages are estimated to have accounted for about one-third of all U.S. mortgage originations in 2006, compared with less than one-tenth just a few years earlier. Nontraditional mortgage products have been available for many years; however, they have historically been offered to higher-income borrowers. More recently, nontraditional mortgages have been offered to a wider spectrum of consumers, including consumers who may be less able to afford the jump in monthly payments common in these types of mortgages and may not fully recognize their embedded risks. Subprime borrowers are more likely to experience an unmanageable payment shock during the life of the loan, meaning that they may be more likely to default on the loan. Supervisors have also observed that lenders are increasingly combining nontraditional mortgage loans with "risk layering" practices--such as by not evaluating the borrower's ability to meet increasing monthly payments when amortization begins or when interest rates on adjustable rate mortgages rise due to indexing or at the end of a "teaser" rate period. We are also seeing more frequent use of limited or no documentation in evaluating an applicant's income and assets. Although some lenders may have used elements of nontraditional mortgage products successfully in the past, the recent easing of traditional underwriting controls and the sale of some types of nontraditional products to subprime borrowers may generate losses on these products greater than has been observed in the past. Additionally, information from other sources seems to indicate that more borrowers are purchasing real estate with no equity down payment by using simultaneous second liens. The greater prevalence of risk-layering practices and sales of nontraditional mortgage products to nonprime borrowers have occurred in the past few years as competition for borrowers and declining profit margins has prompted lenders to loosen their credit standards to maintain loan volume in a slowing environment. The industry trends I have just described, taken together, were what led the Federal Reserve, NCUA, and the other banking agencies to issue guidance on nontraditional mortgage products last September. The guidance emphasizes that an institution's risk-management processes should allow it to adequately identify, measure, monitor, and control the full set of risks associated with these products. It reminds lenders of the importance of assessing a borrower's ability to repay the loan, both now and when amortization begins and interest rates rise. Nontraditional mortgage products warrant a bank having strong risk-management standards as well as adequate capital and loan-loss reserves. Further, bankers should consider the impact of prepayment penalties for ARMs. Lenders should provide enough information so that borrowers clearly understand, before choosing a product or payment option, the terms of and risks associated with these loans, particularly the extent to which monthly payments may rise and negative amortization may increase the amount owed above the amount originally borrowed. Subprime Mortgage LendingThe agencies' guidance on nontraditional mortgage products did not specifically address mortgage lending to subprime borrowers--although, as noted, nontraditional mortgage products are sometimes offered to subprime borrowers. Both lenders and supervisors are aware of the benefits of subprime lending to homeowners, and both have an interest in ensuring that the market remains viable over the longer term. To ensure that viability, it is important to maintain sound underwriting standards and product terms as well as sufficient consumer protection practices. Therefore, subprime mortgage lending continues to be an area that supervisors monitor closely. While overall mortgage delinquency rates remain low by historical standards, they have been increasing in recent months, especially in the subprime sector. Performance deterioration is most notable in the more recent vintages. Many industry observers believe the poor performance of more recently originated subprime loans is due primarily to looser underwriting standards, including limited or no verification of borrower income and high loan-to-value transactions. Subprime lending has certainly created homeownership opportunities for borrowers with weaker or less certain credit histories. But because of the increased risk profile, lenders need to be especially diligent in maintaining prudent underwriting standards and in promoting manageable loan terms and sufficient consumer disclosure practices. Further, as part of an ERM process, as lenders design more complex products they need to identify ways to clearly communicate the product features and risks to their customers. Subprime mortgages typically carry higher interest rates than prime loans. It is not uncommon to find margins of 600 basis points or more on adjustable rate subprime loans after the expiration of a teaser rate. Not surprisingly, some borrowers are unable to keep up with their mortgage payments once these payments fully adjust. In some cases, if alternative financing cannot be found, borrowers may be forced to sell their home or enter foreclosure. And given prepayment penalties, home price appreciation slowing significantly and capital market investors becoming more conservative, some borrowers may be having more difficultly in refinancing to avoid foreclosure. Supervisors are discussing what can be done to ensure that these types of loans are being originated in a safe and sound manner and that consumers are being provided with clear and balanced information so that they can fully understand the terms and risks of these products. Subprime loan underwriting, when done prudently, should reflect all relevant credit factors, including the borrower's ability to service the debt. In the current environment, risk managers should review policies governing the use of loans with limited or no documentation and simultaneous-second mortgages. Lenders that do not account for tax and insurance burdens in assessing borrower qualifications should understand the associated risks. It may even be prudent to escrow tax and insurance payments to ensure that the collateral is adequately protected from physical casualty losses as well as tax liens, or the lender should inform borrowers what should be set aside to meet the periodic insurance and tax payments on their homes if these payments are not already included in their total monthly mortgage payment. ConclusionAll financial institutions need sound risk-management practices. An enterprise-wide approach is appropriate for setting objectives across the organization, instilling a culture attuned to risk, and ensuring that key activities and risks are being monitored regularly. Clearly, there is always an opportunity to improve upon enterprise risk-management strategies and strengthening the discipline to implement those strategies effectively. But vigilance is critical, too, since problems can sometimes quickly arise in a business line or unit that has presented no past difficulties. Accordingly, it is always helpful to evaluate the "what if" scenarios even for the most pristine of business units. But the manner in which risk-management challenges are addressed can--and should--vary across institutions, based on their size, complexity, and individual risk profile. In many cases, it simply does not make sense for small organizations to adopt the most sophisticated risk-management practices; however, that does not absolve such smaller institutions of their responsibility to improve risk management. Additionally, as supervisors, we want to ensure that institutions are not only identifying, measuring, and managing their risks but are also developing and maintaining appropriate corporate governance structures appropriate for their business activities and risk taking. Our hope is that the guidance we offer on these various topics is becoming more consistent with financial institutions' own risk-management practices. Today I have used the example of mortgage lending to stress the importance of ERM, but there are obviously many other areas to which ERM applies. We believe that the recently issued guidance on nontraditional mortgage products contains helpful reminders and recommendations for institutions using those products, ensuring that they recognize the full set of risks involved. As a final point, I would like to stress that supervisors at all five federal banking agencies, including the NCUA and the Federal Reserve, aim to implement the guidance as consistently as possible across institutions, since we do understand institutions' concerns about this issue. Of course, it is always a challenge to ensure that guidance is applied consistently throughout the industry, especially when institution-specific factors--such as portfolio concentrations and individual risk-management practices--might affect the manner in which the guidance needs to be applied to individual organizations. But we have already begun to undertake efforts across our agencies, including extensive communication and coordination, so that institutions are not subjected to needlessly differing treatment.
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the Forecaster’s Club of New York, New York, New York Over the past ten years, we have seen extraordinary run-ups in house prices. From 1996 to the present, nominal house prices in the United States have doubled, rising at a 7-1/4 percent annual rate.1Over the past five years, the rise even accelerated to an annual average increase of 8-3/4 percent. This phenomenon has not been restricted to the United States but has occurred around the world. For example, Australia, Denmark, France, Ireland, New Zealand, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom have had even higher rates of house price appreciation in recent years. Although increases in house price have recently moderated in some countries, they still are very high relative to rents. Furthermore, with the exception of Germany and Japan, the ratios of house prices to disposable income in many countries are greater than what would have been predicted on the basis of their trends. Because prices of homes, like other asset prices, are inherently forward looking, it is extremely hard to say whether they are above their fundamental value. Nevertheless, when asset prices increase explosively, concern always arises that a bubble may be developing and that its bursting might lead to a sharp fall in prices that could severely damage the economy. This concern has led to an active debate among monetary policy makers around the world on the appropriate reaction to the run-ups in house prices that we have recently seen in many markets: Should central banks raise interest rates? And how should they prepare themselves to react if housing prices decline? These are the issues that I will address today. The views I will express are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Home prices, like other asset prices, have important effects on output and inflation. Home prices affect the economy in two primary ways. First, when they begin rising, the expectation of further appreciation tends to become built into the market. That expectation boosts demand for homes, which stimulates new construction and aggregate demand. Of course, the sustained rise in prices can simultaneously sow the seeds of a market correction by making houses progressively less affordable relative to income, thereby limiting the demand for them and restraining additional construction. Second, higher home prices increase household wealth, thus stimulating consumer spending, another component of aggregate demand. Because central banks are in the business of managing total demand in the economy so as to produce desirable outcomes on inflation and employment, monetary policy should accordingly respond to home prices to the extent that these prices are influencing aggregate demand and resource utilization. The issue of how central banks should respond to house price movements is therefore not whether they should respond at all. Rather, the issue is whether they should respond over and above the response called for in terms of objectives to stabilize inflation and employment over the usual policy time horizon. The issue here is the same one that applies to how central banks should respond to potential bubbles in asset prices in general: Because subsequent collapses of these asset prices might be highly damaging to the economy, as they were in Japan in the 1990s, should the monetary authority try to prick, or at least slow the growth of, developing bubbles? I view the answer as no. I will outline some conventional arguments for and against reacting to asset prices over and above their direct and foreseeable effects on inflation and employment. I will also discuss some additional reasons why central banks should not overly emphasize house prices in particular. Although I come down squarely on the side of those who oppose giving a special role to house prices in the conduct of monetary policy, I do think that central banks can take steps to ensure that sharp movements in the prices of homes or other assets do not have serious negative consequences for the economy. There is no question that asset price bubbles have potential negative effects on the economy. The departure of asset prices from fundamentals can lead to inappropriate investments that decrease the efficiency of the economy. For example, if home prices rise above what the fundamentals would justify, too many houses will be built. Moreover, at some point, bubbles burst and asset prices then return to their fundamental values. When this happens, the sharp downward correction of asset prices can lead to a sharp contraction in the economy, both directly, through effects on investment, and indirectly, through the effects of reduced household wealth on consumer spending. Despite the clear dangers from asset price bubbles, the question remains as to whether central banks should do anything about them. Some economists have argued that central banks should at times "lean against the wind" by raising interest rates to stop bubbles from getting out of hand. They argue that if a bubble has been identified, then raising interest rates will produce better outcomes. For instance, William White, of the Bank for International Settlements, has said that "monetary policy might rather be used in a highly discretionary way to respond to growing imbalances that were judged by policymakers to threaten financial instability."2Although central banks have generally not argued that interest rates should be raised aggressively to burst asset price bubbles, statements suggest some central bankers believe some leaning against the wind might be warranted. For example, in the second half of 2003 and the first half of 2004, a minority of members of the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England argued for raising interest rates more than could be justified in terms of the Bank of England's objectives for inflation over its normal policy horizon. They said that such a move would help lower the probability of house prices rising further and make it less likely that a house price collapse would occur later. Mervyn King, the Governor of the Bank of England, did not advocate leaning against the wind but did suggest that, to prevent a buildup of financial imbalances, a central bank might extend the horizon over which inflation is brought back to target. Statements from officials at the European Central Bank also have suggested that the possibility of an asset boom or bust might require longer than the usual one to two years in assessing whether the price stability goal was being met. The recent case of the Sveriges Riksbank, the Swedish central bank, is particularly interesting. I studied the Riksbank in a report on monetary policy written with Francesco Giavazzi for the Swedish parliament before I came to the Federal Reserve Board.3We found that communications by the Riksbank suggested to market participants that it was actually adjusting monetary policy to lean against the wind of rapid increases in home prices. On February 23, 2006, the Executive Board of the Riksbank voted to raise the repo rate 25 basis points (0.25 percentage points). This monetary policy action was accompanied by a statement acknowledging that the inflation forecast was revised downward. In fact theInflation Reportpublished on the same day also showed that inflation forecasts had been revised downward and were below the 2 percent target at every horizon. The Executive Board's statement pointed out that "there is also reason to observe that household indebtedness and house prices are continuing to rise rapidly."4It then said: "Given this, the Executive Board decided to raise the repo rate by 0.25 percentage points at yesterday's meeting." Not surprisingly, market participants took this statement to mean that the Riksbank was setting the policy instrument not only to control inflation but also to restrain house prices. A similar reference to house prices in explaining the decision to raise rates was made in the press release of January 20, 2006. The above statements suggest that some central bankers advocate that asset prices, and in particular, house prices, should have a special role in the conduct of monetary policy over and above their foreseeable effect on inflation and employment. There are several objections to this view. A special role for asset prices in the conduct of monetary policy requires three key assumptions. First, one must assume that a central bank can identify a bubble in progress. I find this assumption highly dubious because it is hard to believe that the central bank has such an informational advantage over private markets. Indeed, the view that government officials know better than the markets has been proved wrong over and over again. If the central bank has no informational advantage, and if it knows that a bubble has developed, the market will know this too, and the bubble will burst. Thus, any bubble that could be identified with certainty by the central bank would be unlikely ever to develop much further. A second assumption needed to justify a special role for asset prices is that monetary policy cannot appropriately deal with the consequences of a burst bubble, and so preemptive actions against a bubble are needed. Asset price crashes can sometimes lead to severe episodes of financial instability, with the most recent notable example among industrial countries being that of Japan. In principal, in the event of such a crash, monetary policy might become less effective in restoring the economy's health. Yet there are several reasons to believe that this concern about burst bubbles may be overstated. To begin with, the bursting of asset price bubbles often does not lead to financial instability. In research that I conducted with Eugene White on fifteen stock market crashes in the twentieth century, we found that most of the crashes were not associated with any evidence of distress in financial institutions or the widening of credit spreads that would indicate heightened concerns about default.5The bursting of the recent stock market bubble in the United States provides one example. The stock market drop in 2000-01 did not substantially damage the balance sheets of financial institutions, which were quite healthy before the crash, nor did it lead to wider credit spreads. At least partly as a result, the recession that followed the stock market drop was very mild despite some severely negative shocks to the U.S. economy, including the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks and the corporate accounting scandals in Enron and other U.S. companies; the scandals raised doubts about the quality of information in financial markets and ultimately did indeed widen credit spreads. There are even stronger reasons to believe that a bursting of a bubble in house prices is unlikely to produce financial instability. House prices are far less volatile than stock prices, outright declines after a run-up are not the norm, and declines that do occur are typically relatively small. The loan-to-value ratio for residential mortgages is usually substantially below 1, both because the initial loan is less than the value of the house and because, in conventional mortgages, loan-to-value ratios decline over the life of the loan. Hence, declines in home prices are far less likely to cause losses to financial institutions, default rates on residential mortgages typically are low, and recovery rates on foreclosures are high. Not surprisingly, declines in home prices generally have not led to financial instability. The financial instability that many countries experienced in the 1990s, including Japan, was caused by bad loans that resulted from declines in commercial property prices and not declines in home prices. In the absence of financial instability, monetary policy should be effective in countering the effects of a burst bubble. Many have learned the wrong lesson from the Japanese experience. The problem in Japan was not so much the bursting of the bubble but rather the policies that followed. The problems in Japan's banking sector were not resolved, so they continued to get worse well after the bubble had burst. In addition, with the benefit of hindsight, it seems clear that the Bank of Japan did not ease monetary policy sufficiently or rapidly enough in the aftermath of the crisis. A lesson that I draw from Japan's experience is that the serious mistake for a central bank that is confronting a bubble is not failing to stop it but rather failing to respond fast enough after it has burst. Deflation in Japan might never have set in had the Bank of Japan responded more rapidly after the asset price crash, which was substantially weakening demand in the economy. If deflation had not gotten started, Japan would not have experienced what has been referred to by economist Irving Fisher as debt deflation, in which the deflation increased the real indebtedness of business firms, which in turn further weakened the balance sheets of the financial sector. Another lesson from Japan is that if a burst bubble harms the balance sheets of the financial sector, the government needs to take immediate steps to restore the health of the financial system. This should involve structural improvements in the way banks operate, not bailing out insolvent institutions. The prolonged problems in the banking sector are a key reason that the Japanese economy did so poorly after the bubble burst. A third assumption needed to justify a special focus on asset prices in the conduct of monetary policy is that a central bank actually knows the appropriate monetary policy to deflate a bubble. The effect of interest rates on asset price bubbles is highly uncertain. Although some theoretical models suggest that raising interest rates can diminish the acceleration of asset prices, others suggest that raising interest rates may cause a bubble to burst more severely, thus doing even more damage to the economy. An illustration of the difficulty of knowing the appropriate response to a possible bubble was provided when the Federal Reserve tightened monetary policy before the October 1929 stock market crash because of its concerns about a possible stock market bubble. With hindsight, economists have viewed this monetary policy tightening as a mistake. Given the uncertainty about the effect of interest rates on bubbles, raising rates to deflate a bubble may do more harm than good. Furthermore, altering the trajectory of interest rates from the path predicted to have the most desirable outcomes for inflation and employment over the foreseeable horizon has the obvious cost of producing deviations from these desirable outcomes. Because I doubt that any of the three assumptions needed to justify a special monetary policy focus on asset prices holds up, I am in the camp of those who argue that monetary policy makers should restrict their efforts to achieving their dual mandate of stabilizing inflation and employment and should not alter policy to have preemptive effects on asset prices. A central bank that focuses intently on asset prices looks as if it is trying to control too many elements of the economy. Part of the recent successes of central banks throughout the world has been that they have narrowed their focus and have more actively communicated what they can and cannot do. Specifically, central banks have argued that they are less capable of controlling real economic trends in the long run and should therefore focus more on price stability and damping short-term economic fluctuations. By narrowing their focus, central banks in recent years have been able to increase public support for their independence. A central bank that expanded its focus to asset prices could potentially weaken its public support and may even cause the public to worry that it is too powerful and has undue influence over all aspects of the economy. Too much focus on asset prices might also weaken support for a central bank by leading to public confusion about its objectives. When my co-author and I conducted our evaluation of monetary policy in Sweden, I directly observed this problem. I heard over and over again in interviews with participants from different sectors of Swedish society that the statements about house prices by the Riksbank confused the public about what it was trying to achieve. My discussion so far indicates that central banks should not put a special emphasis on prices of houses or other assets in the conduct of monetary policy. This does not mean that central banks should stand by idly when such prices climb steeply. Rather my analysis suggests that central banks can take steps to make it less likely that sharp movements in asset prices will have serious negative consequences for the economy. Instead of trying to preemptively deal with the bubble--which I have argued is almost impossible to do--a central bank can minimize financial instability by being ready to react quickly to an asset price collapse if it occurs. One way a central bank can prepare itself to react quickly is to explore different scenarios to assess how it should respond to an asset price collapse. This is something that we do at the Federal Reserve. Indeed, examinations of different scenarios can be thought of as stress tests similar to the ones that commercial financial institutions and banking supervisors conduct all the time. They see how financial institutions will be affected by particular scenarios and then propose plans to ensure that the banks can withstand the negative effects. By conducting similar exercises, in this case for monetary policy, a central bank can minimize the damage from a collapse of an asset price bubble without having to judge that a bubble is in progress or predict that it will burst in the near future. Another way that a central bank with bank supervisory authority can respond to possible bubbles is through prudential supervision of the financial system. If elevated asset prices might be leading to excessive risk-taking on the part of financial institutions, the central bank, as in the case of the United States, can ask financial institutions if they have the appropriate practices to ensure that they are not taking on too much risk. Working through supervisory channels has the advantage not only of helping make financial institutions better able to cope with possible asset price declines but possibly also of indirectly restraining extreme asset prices if they have been stimulated by excessive bank financing. Also, reminding institutions to maintain risk-management practices appropriate to the economic and financial environment could potentially help lessen a buildup of excessive asset prices in the first place. Even if the central bank is not involved in the prudential supervision directly, it can still play a role through public communication, particularly if it has a vehicle like the financial stability reports that some central banks publish. In these reports, central banks can evaluate whether rises in asset prices might be leading to excessive risk-taking on the part of financial institutions or whether distortions from inappropriate tax or regulatory policy may be stimulating excessive valuations of assets. If this appears to be happening, the central bank's discussion might encourage policy adjustment to remove the distortions or encourage prudential regulators and supervisors to more closely monitor the financial institutions they supervise. Large run-ups in prices of assets such as houses present serious challenges to central bankers. I have argued that central banks should not give a special role to house prices in the conduct of monetary policy but should respond to them only to the extent that they have foreseeable effects on inflation and employment. Nevertheless, central banks can take measures to prepare for possible sharp reversals in the prices of homes or other assets to ensure that they will not do serious harm to the economy. Footnotes 1.House prices are measured with the repeat-transaction price index of the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight.Return to text 2.William R. White (2004), "Making Macroprudential Concerns Operational," speech delivered at the Financial Stability Symposium sponsored by the Netherlands Bank, Amsterdam, October 25-26 (www.bis.org/speeches/sp041026.htm).Return to text 3.Francesco Giavazzi and Frederic S. Mishkin (2006), "An Evaluation of Swedish Monetary Policy between 1995 and 2005" report published by the Riksdag (Swedish parliament) Committee on Finance; refer to Sveriges Riksbank (2006), "Assessment of Monetary Policy," press release, November 28,www.riksbank.com/templates/Page.aspx?id=23320.Return to text 4.Sveriges Riksbank (2006). "Repo Rate Raised by 0.25 Percentage Points," press release, February 23,www.riksbank.com/templates/Page.aspx?id=20502.Return to text 5.Frederic S. Mishkin and Eugene N. White (2002), "U.S. Stock Market Crashes and Their Aftermath: Implications for Monetary Policy," NBER Working Paper Series 8992. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June; also in William Curt Hunter, George G. Kaufman, and Michael Pomerleano, eds., Asset Price Bubbles: The Implications for Monetary, Regulatory, and International Policies. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 53-80.Return to text
David FettigFSPC Spokesman[email protected](612) 204-5274 Minneapolis, Minn., January 16, 2007--The Federal Reserve Banks today announced plans to conduct another round of studies to determine the current composition of the nation’s retail payments market, including checks, credit and debit cards, and automated clearing house (ACH) transactions. These two studies will build on information gained from similar studies published by the Reserve Banks in 2001 and 2004. “As the nation continues its migration from paper-based to electronic payments, we believe these studies will provide additional insight to help industry participants plan for the future,” said Richard Oliver, an executive vice president with the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and the Federal Reserve System’s product manager for retail payments. One study will quantify the number and value of checks being written in the United States. Another study will quantify the number and value of electronic payments. In addition, the check study will attempt to determine the primary uses for check writing, something that was researched in the 2001 study but not in 2004. The information for this round of studies will be collected during the first half of 2007 with results released later in the year. The Reserve Banks will work with Global Concepts, Inc. for the check study and Dove Consulting for the electronic payments study. Both firms have experience with previous Federal Reserve studies. The previous studies conducted in 2001 and 2004 captured the dramatic shift in payments away from paper-based checks and toward electronic payments, such as debit cards, credit cards and ACH transactions. According to research in 2001, the number of checks paid exceeded the number of electronic transactions, 41.9 billion to 30.6 billion. By 2004, the number of electronic transactions exceeded checks paid, 44.5 billion to 36.7 billion. These changes represent a 4.3 percent annual decline in checks paid and a 13.2 percent annual increase in electronic transactions over the period 2001-2004. “From our previous studies, we were able to provide very valuable information on the nation’s payments system for financial institutions and industry participants to use,” Oliver said. “We believe these studies are helping institutions make better-informed decisions about future investments in their payments technology. Therefore, we’re encouraging financial institutions and other providers of payment services to participate in these studies in order to help achieve robust and accurate estimates of payments usage in the United States.” More information about Federal Reserve Financial Services can be found athttp://www.frbservices.org/. * * * The Financial Services Policy Committee (FSPC) is responsible for the overall direction of financial services and related support functions for the Federal Reserve Banks, as well as for providing Federal Reserve leadership in dealing with the evolving U.S. payments system. The FSPC is composed of three Reserve Bank presidents and two Reserve Bank first vice presidents.
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 percent. Recent indicators have suggested somewhat firmer economic growth, and some tentative signs of stabilization have appeared in the housing market. Overall, the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace over coming quarters. Readings on core inflation have improved modestly in recent months, and inflation pressures seem likely to moderate over time. However, the high level of resource utilization has the potential to sustain inflation pressures. The Committee judges that some inflation risks remain. The extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to address these risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Susan S. Bies; Thomas M. Hoenig; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Cathy E. Minehan; Frederic S. Mishkin; Michael H. Moskow; William Poole; and Kevin M. Warsh.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the launch of a new website for bank directors and the update of an existing online director training course. Resources for Bank Directors(http://www.kansascityfed.org/bankdirect/) offers numerous resources designed to assist bank directors with their management oversight responsibilities. It was developed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Information available through the site includes: Insights(http://www.stlouisfed.org/col/director/agenda.htm) is an online training course developed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and supported by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. It introduces bank directors to corporate governance and director duties and responsibilities; covers basic bank financial analysis; and discusses the sources, control, and monitoring of portfolio risks, including credit, liquidity, and market risks. The course includes exercises and examples to reinforce points made in the study text. Additionally, it provides links to Internet sites that directors might find useful. Questions and comments regardingResources for Bank DirectorsorInsightsshould be directed to Timothy Todd at (816) 881-2308.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. Senate Chairman Conrad, Senator Gregg, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here to offer my views on the federal budget and related issues. At the outset, I should underscore that I speak only for myself and not necessarily for my colleagues at the Federal Reserve. As you know, the deficit in the unified federal budget declined for a second year in fiscal year 2006, falling to $248 billion from $319 billion in fiscal 2005. As was the case in the preceding year, the improvement in 2006 was primarily the result of solid growth in tax receipts, especially in collections of personal and corporate income taxes. Federal government outlays in fiscal 2006 were 20.3 percent of nominal gross domestic product (GDP), receipts were 18.4 percent of GDP, and the deficit (equal to the difference of the two) was 1.9 percent of GDP. These percentages are close to their averages since 1960. The on-budget deficit, which differs from the unified budget deficit primarily in excluding receipts and payments of the Social Security system, was $434 billion, or 3.3 percent of GDP, in fiscal 2006.1As of the end of fiscal 2006, federal government debt held by the public, which includes holdings by the Federal Reserve but excludes those by the Social Security and other trust funds, amounted to about 37 percent of one year's GDP. Official projections suggest that the unified budget deficit may stabilize or moderate further over the next few years. Unfortunately, we are experiencing what seems likely to be the calm before the storm. In particular, spending on entitlement programs will begin to climb quickly during the next decade. In fiscal 2006, federal spending for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid together totaled about 40 percent of federal expenditures, or roughly 8-1/2 percent of GDP.2In the most recent long-term projections prepared by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), these outlays are projected to increase to 10-1/2 percent of GDP by 2015, an increase of about 2 percentage points of GDP in less than a decade. By 2030, according to the CBO, they will reach about 15 percent of GDP.3As I will discuss, these rising entitlement obligations will put enormous pressure on the federal budget in coming years. The large projected increases in future entitlement spending have two principal sources. First, like many other industrial countries, the United States has entered what is likely to be a long period of demographic transition, the result both of the reduction in fertility that followed the post-World War II baby boom and of ongoing increases in life expectancy. Longer life expectancies are certainly to be welcomed. But they are likely to lead to longer periods of retirement in the future, even as the growth rate of the workforce declines. As a consequence of the demographic trends, the number of people of retirement age will grow relative both to the population as a whole and to the number of potential workers. Currently, people 65 years and older make up about 12 percent of the U.S. population, and there are about five people between the ages of 20 and 64 for each person 65 and older. According to the intermediate projections of the Social Security Trustees, in 2030 Americans 65 and older will constitute about 19 percent of the U.S. population, and the ratio of those between the ages of 20 and 64 to those 65 and older will have fallen to about 3. Although the retirement of the baby boomers will be an important milestone in the demographic transition--the oldest baby boomers will be eligible for Social Security benefits starting next year--the change in the nation's demographic structure is not just a temporary phenomenon related to the large relative size of the baby-boom generation. Rather, if the U.S. fertility rate remains close to current levels and life expectancies continue to rise, as demographers generally expect, the U.S. population will continue to grow older, even after the baby-boom generation has passed from the scene. If current law is maintained, that aging of the U.S. population will lead to sustained increases in federal entitlement spending on programs that benefit older Americans, such as Social Security and Medicare. The second cause of rising entitlement spending is the expected continued increase in medical costs per beneficiary. Projections of future medical costs are fraught with uncertainty, but history suggests that--without significant changes in policy--these costs are likely to continue to rise more quickly than incomes, at least for the foreseeable future. Together with the aging of the population, ongoing increases in medical costs will lead to a rapid expansion of Medicare and Medicaid expenditures. Long-range projections prepared by the CBO vividly portray the potential effects on the budget of an aging population and rapidly rising health care costs. The CBO has developed projections for a variety of alternative scenarios, based on different assumptions about the evolution of spending and taxes. The scenarios produce a wide range of possible budget outcomes, reflecting the substantial uncertainty that attends long-range budget projections.4However, the outcomes that appear most likely, in the absence of policy changes, involve rising budget deficits and increases in the amount of federal debt outstanding to unprecedented levels. For example, one plausible scenario is based on the assumptions that (1) federal retirement and health spending will follow the CBO's intermediate projection; (2) defense spending will drift down over time as a percentage of GDP; (3) other non-interest spending will grow roughly in line with GDP; and (4) federal revenues will remain close to their historical share of GDP--that is, about where they are today.5Under these assumptions, the CBO calculates that, by 2030, the federal budget deficit will approach 9 percent of GDP--more than four times greater as a share of GDP than the deficit in fiscal year 2006. A particularly worrisome aspect of this projection and similar ones is the implied evolution of the national debt and the associated interest payments to government bondholders. Minor details aside, the federal debt held by the public increases each year by the amount of that year's unified deficit. Consequently, scenarios that project large deficits also project rapid growth in the outstanding government debt. The higher levels of debt in turn imply increased expenditures on interest payments to bondholders, which exacerbate the deficit problem still further. Thus, a vicious cycle may develop in which large deficits lead to rapid growth in debt and interest payments, which in turn adds to subsequent deficits. According to the CBO projection that I have been discussing, interest payments on the government's debt will reach 4-1/2 percent of GDP in 2030, nearly three times their current size relative to national output. Under this scenario, the ratio of federal debt held by the public to GDP would climb from 37 percent currently to roughly 100 percent in 2030 and would continue to grow exponentially after that. The only time in U.S. history that the debt-to-GDP ratio has been in the neighborhood of 100 percent was during World War II. People at that time understood the situation to be temporary and expected deficits and the debt-to-GDP ratio to fall rapidly after the war, as in fact they did. In contrast, under the scenario I have been discussing, the debt-to-GDP ratio would rise far into the future at an accelerating rate. Ultimately, this expansion of debt would spark a fiscal crisis, which could be addressed only by very sharp spending cuts or tax increases, or both.6 The CBO projections, by design, ignore the adverse effects that such high deficits would likely have on economic growth. But if government debt and deficits were actually to grow at the pace envisioned by the CBO's scenario, the effects on the U.S. economy would be severe. High rates of government borrowing would drain funds away from private capital formation and thus slow the growth of real incomes and living standards over time. Some fraction of the additional debt would likely be financed abroad, which would lessen the negative influence on domestic investment; however, the necessity of paying interest on the foreign-held debt would leave a smaller portion of our nation's future output available for domestic consumption. Moreover, uncertainty about the ultimate resolution of the fiscal imbalances would reduce the confidence of consumers, businesses, and investors in the U.S. economy, with adverse implications for investment and growth. To some extent, strong economic growth can help to mitigate budgetary pressures, and all else being equal, fiscal policies that are supportive of growth would be beneficial. Unfortunately, economic growth alone is unlikely to solve the nation's impending fiscal problems. Economic growth leads to higher wages and profits and thus increases tax receipts, but higher wages also imply increased Social Security benefits, as those benefits are tied to wages. Higher incomes also tend to increase the demand for medical services so that, indirectly, higher incomes may also increase federal health expenditures. Increased rates of immigration could raise growth by raising the growth rate of the labor force. However, economists who have looked at the issue have found that even a doubling in the rate of immigration to the United States, from about 1 million to 2 million immigrants per year, would not significantly reduce the federal government's fiscal imbalance.7 The prospect of growing fiscal imbalances and their economic consequences also raises essential questions of intergenerational fairness.8As I have noted, because of increasing life expectancy and the decline in fertility, the number of retirees that each worker will have to support in the future--either directly or indirectly through taxes paid to support government programs--will rise significantly. To the extent that federal budgetary policies inhibit capital formation and increase our net liabilities to foreigners, future generations of Americans will bear a growing burden of the debt and experience slower growth in per-capita incomes than would otherwise have been the case. An important element in ensuring that we leave behind a stronger economy than we inherited, as did virtually all previous generations in this country, will be to move over time toward fiscal policies that are sustainable, efficient, and equitable across generations. Policies that promote private as well as public saving would also help us leave a more productive economy to our children and grandchildren. In addition, we should explore ways to make the labor market as accommodating as possible to older people who wish to continue working, as many will as longevity increases and health improves. Addressing the country's fiscal problems will take persistence and a willingness to make difficult choices. In the end, the fundamental decision that the Congress, the Administration, and the American people must confront is how large a share of the nation's economic resources to devote to federal government programs, including transfer programs such as Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. Crucially, whatever size of government is chosen, tax rates must ultimately be set at a level sufficient to achieve an appropriate balance of spending and revenues in the long run. Thus, members of the Congress who put special emphasis on keeping tax rates low must accept that low tax rates can be sustained only if outlays, including those on entitlements, are kept low as well. Likewise, members who favor a more expansive role of the government, including relatively more-generous benefits payments, must recognize the burden imposed by the additional taxes needed to pay for the higher spending, a burden that includes not only the resources transferred from the private sector but also any adverse economic incentives associated with higher tax rates. Achieving fiscal sustainability will require sustained efforts and attention over many years. As an aid in charting the way forward, the Congress may find it useful to set some benchmarks against which to gauge progress toward key budgetary objectives. Because no single statistic fully describes the fiscal situation, the most effective approach would likely involve monitoring a number of fiscal indicators, each of which captures a different aspect of the budget and its economic impact. The unified budget deficit, projected forward a certain number of years, is an important measure that is already included in the congressional budgeting process. However, the unified budget deficit does not fully capture the fiscal situation and its effect on the economy, for at least two reasons. First, the budget deficit by itself does not measure the quantity of resources that the government is taking from the private sector. An economy in which the government budget is balanced but in which government spending equals 20 percent of GDP is very different from one in which the government's budget is balanced but its spending is 40 percent of GDP, as the latter economy has both higher tax rates and a greater role for the government. Monitoring current and prospective levels of total government outlays relative to GDP or a similar indicator would help the Congress ensure that the overall size of the government relative to the economy is consistent with members' views and preferences. Second, the annual budget deficit reflects only near-term financing needs and does not capture long-term fiscal imbalances. As the most difficult long-term budgetary issues are associated with the growth of entitlement spending, a comprehensive approach to budgeting would include close attention to measures of the long-term solvency of entitlement programs, such as long-horizon present values of unfunded liabilities for Social Security and Medicare. To summarize, because of demographic changes and rising medical costs, federal expenditures for entitlement programs are projected to rise sharply over the next few decades. Dealing with the resulting fiscal strains will pose difficult choices for the Congress, the Administration, and the American people. However, if early and meaningful action is not taken, the U.S. economy could be seriously weakened, with future generations bearing much of the cost. The decisions the Congress will face will not be easy or simple, but the benefits of placing the budget on a path that is both sustainable and meets the nation's long-run needs would be substantial. Thank you again for allowing me to comment on these important issues. I would be glad to take your questions. Footnotes 1.Excluding the operations of both Social Security and Medicare Part A, the budget deficit in fiscal year 2006 was $459 billion, or 3.5 percent of GDP. Like Social Security, Medicare Part A pays benefits out of, and receives a dedicated stream of revenues into, a trust fund.Return to text 2.Net of Medicare premiums paid by beneficiaries and amounts paid by states from savings on Medicaid prescription drug costs, these outlays were equal to 8 percent of GDP.Return to text 3.These projections are for the CBO's intermediate spending path. Consistent with the assumptions used by the Medicare trustees, this path is based on the assumption that, over the long run, per beneficiary health expenditures will increase at a rate that is 1 percentage point per year greater than the growth rate of per capita GDP. Over the past twenty-five years, however, per beneficiary Medicare spending has actually exceeded per capita GDP growth by about 2-1/2 percentage points per year. Thus, a significant slowing in the growth of medical costs per beneficiary will be needed to keep expenditures close to those projected in the CBO's intermediate-spending scenario. See Congressional Budget Office (2005),The Long-Term Budget Outlook, December,http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/69xx/doc6982/12-15-LongTermOutlook.pdf.Return to text 4.For example, in 2030, five of the six scenarios imply deficits ranging from 1-1/2 percent of GDP to nearly 14 percent of GDP; a sixth scenario is capable of producing a surplus, but it relies on the confluence of a very favorable set of assumptions.Return to text 5.CBO (2005),The Long-Term Budget Outlook, pp. 5-13 and 48-49.Return to text 6.To give a sense of the magnitudes involved, suppose--for the sake of illustration only--that the deficit projected for 2030 in the CBO scenario were to be eliminated entirely in that year, half through reductions in discretionary spending and half through increases in non-payroll taxes. (Of course, in reality the fiscal adjustment would likely not occur in one year, but this hypothetical example is useful for showing the magnitude of the problem.) This fiscal adjustment would involve a cut in discretionary spending (including defense) of nearly 80 percent (relative to its baseline level) and a rise in non-payroll taxes of more than 35 percent. The need for such painful measures could be diminished by beginning the process of fiscal adjustment much earlier, thereby avoiding some of the buildup in outstanding debt and the associated interest burden.Return to text 7.CBO (2005),The Long-Term Budget Outlook, p. 3.Return to text 8.I discussed this issue in Ben S. Bernanke (2006), "The Coming Demographic Transition: Will We Treat Future Generations Fairly?", speech delivered before the Washington Economic Club, Washington, October 4,http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20061004a.htm.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from November 6 through December 11, 2006. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 12, 2006. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The summary description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's web site atwww.federalreserve.gov/fomc.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Pacific Mercantile Bank, Costa Mesa, California, a state member bank. Pacific Mercantile Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board’s Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires Pacific Mercantile Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $6,850, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced that the Federal Reserve Banks distributed approximately $28.547 billion of their $37.838 billion total income to the U.S. Treasury during 2006. Federal Reserve System income is derived primarily from interest earned on U.S. government securities that the Federal Reserve has acquired through open market operations. This income amounted to $36.452 billion in 2006. Additionally, income from fees for the provision of priced services to depository institutions totaled $909 million. The remaining income of $477 million includes earnings on foreign currencies, earnings from loans, and other income. The operating expenses of the twelve Reserve Banks totaled $2.420 billion in 2006. In addition, the cost of earnings credits granted to depository institutions amounted to $277 million. Assessments against Reserve Banks for Board expenditures totaled $301 million and the cost of currency amounted to $492 million. Net deductions to income amounted to $159 million, primarily representing interest expense on securities sold under agreements to repurchase, which is offset, in part, by unrealized gains on assets denominated in foreign currencies that are revalued to reflect current market exchange rates. Total net income for the Federal Reserve Banks in 2006 amounted to $34.189 billion. Under the Board's policy, each Reserve Bank's net income is transferred to the U.S. Treasury, after providing for statutory dividends to member banks and the amount necessary to equate surplus to paid-in capital. In 2006, statutory dividends amounted to $871 million. The implementation of Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 158, Employers' Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans, required a reduction to surplus of $2.347 billion. As a result, the amount required to equate surplus to paid-in capital totaled $4.771 billion.
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Atlanta Rotary Club, Atlanta, Georgia Thank you for inviting me to fill in for Jack Guynn today to discuss the economic outlook for the new year. Those are big shoes to fill. Jack played a prominent and constructive role in the Federal Reserve System, as I know he did in the Atlanta community, bringing his vast experience and uncommonly good sense to bear on a wide variety of important policy issues. As we enter 2007, the current economic expansion is now more than five years old. Although it got off to a slow start, the expansion was quite strong from mid-2003 through mid-2006. Over that period, a good deal of the slack in our nation's utilization of resources was taken up, and the unemployment rate reached its lowest level in five years. At the same time, however, core inflation--that is, inflation without potentially volatile food and energy prices--as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures, moved up from less than 1-1/2 percent to about 2-1/2 percent. To safeguard the gains made over the past quarter century in the achievement of price stability and to promote sustained economic expansion, the Federal Reserve in mid-2004 began removing the considerable monetary accommodation it had earlier put in place. More recently, led by a sharp pullback in housing activity, economic activity decelerated in the second half of 2006 to a pace that was probably a bit below the long-term rate of growth in our nation's productive capacity. At the same time, decreases in energy prices have substantially reduced overall consumer price inflation of late, and core inflation has showed signs of slowing. My expectations for 2007 quite naturally rest on an assessment of how recent trends are likely to play themselves out. How long will the decline in housing activity hold back overall economic growth? What about spillovers from housing to other sectors? What are we to make of the recent weakness in manufacturing activity? Will the recent good news on inflation persist? Before venturing some guesses on these questions, I need to issue two caveats. First, events will probably unfold differently than currently seems likely, and the range of uncertainty around any forecast is considerable. That uncertainty does not, however, diminish the value of having and discussing an outlook. Monetary policy must be based on our best estimate of future developments, and the effectiveness of policy is aided when the public understands the outlook of policymakers. But the uncertainty does underscore the value of monitoring the incoming information closely, as we always do, and of being prepared to adjust our expectations accordingly. Second, the views that I will express today are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1 Economic ActivityThe deceleration in economic activity in the second half of 2006 was concentrated in the housing and motor vehicle sectors and in the production of related materials and supplies. The slowing of activity has been most acutely felt in the real estate market, where the sales of new and existing homes contracted sharply beginning in the fall of 2005. Residential construction has slowed dramatically as well. As of November, single-family housing starts had fallen about 30 percent from their peak in January 2006. Tentative signs have begun to emerge that the housing market may be stabilizing. Home sales appear to have flattened out since midyear, mortgage applications have been increasing, and consumers' perceptions of homebuying conditions, as reported in the Michigan survey, have improved. Nonetheless, even if the demand for housing is leveling off, housing activity may not yet have found a floor, given the sizable overhang of unsold houses. Uncertainty about where we stand in the housing cycle remains considerable. In part, that is because this housing downturn has differed from some of those in the past in important ways. It was not triggered by a restrictive monetary policy and high interest rates; indeed, relatively low intermediate and long-term interest rates are helping to support the stabilization of this sector. But the current contraction in housing did follow an unusually large run-up in sales and construction and, even more so, in prices relative to the returns on other financial and real assets. Our uncertainty about what pushed home prices and sales to those elevated levels raises questions about how the market will adjust now that expectations of the rate of house price appreciation are being trimmed. And changes in the organization of the construction industry, with activity more concentrated in the hands of large, publicly traded corporations, may also affect the dynamics of prices and activity in response to the inventory overhang. In my own judgment, housing starts may be not very far from their trough, but the risks around this outlook still are largely to the downside. Although house prices nationally have decelerated noticeably and appear to have fallen in some markets, they are still high relative to rents and interest rates. Building permits decreased substantially again in November, and inventories of unsold homes have only started to edge lower. We also do not know whether the possible stabilization that seems to be taking hold would be immune to a rise in longer-term interest rates should term premiums increase or the federal funds rate fail to follow the downward path currently built into market expectations. Even if starts stabilize at close to current levels, those levels are sufficiently low that overall construction activity would remain a negative for the growth of economic activity in the first half of this year. While the downturn in housing was steepening during the third and fourth quarters, domestic producers of cars and light trucks slashed output in an effort to reduce their elevated inventories, particularly of light trucks (minivans, SUVs, and pickups). In October, light motor vehicles were assembled at the slowest pace in more than eight years. However, production rebounded in the final two months of the year, and, with inventories having come down from their highs last summer, available monthly schedules suggest that vehicle manufacturers anticipate maintaining the pace of assemblies during the first quarter at about the average rate in November and December. Thus, with sales reasonably well maintained through December, the drag from this sector's inventory correction should be ending. Although much of the weakness in industrial production toward the end of 2006 can be readily traced to the housing and motor vehicle sectors, production in other manufacturing industries also softened from September through November, and this development raised concerns that the deceleration in economic activity was becoming more broadly based. Some of the industries reporting lower output late last year included those that produce intermediate goods for the housing and motor vehicle sectors, but others have only tenuous links to those two sectors. Evidently, other industries have experienced a small buildup of inventories, prompting production adjustments. These inventory and production developments may reflect in part a slowing in the growth of business capital spending that has become evident in recent data on orders and shipments of equipment other than high-tech and transportation equipment. In my view, however, what we are seeing in the recent information on factory output and capital spending is not the leading edge of general economic weakness but instead an adjustment to a sustained pace of expansion that, necessarily, is less rapid than that from mid-2003 to mid-2006. A number of indicators continue to suggest that economic activity outside the housing and motor vehicle sectors is likely to post continuing healthy gains over coming quarters. Although several regional manufacturing surveys have suggested that the weakness in factory production extended into December, the national purchasing managers' survey rose a notch last month. Prices of many industrial commodities are typically sensitive to developments in the manufacturing sector, and these prices generally remain firm, as is consistent with sustained demand here and abroad. More broadly, last Friday's employment report suggested no signs of cumulating weakness either in manufacturing or private service-producing industries. New job creation has remained relatively brisk in recent months; over the fourth quarter, private businesses added an average of 119,000 jobs to payrolls each month--only a little below the pace of hiring earlier in the year. And the unemployment rate remained in the neighborhood of 4-1/2 percent. On the whole, businesses seem to be reasonably upbeat. The Reserve Bank Districts, including Atlanta, report that most firms are anticipating good gains in sales over the coming year. The semiannual economic forecast of the Institute for Supply Management, released in mid-December, was optimistic--perhaps surprisingly so in light of the recent slowdown in industrial activity. Respondents indicated that capital spending in 2007 would increase at a robust pace similar to that for all of 2006. That businesses are beginning the year with a positive outlook is not surprising: Profits have been high, encouraging business expansion, and external funding for capital projects remains readily available on favorable terms. And as I noted, firms in their hiring decisions seem to be acting on plans to increase output. Most importantly, the data we have in hand suggest that consumer demand for nonhousing goods and services has been well maintained. The retail sales report for November was strong across the board, and surveys of consumer confidence show that, in the final months of 2006, households' views about business conditions and about their financial situations improved noticeably. Spending and attitudes have been supported over recent months in part by solid gains in household income and employment. One caution is that some of the recent buoyancy in household attitudes and strength in consumer demand also may reflect the unwinding of earlier increases in gasoline prices, in which case part of the strong gain in spending in recent months may be transitory. Another cautionary note is that the strength in consumer spending throughout 2006 received a considerable boost from the earlier rise in household wealth. In the wake of the current slowdown in house price gains, I expect that, over time, households will find it necessary to build their net worth by holding back on consumption, and thus, consumer spending will rise a little less rapidly than income for a while. I do not anticipate that the gap between the growth rates in consumption and income will be large, however, and I believe that the recent data on consumer spending provide some very tentative evidence that the cooling of the housing market will have a limited effect on other forms of spending. Ongoing gains in household consumption and in business capital spending to meet that expected demand and to take advantage of the cost-saving benefits of new technology form the foundation for a moderate pace of economic activity going forward. Continued solid economic expansion among our major trading partners should also provide support to production here at home. To be sure, as I already noted, a low level of housing starts and production adjustments in some manufacturing industries will remain a drag on growth in output in the near term, but these effects will wane during the first half of 2007 as excess inventories are worked off. When this process is completed, the rate of economic growth should pick up to something in the neighborhood of the growth rate of the economy's potential. InflationI believe that a path for output like the one that I have just described is likely to be associated with a gradual decline in core inflation from the elevated levels of last spring and summer. Importantly, measures of long-term inflation expectations are no higher than they were before the rise in core inflation. In addition, some of that earlier price acceleration probably resulted from the pass-through of sharp increases in energy prices in the first half of the year that have been partly reversed; increases in rents and imputed rents for owner-occupied housing may ease back as a portion of the oversupply of homes for sale is shifted into the rental market; and a period of below-trend economic growth should relieve some pressures on labor and product markets. Certainly, the recent data on consumer prices have been encouragingly consistent with the downward tilt to inflation that the FOMC has been expecting. However, we need to be cautious about extrapolating trends from a couple of months of data. The data themselves are noisy--subject to month-to-month variations that are unrelated to more-persistent developments. And we need to recognize that some of the very recent disinflation may represent one-time influences. Energy costs have moved down markedly in recent months, and those declines have fed through to prices for a number of intermediate goods and probably for some final goods as well. But futures markets anticipate that prices of crude oil will increase gradually, which suggests that, once the adjustment to the current level plays out, energy prices will no longer work to restrain total and core inflation. And if a portion of the weakness in goods prices reflects efforts by producers to forestall or correct inventory imbalances, that restraint on pricing will dissipate as firms' corrective actions take effect. So, despite the recent favorable price data, I believe it is still too early to relax our concerns about whether the run-up in price pressures in the spring and summer of last year is truly unwinding and whether it is unwinding rapidly enough to forestall a pickup in inflation expectations. Even with the opening of some slack in the manufacturing sector and in homebuilding, labor markets generally seem to have stayed fairly tight, with the unemployment rate at only 4-1/2 percent. Although recent data indicate that labor costs were not rising as rapidly in 2006 as first estimated, labor compensation does appear to have increased more quickly over 2006 than over 2005. Last year's increase in compensation also appears to have outpaced overall consumer price inflation. That development in and of itself does not necessarily indicate an increase in inflationary pressures, especially if it represents a process in which real compensation begins to catch up with the rapid increases in labor productivity earlier this decade. What would be problematic would be a pickup in the growth of nominal hourly labor compensation that was passed through to prices over the next several quarters, or one that was not matched, over a sustained period, by a comparable pickup in the growth of productivity. Eventually, the resulting faster growth of unit labor costs would pose a serious threat to price stability. Core inflation is still higher than it was just a year ago, and, as I noted, some of the very recent decline may result from one-time changes in relative prices rather than an easing in underlying inflation pressures. A very gradual decline in the trend rate of inflation continues to be the most likely outcome, but that path is still by no means assured, and in my judgment such a decline remains critically important to the sustained prosperity of the U.S. economy. In sum, conditions appear to be in place for a good year for the U.S. economy, one marked by growth that is moderate and sustainable and by inflation that will be lower than last year's. The economy appears to be weathering the downturn in housing with limited collateral effects, and inflation appears to be easing with the aid of lower energy prices, well-anchored inflation expectations, and competitive labor and product markets. I am a central banker to my core, so I know that somewhere, somehow, something will go wrong, but you will have to rely on the new president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta to explain to you next January just what happened and what the implications are for 2008. Footnotes 1.John Stevens and Joyce Zickler, of the Board's staff, contributed to these remarks.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board and the New York State Banking Department on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation, Tokyo, Japan; the bank’s branch in New York, New York; the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; and the New York State Banking Department. The Written Agreement addresses Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money laundering compliance policies and practices at the Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation’s New York branch. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.