The federal financial regulatory agencies issued final rules today that provide consumers with an opportunity to "opt out" before a financial institution uses information provided by an affiliated company to market its products and services to the consumer. The final rules on affiliate marketing implement section 214 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003, which amends the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). The final rules generally prohibit a financial institution from using certain information received from an affiliate to make a solicitation to a consumer unless the consumer is given notice and a reasonable opportunity to opt out of such solicitations, and the consumer does not opt out. The final rules apply to information obtained from the consumer’s transactions or account relationships with an affiliate, any application the consumer submitted to an affiliate, and third-party sources, such as credit reports, if the information is to be used to send marketing solicitations. Nothing in the final rules supersedes or amends a consumer’s existing right to opt out of the sharing of non-transaction or experience information under section 603(d) of the FCRA. The final rules also implement the statutory exceptions to the affiliate marketing notice and opt-out requirement. The appendix to the final rules contains model forms to facilitate compliance with the notice and opt-out requirement. The final rules, issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision, are attached. The final rules are effective on January 1, 2008. All covered entities must comply with the rules no later than October 1, 2008. Substantially similar rules will be issued separately by the Federal Trade Commission and the Securities and Exchange Commission. The Federal Register notice is attached. Federal Register Notice454 KB PDF|TEXT
Washington -- The federal financial institution regulatory agencies and the Federal Trade Commission have sent to the Federal Register for publication final rules on identity theft “red flags” and address discrepancies. The final rules implement sections 114 and 315 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003. According to a report of the President’s Identity Theft Task Force, identity theft (a fraud attempted or committed using identifying information of another person without authority), results in billions of dollars in losses each year to individuals and businesses. The final rules require each financial institution and creditor that holds any consumer account, or other account for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk of identity theft, to develop and implement an Identity Theft Prevention Program (Program) for combating identity theft in connection with new and existing accounts. The Program must include reasonable policies and procedures for detecting, preventing, and mitigating identity theft and enable a financial institution or creditor to: Identify relevant patterns, practices, and specific forms of activity that are “red flags” signaling possible identity theft and incorporate those red flags into theProgram; Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the Program; Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent and mitigate identity theft; and Ensure the Program is updated periodically to reflect changes in risks from identity theft. The agencies also issued guidelines to assist financial institutions and creditors in developing and implementing a Program, including a supplement that provides examples of red flags. The final rules also require credit and debit card issuers to develop policies and procedures to assess the validity of a request for a change of address that is followed closely by a request for an additional or replacement card. In addition, the final rules require users of consumer reports to develop reasonable policies and procedures to apply when they receive a notice of address discrepancy from a consumer reporting agency. The attached final rulemaking is issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Trade Commission, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision. The final rules are effective on January 1, 2008. Covered financial institutions and creditors must comply with the rules by November 1, 2008. The final rules are attached and will be published shortly. Federal Register Notice378 KB PDF|TEXT
The Department of the Treasury (Treasury) and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Board) on Monday announced the release of a joint proposed rule to implement the Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act (the Act). The Act prohibits gambling businesses from accepting payments in connection with unlawful Internet gambling, including payments made through credit cards, electronic funds transfers, and checks. The proposed rule would require U.S. financial firms that participate in designated payment systems to have policies and procedures that are reasonably designed to prevent payments being made to gambling businesses in connection with unlawful Internet gambling. The proposed rule would provide examples of such policies and procedures. For purposes of the proposed rule, unlawful Internet gambling generally would cover the making of a bet or wager that involves use of the Internet and that is unlawful under any applicable federal or state law in the jurisdiction where the bet or wager is made. The Board and Treasury are required by the Act to develop jointly the proposed rule in consultation with the Department of Justice. Comments on the proposed rule are requested by December 12, 2007. The agencies request comment on all aspects of the proposed rule. The Federal Register notice is attached. Federal Register Notice132 KB PDF|TEXT View comments
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its determination, after consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, that the acquisition, management, and operation in the United Kingdom by Citigroup Inc., New York, New York, of certain defined benefit pension plans established by unaffiliated third parties are activities that are financial in nature and permissible for Citigroup Inc., as a financial holding company, to engage in under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday approved the application by ICICI Bank Limited, Mumbai, India, to establish a federal branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Consumers need to keep five tips in mind for managing their checking accounts and safeguarding their funds from unauthorized transfers by criminals, according to a new Federal Reserve Board publication. Criminals may use a consumer's account information to create a demand draft (sometimes called a "remotely created check") drawn on the consumer's account, or to make an electronic transfer from the consumer's account. The publication, available on the Board's website, offers consumers advice on how to protect and manage their accounts: • Don't give your account number and bank routing information to anyone you don't know.• Review your monthly statement.• Notify your bank about any problems as soon as possible.• If you don't have enough money in your account, don't write the check or authorize the debit.• Know your rights under consumer protection laws. This information is available on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/checkingaccount/default.htm. A PDF (Portable Document Format) version is provided on the website so that consumer groups, financial institutions, and retailers can download and print copies for distribution to their clients and customers. Print copies of the publication are also available from Publications Services, Mail Stop 127, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC 20551.
The Federal Reserve Board announced Thursday that the Consumer Advisory Council will hold its next meeting on Thursday, October 25. The meeting will take place in Dining Room E, Terrace Level, in the Board’s Martin Building. The session will begin at 9:00 a.m. and is open to the public. Anyone planning to attend the meeting should, for security purposes, register no later than Tuesday, October 23, by completing the form found online at: https://www.federalreserve.gov/secure/forms/cacregistration.cfm. Additionally, attendees must present photo identification to enter the building. The Council’s function is to advise the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under various consumer financial services laws and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics: Reports by committees and other matters initiated by the Council members may also be discussed. The Board invites comments from the public on any of these matters. The Board’s notice is attached. Federal Register Notice49 KB PDF|TEXT
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Greater Philadelphia Chamber of Commerce 207th Annual Meeting, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania The economic picture has evolved rapidly over the past few months, and on September 18, the Federal Reserve eased monetary policy, cutting its target for the federal funds rate 1/2 percentage point. I thought it might be useful this morning to give you my take on why this action was necessary and my sense of what might lie ahead for the economy. I need to emphasize that these are my views and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1 A brief recap of where the economy has been will be helpful in understanding where we are now and where we might be headed. The economy has been growing at about a 2 percent pace since the middle of 2006 despite being held back by a weakening housing market. Job gains have averaged about 125,000 per month over the past year or so, and the unemployment rate has hovered around 4-1/2 percent, a fairly low rate historically for the U.S. economy. When the members of the Federal Reserve Board and the presidents of Federal Reserve Banks made their semi-annual economic projections this past July, most of us saw growth strengthening a little next year as the drag from the housing adjustment abated, with the unemployment rate perhaps drifting up just a little. Inflation had been buffeted by large swings in food and energy prices, but underlying inflation rates had edged down since the summer of 2006; on balance, we expected relatively low inflation ahead, although we were concerned that tight labor and product markets could lead to further price pressures. When the FOMC met in early August, this basic picture had not changed much. The housing sector had continued to weaken; indeed, with subprime mortgage markets increasingly impaired and problems becoming evident in some other segments of mortgage markets, the contraction in residential construction seemed likely to be even deeper than we had previously anticipated. And increased resistance on the part of investors to some of the terms on the loans and bonds that were backing leveraged buyouts was a sign that a rethinking of risk exposures might be spreading beyond mortgage markets. But output overall still appeared to be expanding at a moderate pace; jobs and incomes, although rising less rapidly than before, were still advancing reasonably well, supporting sustained expansion in household spending; and businesses had successfully worked off the overhang of inventories that had emerged at the end of 2006. In addition, strong demand from abroad was providing considerable support to our exports. The FOMC recognized that less accommodative conditions in some financial markets posed a threat to the strength of future economic growth. Nonetheless, our primary concern remained the upside risks to inflation. Shortly after the August FOMC meeting, however, financial market conditions deteriorated considerably further, following events that shook investor confidence, particularly in complex structured credit products. The disruptions to nonprime mortgage markets became more severe and problems even extended to high-quality loans, as rates for prime jumbo mortgages jumped after the secondary markets for them shut down. Importantly, the disruptions also spread beyond the mortgage markets. Most notably, investors' concerns about exposures to subprime mortgage credit risk caused them to shun commercial paper that might be backed by such assets, in both Europe and the United States. This aversion, in turn, meant that commercial banks that had written backup liquidity lines for commercial paper programs or had other connections with these programs might have to make good on their actual or implied support by extending credit. With leveraged buyout credit and some mortgage originations also possibly staying on the balance sheet unexpectedly, the banks faced substantial, but uncertain, calls on their liquidity and capital. All this uncertainty led the banks and other short-term lenders to turn very cautious; interest rates on bank deposits and other sources of credit beyond just a few days rose steeply, funding in money markets became concentrated in the very short term, and concerned and uncertain lenders generally became much less willing to extend the credit needed for liquid and efficient financial markets. Why the financial markets behaved as they have is a complex story that we will be sorting out for a while. For our purposes this morning, I will concentrate on the consequences for household and business borrowers and for the economy. In particular, I expect that the financial market turmoil of the past few months will leave an imprint on the cost and availability of credit to many household and business borrowers. The greatest effects have been on credit related to residential real estate; in addition to the problems with nonprime and jumbo first mortgages, second mortgages and home equity lines of credit that many households have been using to finance purchases of household durables and other consumer goods and services probably will become more expensive and less available as well. Banks are likely to be especially cautious about making new loans and financing commitments while substantial uncertainty about the quality of loans and the extent of demands from previous commitments persists. So it would not be surprising to see less-generous credit for a wide variety of loans to business and households. And, the rates for some loans are tied directly to elevated libor or other rates in term funding markets. More generally, credit will probably not be as easily available and as inexpensive for many borrowers as it was a few months ago, even after market functioning improves. In several segments of the financial markets, compensation for taking on risk had for some time seemed too low to be sustainable. In addition, more credit is likely to flow through banks, and leverage in the nonbank sectors of the financial markets will be lower. The higher levels of capital relative to assets should form the basis for a more stable system, but the spread of lending rates over the cost of funds will need to rise so that capital can earn a competitive rate of return. The deterioration in actual and expected financial market conditions between the August and September FOMC meetings changed our view of appropriate monetary policy. Whatever policy path previously seemed appropriate to support sustainable growth and price stability looked too high once credit conditions tightened substantially. Our policy easing was aimed at helping to offset the effects of those tighter credit conditions and thereby to encourage moderate economic growth over time. It was not intended to, nor should it, short circuit a more realistic pricing of risk and the gains and losses that the repricing will entail for market participants. Many people had expected the Federal Reserve to follow a gradual path of rate reductions in response to financial market developments--say, 25 basis points in September and another 25 basis points in October. Such a path would be in keeping with how we have often approached our policy choices, as it has the advantage of allowing us to calibrate our policy as we see how the economic situation is evolving and responding to earlier policy moves. However, given the circumstances at the time of the September FOMC meeting, there were strong arguments in favor of the larger action of a 50 basis point decrease in the federal funds rate. For one thing, it seemed that a decrease of that size could well be necessary to promote moderate growth. We had been holding the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 percent, well above the expected rate of inflation, in part to compensate for what had been very narrow yield spreads and readily available credit. We did not know how quickly markets would recover, the extent to which credit terms and standards would be tightened, or precisely how households and businesses would respond to recent or forthcoming financial developments. But, pending further evidence, a 50 basis point easing was not an unreasonable first approximation of what might be required to keep the economy on a sustainable growth path. In addition, I thought that economic performance would be better served by the Federal Reserve taking its chances on responding too much, or too rapidly, to the turmoil in financial markets rather than acting too little, or too slowly. Sluggish or inadequate easing risked a weaker real economy that might cause lenders to pull back even more, leading to a deteriorating situation that could prove difficult to reverse. With the news on inflation relatively favorable of late and with inflation expectations seemingly well anchored, I believed that we would be able to offset the cut in the federal funds rate--if it turned out to be larger than needed--in time to preserve price stability. Since the September FOMC meeting, we have seen some signs of improvement in some markets that were severely disrupted. For example, investors appear to be differentiating more among risk characteristics of asset-backed commercial paper programs; term funding has become a little more readily available to banks and commercial paper issuers; and the run-off in commercial paper outstandings has slowed. But spreads in these markets are still quite high by historical standards and funding maturities are very short, leaving many markets vulnerable to unpleasant surprises. In mortgage markets, spreads for rates on jumbo prime mortgage loans over those on conforming, agency eligible, loans have come down a bit, but are still elevated. Indeed, it may be a while before market participants regain enough confidence to price and trade certain types of assets and more normal liquidity conditions are restored. Our policy action will not be able to avert all of the weakness in the economy that may be in train for the next several months. Monetary policy works with a lag, and the effects of our easing action will have their maximum effect only after several quarters. In particular, housing markets are likely to remain depressed in coming months as housing demand is restrained by the difficulty in obtaining mortgages and perhaps also by spreading expectations on the part of buyers that house prices will fall, as they already have in a number of markets. And, although builders have reduced housing starts sharply, they have made very little progress in reducing the number of unsold new homes on the market. As a result, even absent a further deterioration in sales, residential construction would probably decline further in the months ahead, imparting a significant drag on overall growth in real gross domestic product. Beyond housing, it is too early to tell what effect financial market turmoil is having on household and business spending, though very preliminary and partial information suggest that thus far the effects seem to be limited. Moreover, the available data indicate that the economy entered this period still expanding at a moderate pace. For example, consumption held up well this summer supported by solid growth in real incomes. And, the recent data on orders and shipments of capital goods and on nonresidential construction indicated further growth in capital outlays in August. That said, credit availability is likely to be tighter than before, consumer confidence is down, and businesses will probably be a little more cautious for a while, suggesting that these components of aggregate demand could become more subdued in coming months. Over time, however, I anticipate that the economy will move back onto a moderate growth track. The housing market should gradually recover as the cutback in production and lower prices help reduce the inventory overhang. And, as it does, the drag on growth from the declines in residential construction will abate, providing a boost to overall economic activity. To be sure, households are likely to start to save more out of their current incomes as they come to realize that they cannot count on a rise in the value of their real estate to build their retirement nest eggs. However, households have been surprisingly resilient to recent economic shocks, and any rise in the saving rate probably would be gradual. More generally, consumer spending should continue to be supported by ongoing growth in employment and income. In the business sector, balance sheets are in good shape, and most firms are not likely to face an appreciable tightening of credit availability. As a result, I anticipate that they will expand their investment spending to keep pace with rising household demands and with strength in export markets. In sum, once we get through the near-term weakness caused by the extra downleg from the housing contraction and any spillover from tighter credit conditions, I am looking for moderate growth with high levels of employment. But you should view these forecasts even more skeptically than usual. The FOMC emphasized the considerable uncertainty in the outlook. As I noted earlier, we do not know how financial markets will evolve, and we do not know how households and businesses will respond to financial developments. Naturally, these types of uncertainties are greatest when markets are behaving abnormally. The recovery from the problems of the early 1990s was prolonged because banks had to rebuild capital; the rebound from the market crisis of 1998 was swifter, helped along by higher productivity growth and the rise in the stock market that accompanied the optimism about high-tech profits. We will need to be nimble in adjusting policy to promote growth and price stability. Of course, we would not have eased policy if the outlook for inflation had not been favorable. The recent data on consumer price inflation have been encouraging. Movements in energy prices have created volatility in overall inflation, but over the past twelve months both core and total prices for personal consumption expenditures rose 1.8 percent. Moreover, the near-term weakness in the economy should intensify competitive conditions in markets and reduce potential pressures on costs and prices. And, it will be critical for inflation expectations to remain well contained. That said, I do not want to minimize the upside risks to inflation either. Rates of resource utilization are still relatively high, and the slower rates of productivity growth over the past two years, coupled with a pickup in compensation growth, have led to a noticeable acceleration in unit labor costs. Moreover, the decline in the exchange value of the dollar has put upward pressure on prices of imported goods, which have both direct and indirect effects on overall consumer prices. As a result, and as the FOMC noted in our recent statement, we will need to monitor inflation developments carefully. Allowing inflation to rise would not be in the public interest and would be contrary to our legislative mandate for stable prices and maximum employment. Maintaining an environment of low and stable inflation facilitates planning, saving, and capital investment by households and businesses and thus is a prerequisite for allowing the economy to realize its potential. I assure you that we on the FOMC will continue to monitor economic developments closely and will act as necessary to promote both price stability and sustainable economic growth. Footnotes 1.Wendy DunnandWilliam Wascher, of the Board’s staff, contributed to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the Museum of American Finance Commemoration of the Panic of 1907, New York, New York In my remarks today I would like to address the issue of financial instability from two perspectives: First, I will offer a conceptual framework that helps us understand why periods of financial instability arise, and second, I will describe how the Federal Reserve has used the provision of liquidity to reduce the damage to the economy during such periods of turmoil.1 The interest of the Federal Reserve in financial stability does not arise out of a concern for the functioning of financial markets as such or out of a desire to aid distressed investors or institutions. Rather, the Federal Reserve vigorously promotes financial stability because of the intimate connection between a stable financial system and solid macroeconomic performance. The financial system, comprising financial markets and institutions, channels funds to those individuals or firms that have productive investment opportunities. The better the financial system performs this role, the more efficiently credit flows from lenders to borrowers and the more efficiently the economy operates. A period of financial instability arises when a shock to the financial system prevents it from channeling funds efficiently to productive uses; as I will describe, such a shock generally relates to problems in the flow of information. Unless checked, such a seizing-up of the financial system can lead to a precipitous drop in lending and a steep decline in economic activity. Therefore, a stable financial system is of vital importance for the Federal Reserve if it is to pursue its statutory goals of maximum sustainable employment and stable prices. Asymmetric Information and Financial InstabilityWe can better understand how financial instability can arise if we recognize the problem of asymmetric information‑‑when one party to a financial contract has much less information than the other party. For example, the borrower is usually much better informed than the lender concerning the potential risks and returns associated with the investment projects to be financed by a loan. Asymmetric information leads to two basic problems: adverse selection and moral hazard. Generally speaking, adverse selection arises when investments that are most likely to produce an adverse outcome are the most likely to be selected. For example, investors who intend to take on large amounts of risk are the most likely to be willing to seek financing. When the problem of asymmetric information is particularly severe in the marketplace, lenders may decide to cut back on lending even though good credit risks exist.2Clearly, minimizing adverse selection requires that lenders screen out bad credit risks. Moral hazard occurs when the lender is subjected to the hazard in which the borrower has an incentive to engage in activities that are undesirable from the lender's point of view, that is, activities that make it less likely that the loan will be repaid. For example, a borrower may have an incentive to invest in high-risk projects in which the borrower does well if the project succeeds but the lender bears most of the loss if the project fails. Again, if this conflict of interest between the borrower and lender becomes particularly pronounced in the marketplace, many lenders might decide that they would rather not make loans, which leads to suboptimal lending and investment. To minimize moral hazard, lenders must impose restrictions (known as restrictive covenants) that penalize borrowers for engaging in certain activities; lenders must monitor those activities, and they must enforce the restrictions if the borrower violates them. Over time, the financial system has developed a variety of mechanisms to deal with informational asymmetries. These mechanisms include a strong network of financial intermediaries, sound and resilient financial markets, innovative financial products that spread risk to the investors most willing and able to bear it, and effective supervisory and regulatory frameworks. However, even the strongest financial system is not immune to shocks. When such shocks interfere materially with information flows, the problems of adverse selection and moral hazard can overwhelm the mechanisms intended to control them. As lenders pull back and liquidity becomes scarce, a period of financial instability can ensue, carrying with it, as I mentioned at the outset, the threat of a serious decline in economic activity through a virtual cessation of lending. Broadly speaking, at least four types of shocks can lead to financial instability. The first type, and the one that has been the catalyst of many past crises, is a sharp increase in interest rates. Higher interest rates increase the likelihood that borrowers will be poor credit risks because those taking on more risk are the most willing to pay the higher rates; not surprisingly, lenders have many times responded to sharp increases in interest rates by cutting back the supply of loans, which results in credit rationing. The other types of shocks are a sudden increase in uncertainty, a deterioration of corporate and household balance sheets, and weakened financial intermediaries. Some of these have clearly manifested themselves in the episode that has affected global financial markets in recent months. In general, an increase in uncertainty makes it harder to obtain information about borrowers, thereby deterring lending, and may arise from the failure of a large financial institution, a market crash, a recession, or, as in the latest episode, an inability to value complex financial products. Weak borrower balance sheets are also a deterrent to lending because they worsen credit risk and thus make the problems of adverse selection and moral hazard more prominent. The harmful effects of balance sheet deterioration were evident in recent months, when concerns about borrower financial positions caused lenders to demand a substantial premium on loans and even to drastically cut the flow of credit. Finally, problems in the banking sector may also be a catalyst for financial instability because financial intermediaries that find themselves with weakened financial positions typically respond by cutting their lending. A central bank can respond to an episode of financial instability by temporarily providing the liquidity that financial intermediaries are unwilling or unable to supply. Central banks typically inject liquidity into the system via the banking sector, but the intent is clearly to have the liquidity spread from there. From banks, liquidity typically finds its way to financial markets and to nonbank institutions that are unable to access securities markets. Thus, injections of liquidity have the potential to directly address the causes of financial instability and therefore to counteract the pernicious effects of financial instability on broad macroeconomic conditions. With this understanding, we can now turn to some history. The Panic of 1907 and the Creation of the Federal ReserveDuring the National Banking Era, which began in 1865 and ended in 1914, when the Federal Reserve began operations, reserves were channeled to New York banks, which became providers of liquidity to the financial system through the New York Clearinghouse. Nevertheless, the banking system periodically suffered panics, as the demand for liquidity often exceeded what New York institutions could provide. These panics, in turn, caused large numbers of banks to fail or at least suspend the conversion of deposits into currency. During these episodes, interest rates tended to spike and equity markets to decline, often sharply.3 The Panic of 1907, the subject of this conference, was the last panic of the National Banking Era and one of the most severe. During the summer of 1907, U.S. financial institutions, especially those in New York, came under increasing pressure as interest rates crept up and U.S. gold reserves declined; those movements were due in part to increases in interest rates abroad as foreign central banks sought to maintain their gold reserves.4The panic started in October with a run on the Knickerbocker Trust Company, one of the largest financial institutions at the time. The stock market crashed, and the resulting surge in demand for liquid assets by banks that had New York correspondents, as well as by the general public, caused a sharp rise in interest rates, the failure of a number of financial institutions, and widespread suspensions of convertibility of deposits into currency. The subsequent banking crisis arguably turned a mild recession into a sharp, though fairly short, contraction. As a result of the 1907 crisis, the Congress set up the National Monetary Commission to consider whether the federal government should more actively manage the nation's money supply. The committee's recommendations led to the creation of the Federal Reserve. Thus, an important impetus for the establishment of the U.S. central bank was the desire to prevent panics such as the one in 1907, whose detrimental effects on the rest of the economy were not lost on policymakers.5 At the time, the belief was widespread that the inelasticity of the currency contributed to the weakness of the financial system. The supply of high-powered money‑‑which included national bank notes, specie, U.S. notes, and silver certificates‑‑was relatively fixed (inelastic) in the short run. Thus, even fairly moderate increases in demand for high-powered money led to higher interest rates. In addition, some of the increases in the demand for money were not random; they were associated with the crop cycle and were thus seasonal.6Just as no existing mechanism or institution could quickly supply the liquidity needed to respond to a rise in the demand for money, none could supply it to resolve the ensuing crisis. The establishment of the Federal Reserve provided the nation with an institution that was able to expand the money supply to virtually eliminate seasonal fluctuations in interest rates and thus mitigate the stress such fluctuations might put on the financial system. The policymakers involved in establishing the Federal Reserve also believed that the institution would be able to meet the needs of the financial system at times when there was an unanticipated scramble for liquidity. The founders tended to focus on the ability to rediscount commercial loans at the discount window, which was seen as a way of providing an elastic currency that would eliminate crises or at least mitigate them.7 The Federal Reserve as a Liquidity ProviderIn past research, I have examined the importance of liquidity provisions by central banks in overcoming the problem of asymmetric information, exacerbated by the increase in interest rates, and the uncertainty that generally accompany a financial crisis (Mishkin, 1997). Increased liquidity can help restrain rising interest rates and, amid an environment of heightened uncertainty, enable the institutions best able to make judgments about the creditworthiness of prospective borrowers to provide credit. Over time, the Federal Reserve has used various methods to provide liquidity to the financial system. At first, the ability to rediscount paper was seen as the main tool with which to provide liquidity. At other times, the Federal Reserve has changed interest rate ceilings or used open market operations. Since 2003, the operation of the discount window has altered significantly. The new facility allows banks in sound financial condition to borrow at will at a rate above the target federal funds rate. The facility can be used to provide liquidity to financial institutions during a crisis in which financial markets become dysfunctional as well as during other periods of financial tightness that are not the result of a systemic event. Even with the Federal Reserve System in place, periods of financial stress have arisen since World War II. I will briefly review a few of the more recent ones and focus on the role of the Federal Reserve as a liquidity provider in mitigating them. The first of these more recent episodes arose from the 1970 bankruptcy of the Penn Central Corporation, an important issuer of commercial paper. Policymakers and market participants worried that the bankruptcy of such a major issuer would have a chilling effect on the commercial paper market, as uncertainties about the quality of other issuers would impede them from rolling over their commercial paper to obtain short-term financing.8The Penn Central bankruptcy thus had the potential to send other companies into bankruptcy and possibly trigger a full-scale financial panic. To forestall this possibility, the Federal Reserve provided liquidity to financial markets in two ways. First, the Federal Reserve Banks let the depositories in their respective Districts know that the discount window was available to enable them to make loans to customers who could not roll over their commercial paper. Second, the Federal Reserve (along with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Home Loan Bank Board) suspended the interest rate ceilings imposed by the Federal Reserve's Regulation Q on some large certificates of deposit, thus providing banks another means of financing increases in loans. The second recent episode of financial instability was the stock market crash of 1987. A significant concern during this episode was the possibility of a breakdown in the clearing and settlement systems in the equity and futures markets. To keep those markets functioning in an orderly fashion, brokerage firms needed to obtain massive amounts of credit from banks to meet margin calls from the clearing and settlement institutions. However, although brokerages were clearly in need of additional funds to finance their activities, banks were understandably nervous about the health of securities firms in the wake of the unprecedented market movements.9In response, the Federal Reserve issued a statement affirming its readiness to serve as a source of liquidity to support the economic and financial system. The Federal Reserve underscored its commitment to providing liquidity by conducting open market operations in a high-profile manner and earlier than usual.10The Federal Reserve also communicated with market participants to support efforts to coordinate a market response (Greenspan, 1994). What is remarkable about this episode is the relatively limited amount of liquidity extended by the Federal Reserve: In the immediate aftermath of the crash, it temporarily injected through open market operations about $12 billion, which at the time was a notable but not exceptional amount. Because the Federal Reserve acted promptly (within a day) to prevent the financial system from seizing up, banks were not as reluctant to lend their funds to securities firms as they presumably would have been in the absence of a stabilizing action from the central bank. Thus, the Fed did not need to lend directly to the banks to encourage them to lend to the securities firms that needed funds to clear their customers' accounts. Confidence was restored, and the fear of crisis subsided quickly. The ability of the Federal Reserve to provide liquidity was also vital following the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, which disrupted payment, settlement, and communication systems needed to transfer funds among financial institutions. Unable to receive funds for their normal operations, many of these institutions turned to the central bank. The Federal Reserve responded by injecting a considerable amount of liquidity into the system, both through discount window loans (which soared from around $200 million in the days immediately before the attacks to a maximum of $46 billion) and repurchase agreements (which jumped from $25 billion to a peak of more than $80 billion). Further, the Federal Reserve helped facilitate the provision of dollar liquidity abroad by arranging swap lines with foreign central banks. Thanks to these steps, credit continued to flow through the system during the episode, and serious macroeconomic consequences were avoided. The final episode of financial instability I want to discuss is the market turbulence of the past few months. Concerns originating in the subprime-mortgage sector sparked a pullback in risk-taking in a variety of markets. As investors sought safety and liquidity, the issuance and trading of structured financial products slowed sharply or, in some cases, completely ceased; some asset-backed commercial paper could not be rolled over; yields in the Treasury bill market fluctuated considerably; and spreads in interbank funding markets rose to unusually high levels. To prevent these problems from turning into a severe credit crunch for households and corporations alike, the Federal Reserve used several tools to inject liquidity into the system. In particular, on August 10, the Federal Reserve announced that it would conduct open market operations necessary to promote trading in the interbank market at close to the target federal funds rate and noted that the discount window was available as a source of funding. On August 17, the Federal Reserve Board approved a reduction of 50 basis points in the discount window's primary-credit rate and announced changes in practices to allow the provision of term financing to depository institutions in solid financial condition for as long as thirty days. Also, to help address the heightened safe-haven demands for Treasury securities, the Federal Reserve announced a temporary reduction‑‑from 100 basis points to 50 basis points‑‑in the minimum fee for borrowing securities from the System Open Market Account. Although market functioning has certainly not yet returned to normal, and while it is still too early to judge their ultimate success, these actions, along with the policy easing decided at the September FOMC meeting, have helped improve conditions in several short-term funding markets and instill confidence in investors that liquidity would be available if needed. Policy IssuesAs I have just recounted, the Federal Reserve has been able to reduce the negative macroeconomic consequences of bouts of financial instability by providing liquidity to markets and institutions at times of need. The provision of liquidity should thus be seen as a key tool for the Federal Reserve in its quest to achieve its statutory objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price stability. The episodes I reviewed here also suggest that the more quickly liquidity can be provided when financial instability occurs, the more effective it may be. As I mentioned earlier, the Federal Reserve's quick response to the stock market crash of 1987 is noteworthy because it meant that only a small amount of liquidity, and no direct lending, was needed to restore normal market conditions. Although the provision of liquidity is undoubtedly a useful tool, it is not without potential costs. Improperly managed, it can lead to increased incentives for banks to take on excessive risk‑‑that is, it can create another form of moral hazard. That additional moral hazard will worsen, rather than enhance, the stability of the financial system. The risk of moral hazard increases if the central bank is perceived to be lending frequently to insolvent financial institutions. That concern, however, is addressed in the United States by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991, which establishes certain constraints on the Federal Reserve's ability to lend to troubled institutions, and by the guiding principle for the operation of the Federal Reserve's primary-credit facility, namely, to lend only to sound institutions and on good collateral.11The need to limit moral hazard by not lending to insolvent institutions indicates that central banks must have information sufficient to determine whether an institution with access to the discount window is indeed healthy. That consideration is one reason that central banks benefit from having some supervisory responsibility for institutions with access to the discount window (Mishkin, 1994; Bernanke, 2007). Moral hazard could also arise when a central bank lends in response to liquidity problems, but I would argue that the risk of that happening might be lower than in the case of lending to troubled institutions. I have in mind situations in which markets become impaired for exogenous reasons. In those circumstances‑‑when financial institutions that are otherwise perfectly solid are at risk of failure because market infrastructures are disrupted or, more generally, when financial instability originates outside the banking sector‑‑an intervention by the Federal Reserve would certainly be beneficial, and the creation of perverse incentives would probably be limited. The traditional recommendation for the prevention of financial crises goes back to Thornton (1802) and Bagehot (1873), who argued that, during a panic, the central bank should be a lender of last resort that lends freely at a penalty rate. Charging a penalty rate is another way to limit the possible moral hazard arising from liquidity provisions because it gives institutions an incentive to maintain liquidity sufficient to avoid borrowing at a high rate. Indeed, the Federal Reserve's standing facility charges an interest rate above the target federal funds rate for exactly that reason (Madigan and Nelson, 2002). The Thornton-Bagehot criterion is an important principle, but central banks must also determine the appropriate penalty rate to apply under the circumstances. For example, when financial instability originates outside of the banking sector, liquidity made available to banks may allow them to channel funds to the part of the financial system that has seized up, thereby helping the recovery of that sector. Indeed, that mechanism seems to have been at work during the Penn Central bankruptcy episode. However, if banks must pay a substantial penalty rate to acquire the extra liquidity, they may find it unprofitable to extend loans to the troubled sector. In such circumstances, the central bank may judge that a lower penalty rate for borrowing at the discount window is warranted for a time. Lowering the discount rate may also help underscore the central bank's intent to provide adequate liquidity to promote the functioning of financial markets. The Federal Reserve took just such an action on August 17 of this year, when it lowered the rate for primary credit by 50 basis points. When even depository institutions in sound financial condition are constrained in their access to funding because of information problems or operational disruptions, open market operations may be incapable of providing reserves to the specific banks in need of funding. Having a discount facility at its disposal provides a central bank with a more targeted tool for coping with financial disturbances without promoting inflationary tendencies. But wouldn't lending at a reduced rate exacerbate moral hazard? That seems to me to be unlikely so long as two fundamental principles are observed. First, any such lending should be temporary and implemented only in the highly unusual circumstance in which systemic risk is clearly present; that restriction should prevent market participants from expecting such lending to become a normal part of doing business (Brimmer, 1989). Second, commercial banks‑‑to the extent that they lend out the funds obtained from the central bank‑‑should remain responsible for their own credit judgments, even in extreme situations. ConclusionThe Congress has given the Federal Reserve a dual mandate to achieve both price stability and maximum sustainable employment. The Federal Reserve's role as a provider of liquidity to cope with episodes of financial instability has been, and will continue to be, critical to its success in achieving this mandate. How best to perform that role is something that both academics and policymakers will continue to think about for a long time. ReferencesAldrich, Nelson (1908).Congressional Record,Feb. 10, p. 1755. Cited in Robert L. Owen (1919),The Federal Reserve Act,New York: Century, pp. 29-30. Akerlof, George A. (1970)."The Market for 'Lemons': Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 84 (August), pp. 488-500. Bagehot, Walter (1873).Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market. London: King. Reprint (1962), Westport, Conn.: Hyperion Press. Bernanke, Ben S. (2007)."Central Banking and Bank Supervision in the United States,"speech delivered at the Allied Social Science Association Annual Meeting, Chicago, January 5. Brimmer, Andrew F. (1989)."Distinguished Lecture on Economics in Government: Central Banking and Systemic Risks in Capital Markets,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 3 (Spring), pp. 3-16. Calomiris, Charles W., and Gary Gorton (1991). "The Origins of Banking Panics: Models, Facts, and Bank Regulation," in R. Glenn Hubbard, ed.,Financial Markets and Financial Crises. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 109-75. Carlson, Mark (2007)."A Brief History of the 1987 Stock Market Crash with a Discussion of the Federal Reserve Response,"Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-13. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May. Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwarz (1963).A Monetary History of theUnited States1867-1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Greenspan, Alan (1994). "Statement and Comments of Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Federal Reserve," inBanking Industry Regulatory Consolidation,U.S. Senate, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, Senate Hearing, 103 Cong. 2 Session, March 2. Washington: Government Printing Office. Hamlin, Charles S. (1914). "The Federal Reserve System as Established and in Operation," speech delivered to the New York Chamber of Commerce, New York, December 3, inNew York Times, "Financial Panics Things of the Past," December 4. Madigan, Brian F., and William R. Nelson (2002)."Proposed Revision to the Federal Reserve's Discount Window Lending Programs,"Federal Reserve Bulletin,vol. 88 (July), pp. 314-19. Maisel, Sherman J. (1973).Managing the Dollar. New York: Norton. Miron, Jeffrey A. (1986)."Financial Panics, the Seasonality of the Nominal Interest Rate, and the Founding of the Fed,"American Economic Review,vol. 76 (March), pp. 125-40. Mishkin, Frederic S. (1991). "Asymmetric Information and Financial Crises: A Historical Perspective," in R. Glenn Hubbard, ed.,Financial Markets and Financial Crises. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 69-108. Mishkin, Frederic S. (1994)."Preventing Financial Crises: An International Perspective,"TheManchesterSchoolof Economic and Social Studies,vol. 62, pp. 1-40. Mishkin, Frederic S. (1997)."The Causes and Propagation of Financial Instability: Lessons for Policymakers (145 KB PDF),"presented at "Maintaining Financial Stability in a Global Economy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 28-30, pp. 55-96. Odell, Kerry A., and Marc D. Weidenmier (2004)."Real Shock, Monetary Aftershock: The 1906 San Francisco Earthquake and the Panic of 1907,"Journal of Economic History,vol. 64 (December), pp. 1002-27. Sprague, Oliver M. (1910).History of Crises under the National Banking System. Washington: National Monetary Commission. Tallman, Ellis, and Jon Moen (1998)."Gold Shocks, Liquidity, and the United States Economy during the National Banking Era,"Explorations in Economic History,vol. 35 (October), pp.381-404. Thornton, Henry (1802).An Inquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit ofGreat Britain. London. Reprint (1962), New York: Kelley. Footnotes1.I thankMark Carlson,William English, andRoberto Perlifor their comments and assistance on this speech. Note that my comments here reflect my own views and not necessarily those of others on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.This outcome is a feature of the classic "lemons problem" first described by Akerlof (1970).Return to text 3.As discussed, for example, in Sprague (1910); Mishkin (1991); and Calomiris and Gorton (1991).Return to text 4.A description of what occurred in this panic is in Sprague (1910); Friedman and Schwarz (1963); Mishkin (1991); Tallman and Moen (1998); and Odell and Weidenmier (2004).Return to text 5.Following the panic of 1907, Senator Aldrich noted that "the shrinkage in values of securities and property and the losses from injury to business, resulting from and incidental to the crisis, amounted to thousands of millions of dollars" (Aldrich, 1908).Return to text 6.As discussed, for example, in Miron (1986).Return to text 7.According to Charles Hamlin, the first head of the Federal Reserve Board, "[During periods of hoarding,] each bank retreats into its own citadel at the sound of danger and at a time when it should be drawing upon its reserves to help the business man of the community, it stays aloof, piling up reserves… such a state of affairs will never occur again under the Federal reserve system. The mobilization of reserves and the turning of commercial paper [loans] into a liquid investment, will enable every bank to draw down its reserves with confidence that it can replace them at will if it has proper commercial paper at its disposal" (Hamlin, 1914).Return to text 8.A discussion of this episode is in Maisel (1973); Brimmer (1989); and Mishkin (1991).Return to text 9.Brimmer (1989) and Mishkin (1991) also discuss this episode.Return to text 10.Carlson (2007) has a more detailed account of the Federal Reserve response to that episode.Return to text 11.The Federal Reserve’s secondary-credit program, which applies to institutions not eligible for primary credit, also requires good-quality collateral.Return to text
Governor Kevin Warsh At the New York State Economics Association 60th Annual Conference, Loudonville, New York Thank you to the New York State Economics Association and our hosts here at Siena College for inviting me to participate in the conference. They say you can never go home again. Well, I am testing that theory and am pleased to be back in upstate New York for the second time in as many weeks. In my remarks at the School of Business at the University at Albany, I argued that the conditions causing the turmoil in the financial markets were long in the making and that these causes should not be conflated with the particular troubles in the mortgage markets. I also posited that the financial market conditions may have proven to be overly ebullient, masking troubles that may have sown the seeds of financial distress.1This evening, I will underscore the responsibility of the Federal Reserve during periods of financial market turmoil and offer some perspective on the current state of financial markets. The Gathering StormSeveral months ago, many large, global commercial and investment banks appeared on pace to post another record year of corporate profits. Underwriting and M&A activities were robust. Sales and trading revenues were bolstered by the acceleration of financial innovation. Principal investing appeared to be an increasingly accepted industry practice alongside traditional advisory business. Private pools of capital were growing strikingly. Public and private pension funds were reportedly increasing capital allocations to alternative investments. And, thanks in part to accommodative credit markets, the golden age of private equity appeared upon us. Finance companies and other nondepository financial institutions were increasingly able to thrive, proving to be formidable competitors for traditional banks and thrifts. In sum, market functioning appeared robust, and risks underlying various assets were seemingly dispersed among a range of sovereignties, financial intermediaries, and investors. During this period of seemingly benign economic conditions, most market participants appeared more focused on the dynamics of the new financial architecture than on the policy judgments of central bankers. Surely, market participants did not presume that the Federal Reserve was a mere spectator to market developments. Nonetheless, discussions of the Fed and financial stability may have seemed somehow anachronistic with the new paradigm sweeping financial markets. How quickly times change. As you well know, by mid-August, volatility spiked in many markets. Risk premiums widened significantly. Term premiums reappeared with force. Signs of illiquidity were evident in a number of important markets. And clarion calls for the Fed to bring stability to financial markets were loud. Almost overnight, the role of the Federal Reserve and other central banks in fostering financial stability found its way to the front pages of major media. So, let me discuss the responsibilities of the Federal Reserve in promoting stable financial conditions. Although our policy tools are powerful, and our judgments are informed, our pronouncements are not made in isolation. The roles and responsibilities of other public agents, domestic and abroad, and private market participants are particularly critical during times of financial turmoil. We are, after all, central bankers, not central planners. Responsibilities of the Federal ReserveSo what is the role of a central bank like the Federal Reserve in fostering financial stability?2Historically, episodes of financial instability and the sharp economic downturns that sometimes ensued were a driving force in the creation of the Federal Reserve itself. After earlier, sporadic, and ultimately less-than-successful attempts to create a central bank of the United States, the U.S. financial system found itself lacking an effective means to address the periodic financial crises that occurred in the second half of the nineteenth and in the early twentieth century.3Against this backdrop, the Congress authored the Federal Reserve Act in 1913, creating the Federal Reserve System. It is worth emphasizing that the Federal Reserve's concern with financial stability stems largely from the adverse implications of financial instability for overall economic performance.4The Fed's interest in promoting financial stability is thus intimately connected with its macroeconomic objectives: maximum sustainable employment and price stability. From the founding of the Federal Reserve to the present, a key question confronts policymakers and market participants alike: What is financial stability? Perhaps it is better to address what it is not. In my view, financial stability does not demand a state of lessened financial market movements, a state of muted volatility. More often than not, financial markets process new information efficiently: If some unexpected news arrives, markets adjust, sometimes even sharply, and they should. These types of movements are healthy, even necessary. They serve to quickly bring prices in line with underlying fundamentals. And markets that move quickly and adroitly do not necessarily produce unstable financial conditions. Nor should those who take up the cause of ensuring financial stability protect individual investors or financial institutions from substantial losses or insolvency. To the contrary, a healthy and well-functioning financial system will tend to reward well-managed risk-taking and punish imprudence.I am inclined to interpret the Federal Reserve's interest in promoting financial stability as a desire to foster conditions that favor sustainable growth and stable prices. In this sense, financial stability concerns may rightly shape policymakers' views about the modal outlook for the economy as well as the risks surrounding this outlook. Financial instability may thus be characterized as a situation in which the financial system becomes incapable of efficiently allocating resources at market-clearing prices across the economy.5If financial markets become dysfunctional, financial intermediaries' flexibility may be impaired, and investors may become uncertain about their prospects. And if this situation were to persist, overall macroeconomic performance could be threatened. In an earlier period of financial turmoil, this phenomenon was termed "fear-induced disengagement."6Assessing Financial StabilityThe Federal Reserve is well positioned to monitor developments in financial markets and assess the quality of market functioning. We have access to a wide range of financial and economic data and extensive contacts with market participants. Particularly in times of financial distress, we must draw on a full range of market indicators. We also glean important information by virtue of our responsibilities as a banking regulator and payment system operator. And although such a dashboard of key information is exceedingly useful, it should not be confused with a crystal ball. For even if our understanding of the financial markets was somehow perfect, the transmission mechanism between financial markets and the real economy is only partially understood. Like private market participants, the Federal Reserve is in the business of making policy judgments amid uncertainty and must assess the prospects for the real economy with considerable humility.What indicators might help us assess the economic and financial situation? We look to prices at which investors are willing to provide capital by reviewing risk premiums across a range of asset markets. As an example, we monitor corporate credit spreads from bond, loan, and credit derivative markets, and we follow closely the evolution of pricing in mortgage markets. We also look to the terms by which market participants are willing to lock up funds over various time horizons by reviewing term premiums embedded in financial market prices. And we constantly revisit investors' willingness to conduct business with financial intermediaries to assess counterparty credit risk. In this respect, market-based indicators are certainly informative, as are measures of current exposures of financial institutions obtained through the supervisory process. No central bank financial market dashboard is complete, however, if it does not give considerable weight to measures of price stability. As a result, we constantly review inflation expectations, as measured by spot and forward TIPS spreads, surveys, commodity prices, and foreign exchange values.Volume indicators are often particularly useful in assessing market functioning in times of market turmoil. Volume indicators impart knowledge about the depth and extent of trading and the willingness of financial intermediaries to serve as market makers. By reviewing the sizes of issuance of various financial instruments as well as trade volumes in a number of markets, we try to assess the relative strength and resilience of markets. And we try to assess the reliability of prices by reviewing information on bid-ask spreads and quote sizes where available. Of course, these various price and volume indicators are not easy to disentangle, necessitating that our judgments on the state of market functioning customarily be provisional.Throughout the turbulence of the past few months, we have followed a number of indicators that pointed to strains in several markets. For example, we saw spreads on subprime residential mortgage-backed securities soar and securitization volumes slow to a trickle as market participants became concerned about their ability to value those products amid mounting delinquency rates and defaults in the sector. Investors' lack of confidence in valuations was also apparent in other securitized products, as evidenced by higher spreads and lower issuance in markets for collateralized debt obligations and collateralized loan obligations. The asset-backed and the lower-grade unsecured commercial paper markets also came under pressure; difficulties spread to other money markets, and term spreads in interbank funding markets climbed much above historical levels.It is also true, however, that some financial indicators provided some reassurance during this period. Important parts of the financial system continued to function well, especially in markets where less-complex financial products are traded and where investors are less reliant on the role of the rating agencies. For example, although equity markets were quite volatile at times, trading was generally not impaired, and investors were able to buy and sell stocks at market-prevailing prices, even at the times of greatest turbulence. The markets for longer-term Treasury securities and investment-grade corporate bonds generally continued to function well, albeit at new market-clearing prices. It is notable that the level of fails-to-deliver in Treasury trades did not spike amid the market turmoil despite very intense safe-haven demands for Treasury securities at times. Of great importance, clearing and settlement systems proved to be extremely resilient throughout the episode, even if most post-trade infrastructure providers experienced record transaction volumes. To be sure, mortgage lenders came under severe stress, and several large commercial and investment banks were subjected to strains brought about by higher contingent liabilities and various other commitments. Still, at least by number, most financial institutions remained "open for business," willing to lend, albeit at tighter terms. And although many hedge funds posted meaningful losses, on balance, they appear to have performed a useful function during this period of considerable tumult.Although these positive signs are acknowledged, financial conditions were clearly stressed in recent months. When markets do not clear and some large financial institutions withdraw from risk-taking, it is prudent for a central bank to take account of the impaired nature of market functioning. The specter of financial instability is heightened, and the prospect of harm to the overall economy is difficult to dismiss. The Federal Reserve responded to these developments by providing reserves to the banking system; it announced a cut in the discount rate of 50 basis points and adjustments to discount window practices to facilitate the provision of term funding. In the current episode, the disruptions in the structured finance, mortgage, leveraged loan, commercial paper, and interbank term funding markets made credit considerably less available for many households and businesses and thus, ultimately, represented a risk to the performance of our macroeconomy. As a result, the Federal Reserve took action to help forestall this risk, including the 50 basis points cut in the target federal funds rate on September 18.Recent Financial Market DevelopmentsIt is premature to judge the ultimate effects of our policy actions on financial conditions, let alone on macroeconomic performance. Our dashboard of financial indicators, however, points to some encouraging signs, suggesting that financial conditions might be normalizing somewhat. In particular, I am encouraged by the price differentiation in certain markets based upon company-specific and asset-specific assessments of fundamental value. Although prices in several markets were no doubt affected by distortions around the quarter-end, some term spreads in the interbank market appear to have reversed a portion of their earlier increases, as have spreads in some parts of the commercial paper market. On the basis of our most recent data, it seems that the runoff in outstanding commercial paper may be slowing. Similarly, there are some signs of stabilization in the leveraged loan market. Banks have been able to sell substantial parts of large deals to investors in recent weeks, and some collateralized loan obligations are coming to market. Issuance of speculative-grade bonds resumed somewhat of late. Still, the functioning of several markets continues to be strained, a condition which I would expect to continue for awhile. Consequently, my colleagues and I on the FOMC will continue to assess the effects that these and other developments could have on the prospects for the economy. We will rely not only upon economic modeling, but also real-time, forward-looking indicators to help inform our policy judgments.FootnotesNote. The views expressed herein are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of other members of the Board of Governors or of the Federal Open Market Committee. I thank Board staff membersJames ClouseandRoberto Perlifor their valuable contributions to these remarks.1.Warsh, Kevin (2007), "Financial Market Developments," speech delivered at the University at Albany, State University of New York, School of Business, Albany, NY, September 21, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents.Return to text2.The Federal Reserve is by no means the only institution in the United States that is concerned with the stability and functioning of the financial system. Indeed, the Federal Reserve works closely with a number of other U.S. government agencies on both a bilateral basis and jointly through the President's Working Group on Financial Markets to enhance the integrity, efficiency, orderliness, and competitiveness of financial markets and to maintain investor confidence. In addition, the Federal Reserve participates in a number of important international groups, such as the Financial Stability Forum, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Committee on the Global Financial System, and the Committee on Payments and Settlement Systems, to name just a few. Indeed, in today's tightly integrated international financial markets, fostering financial stability requires a global perspective.Return to text3.The First Bank of the United States was created in 1791 and lasted until 1811. The Second Bank of the United States operated from 1816 to 1836.Return to text4.Originally, the preamble to the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 stated that the Federal Reserve System was created "[T]o furnish an elastic currency, to afford means of rediscounting commercial paper, to establish a more effective supervision of banking in the United States, and for other purposes." Macroeconomic objectives were explicitly introduced later, with the 1977 amendment of the Federal Reserve Act, which stated, "The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Open Market Committee shall maintain long-run growth of the monetary and credit aggregates commensurate with the economy's long run potential to increase production, so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates."Return to text5.We should also recognize that financial instability is symmetric and could arise equally when credit flows too freely or at prices that are too low.Return to text6.Those were the words used by then-Chairman Alan Greenspan in his comments on the 1998 financial crisis. Alan Greenspan (2000), "Technology and Financial Services," speech delivered before the Journal of Financial Services Research and the American Enterprise Institute Conference, in Honor of Anna Schwartz, Washington, DC, April 14, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents.htm.Return to text From the founding of the Federal Reserve to the present, a key question confronts policymakers and market participants alike: What is financial stability? Perhaps it is better to address what it is not. In my view, financial stability does not demand a state of lessened financial market movements, a state of muted volatility. More often than not, financial markets process new information efficiently: If some unexpected news arrives, markets adjust, sometimes even sharply, and they should. These types of movements are healthy, even necessary. They serve to quickly bring prices in line with underlying fundamentals. And markets that move quickly and adroitly do not necessarily produce unstable financial conditions. Nor should those who take up the cause of ensuring financial stability protect individual investors or financial institutions from substantial losses or insolvency. To the contrary, a healthy and well-functioning financial system will tend to reward well-managed risk-taking and punish imprudence. I am inclined to interpret the Federal Reserve's interest in promoting financial stability as a desire to foster conditions that favor sustainable growth and stable prices. In this sense, financial stability concerns may rightly shape policymakers' views about the modal outlook for the economy as well as the risks surrounding this outlook. Financial instability may thus be characterized as a situation in which the financial system becomes incapable of efficiently allocating resources at market-clearing prices across the economy.5If financial markets become dysfunctional, financial intermediaries' flexibility may be impaired, and investors may become uncertain about their prospects. And if this situation were to persist, overall macroeconomic performance could be threatened. In an earlier period of financial turmoil, this phenomenon was termed "fear-induced disengagement."6 Assessing Financial StabilityThe Federal Reserve is well positioned to monitor developments in financial markets and assess the quality of market functioning. We have access to a wide range of financial and economic data and extensive contacts with market participants. Particularly in times of financial distress, we must draw on a full range of market indicators. We also glean important information by virtue of our responsibilities as a banking regulator and payment system operator. And although such a dashboard of key information is exceedingly useful, it should not be confused with a crystal ball. For even if our understanding of the financial markets was somehow perfect, the transmission mechanism between financial markets and the real economy is only partially understood. Like private market participants, the Federal Reserve is in the business of making policy judgments amid uncertainty and must assess the prospects for the real economy with considerable humility. What indicators might help us assess the economic and financial situation? We look to prices at which investors are willing to provide capital by reviewing risk premiums across a range of asset markets. As an example, we monitor corporate credit spreads from bond, loan, and credit derivative markets, and we follow closely the evolution of pricing in mortgage markets. We also look to the terms by which market participants are willing to lock up funds over various time horizons by reviewing term premiums embedded in financial market prices. And we constantly revisit investors' willingness to conduct business with financial intermediaries to assess counterparty credit risk. In this respect, market-based indicators are certainly informative, as are measures of current exposures of financial institutions obtained through the supervisory process. No central bank financial market dashboard is complete, however, if it does not give considerable weight to measures of price stability. As a result, we constantly review inflation expectations, as measured by spot and forward TIPS spreads, surveys, commodity prices, and foreign exchange values. Volume indicators are often particularly useful in assessing market functioning in times of market turmoil. Volume indicators impart knowledge about the depth and extent of trading and the willingness of financial intermediaries to serve as market makers. By reviewing the sizes of issuance of various financial instruments as well as trade volumes in a number of markets, we try to assess the relative strength and resilience of markets. And we try to assess the reliability of prices by reviewing information on bid-ask spreads and quote sizes where available. Of course, these various price and volume indicators are not easy to disentangle, necessitating that our judgments on the state of market functioning customarily be provisional. Throughout the turbulence of the past few months, we have followed a number of indicators that pointed to strains in several markets. For example, we saw spreads on subprime residential mortgage-backed securities soar and securitization volumes slow to a trickle as market participants became concerned about their ability to value those products amid mounting delinquency rates and defaults in the sector. Investors' lack of confidence in valuations was also apparent in other securitized products, as evidenced by higher spreads and lower issuance in markets for collateralized debt obligations and collateralized loan obligations. The asset-backed and the lower-grade unsecured commercial paper markets also came under pressure; difficulties spread to other money markets, and term spreads in interbank funding markets climbed much above historical levels. It is also true, however, that some financial indicators provided some reassurance during this period. Important parts of the financial system continued to function well, especially in markets where less-complex financial products are traded and where investors are less reliant on the role of the rating agencies. For example, although equity markets were quite volatile at times, trading was generally not impaired, and investors were able to buy and sell stocks at market-prevailing prices, even at the times of greatest turbulence. The markets for longer-term Treasury securities and investment-grade corporate bonds generally continued to function well, albeit at new market-clearing prices. It is notable that the level of fails-to-deliver in Treasury trades did not spike amid the market turmoil despite very intense safe-haven demands for Treasury securities at times. Of great importance, clearing and settlement systems proved to be extremely resilient throughout the episode, even if most post-trade infrastructure providers experienced record transaction volumes. To be sure, mortgage lenders came under severe stress, and several large commercial and investment banks were subjected to strains brought about by higher contingent liabilities and various other commitments. Still, at least by number, most financial institutions remained "open for business," willing to lend, albeit at tighter terms. And although many hedge funds posted meaningful losses, on balance, they appear to have performed a useful function during this period of considerable tumult. Although these positive signs are acknowledged, financial conditions were clearly stressed in recent months. When markets do not clear and some large financial institutions withdraw from risk-taking, it is prudent for a central bank to take account of the impaired nature of market functioning. The specter of financial instability is heightened, and the prospect of harm to the overall economy is difficult to dismiss. The Federal Reserve responded to these developments by providing reserves to the banking system; it announced a cut in the discount rate of 50 basis points and adjustments to discount window practices to facilitate the provision of term funding. In the current episode, the disruptions in the structured finance, mortgage, leveraged loan, commercial paper, and interbank term funding markets made credit considerably less available for many households and businesses and thus, ultimately, represented a risk to the performance of our macroeconomy. As a result, the Federal Reserve took action to help forestall this risk, including the 50 basis points cut in the target federal funds rate on September 18. Recent Financial Market DevelopmentsIt is premature to judge the ultimate effects of our policy actions on financial conditions, let alone on macroeconomic performance. Our dashboard of financial indicators, however, points to some encouraging signs, suggesting that financial conditions might be normalizing somewhat. In particular, I am encouraged by the price differentiation in certain markets based upon company-specific and asset-specific assessments of fundamental value. Although prices in several markets were no doubt affected by distortions around the quarter-end, some term spreads in the interbank market appear to have reversed a portion of their earlier increases, as have spreads in some parts of the commercial paper market. On the basis of our most recent data, it seems that the runoff in outstanding commercial paper may be slowing. Similarly, there are some signs of stabilization in the leveraged loan market. Banks have been able to sell substantial parts of large deals to investors in recent weeks, and some collateralized loan obligations are coming to market. Issuance of speculative-grade bonds resumed somewhat of late. Still, the functioning of several markets continues to be strained, a condition which I would expect to continue for awhile. Consequently, my colleagues and I on the FOMC will continue to assess the effects that these and other developments could have on the prospects for the economy. We will rely not only upon economic modeling, but also real-time, forward-looking indicators to help inform our policy judgments. Footnotes Note. The views expressed herein are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of other members of the Board of Governors or of the Federal Open Market Committee. I thank Board staff membersJames ClouseandRoberto Perlifor their valuable contributions to these remarks. 1.Warsh, Kevin (2007), "Financial Market Developments," speech delivered at the University at Albany, State University of New York, School of Business, Albany, NY, September 21, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents.Return to text 2.The Federal Reserve is by no means the only institution in the United States that is concerned with the stability and functioning of the financial system. Indeed, the Federal Reserve works closely with a number of other U.S. government agencies on both a bilateral basis and jointly through the President's Working Group on Financial Markets to enhance the integrity, efficiency, orderliness, and competitiveness of financial markets and to maintain investor confidence. In addition, the Federal Reserve participates in a number of important international groups, such as the Financial Stability Forum, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Committee on the Global Financial System, and the Committee on Payments and Settlement Systems, to name just a few. Indeed, in today's tightly integrated international financial markets, fostering financial stability requires a global perspective.Return to text 3.The First Bank of the United States was created in 1791 and lasted until 1811. The Second Bank of the United States operated from 1816 to 1836.Return to text 4.Originally, the preamble to the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 stated that the Federal Reserve System was created "[T]o furnish an elastic currency, to afford means of rediscounting commercial paper, to establish a more effective supervision of banking in the United States, and for other purposes." Macroeconomic objectives were explicitly introduced later, with the 1977 amendment of the Federal Reserve Act, which stated, "The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Open Market Committee shall maintain long-run growth of the monetary and credit aggregates commensurate with the economy's long run potential to increase production, so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates."Return to text 5.We should also recognize that financial instability is symmetric and could arise equally when credit flows too freely or at prices that are too low.Return to text 6.Those were the words used by then-Chairman Alan Greenspan in his comments on the 1998 financial crisis. Alan Greenspan (2000), "Technology and Financial Services," speech delivered before the Journal of Financial Services Research and the American Enterprise Institute Conference, in Honor of Anna Schwartz, Washington, DC, April 14, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents.htm.Return to text
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate 25 basis points to 4-1/2 percent. Economic growth was solid in the third quarter, and strains in financial markets have eased somewhat on balance. However, the pace of economic expansion will likely slow in the near term, partly reflecting the intensification of the housing correction. Today’s action, combined with the policy action taken in September, should help forestall some of the adverse effects on the broader economy that might otherwise arise from the disruptions in financial markets and promote moderate growth over time. Readings on core inflation have improved modestly this year, but recent increases in energy and commodity prices, among other factors, may put renewed upward pressure on inflation. In this context, the Committee judges that some inflation risks remain, and it will continue to monitor inflation developments carefully. The Committee judges that, after this action, the upside risks to inflation roughly balance the downside risks to growth. The Committee will continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act as needed to foster price stability and sustainable economic growth. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Charles L. Evans; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner;Frederic S. Mishkin; William Poole; Eric S. Rosengren; and Kevin M. Warsh. Voting against was Thomas M. Hoenig, who preferred no change in the federal funds rate at this meeting. In a related action, the Board of Governors unanimously approved a 25-basis-point decrease in the discount rate to 5 percent. In taking this action, the Board approved the requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, and San Francisco.
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the Business Cycles, International Transmission and Macroeconomic Policies Conference, HEC Montreal, Montreal, Canada In discussing and thinking about the conduct of monetary policy, many central bankers focus on core inflation‑‑that is, a measure of inflation that excludes the rate of increase of prices for certain volatile components in price indexes.1The Federal Reserve, for example, pays particular attention to the rate of growth of the core personal consumption expenditure (PCE) deflator, which excludes food and energy prices. Indeed, in the presentation of its twice yearly Monetary Policy Report to the Congress, the Federal Reserve Board reports the projections of Federal Open Market Committee participants regarding core PCE inflation, not headline inflation, the latter of which includes all items in the price index. Here in Canada, unlike in the United States, the central bank maintains an explicit inflation target. The Bank of Canada states its target in terms of the headline consumer price index, and although this choice of inflation measure contrasts with the Federal Reserve's preferred index, the difference is not nearly as great as it appears on the surface. In fact, the Bank of Canada monitors a number of inflation measures and uses core inflation as an "operational guide" in coming to its monetary policy decisions and discussing these decisions with the public. Does it make sense for a central bank to concentrate on core inflation? After all, households almost daily pay for energy and food items‑‑which are excluded from the most prominent measures of core inflation‑‑when they fill up their cars at gas stations or visit a grocery store. Households, particularly less-affluent households, spend a major portion of their budgets on food and energy. A focus on core inflation, which excludes these items, might be viewed as indicating that monetary policy makers are out of touch with what consumers really care about. Wouldn't it be better for monetary policy authorities to focus on headline inflation so that they include food and energy in their monitoring of consumer price inflation? As I will argue, this is not an either-or decision. It does indeed make sense for central banks to emphasize headline inflation when determining the appropriate stance of monetary policy over the medium run, but policymakers also are right to emphasize core inflation when deciding how to adjust policy from meeting to meeting. Why? Because what central bankers are truly concerned with‑‑both for the purposes of internal deliberations and for communications with the public‑‑is the underlying rate of inflation going forward, and core inflation can be a useful proxy for that rate. Thus, focusing on core inflation can help prevent a central bank from responding too strongly to transitory movements in inflation. Why Monetary Policy Should Focus on Core InflationBecause households care about the prices of all the items they buy, it clearly does not make sense to pretend that people do not eat or drive. Thus, I have no qualm in stating that controlling headline inflation, not core inflation, is‑‑along with maintaining maximum sustainable employment‑‑the ultimate aim of monetary policy. Nonetheless, I will argue that it is still useful for monetary policy makers to focus on core inflation when deciding how to respond to incoming economic news. Although monetary policy is capable of controlling overall inflation in the long run, it does not have the ability to control relative price movements such as those for food and energy. When a cold snap freezes the Florida orange crop or a tropical storm hits the gasoline refineries along the Gulf Coast, monetary policy cannot reverse the resulting spikes in prices for fresh orange juice or for gasoline at the pump. Temporary supply shocks such as these raise the prices of food and energy relative to other prices and can have substantial effects on inflation in the short run. By including all items‑‑including particularly volatile items like food and energy‑‑headline measures of inflation are inherently noisy and often do not reflect changes in the underlying rate of inflation, the rate at which headline inflation is likely to settle and that monetary policy can affect. Measures of core inflation attempt to strip out or smooth volatile changes in particular prices to distinguish the inflation signal from the transitory noise. Thus, relative to changes in headline inflation measures, changes in core measures are much less likely to be reversed, provide a clearer picture of the underlying inflation pressures, and so serve as a better guide to where headline inflation itself is heading. Of course, if a particular shock to noncore prices is not temporary but, rather, turns out to be more persistent, then the higher costs are likely to put some upward pressure on core prices. Central bankers must always be aware of this risk. However, research has shown that, over the past twenty-five years or more, headline inflation in the United States has tended to revert more strongly toward core inflation than core inflation has moved toward headline inflation.2As that record suggests, core measures often are much better than headline indexes at providing a first approximation of the permanent changes to inflation. When headline inflation has an important transitory component, a focus on core measures can help avoid monetary policy mistakes. If the monetary authorities react to headline inflation numbers, they run the risk of responding to merely temporary fluctuations in inflation. We can think about this danger by considering a supply shock, that causes the relative price of energy to increase sharply, as in fact has happened over the past three years. Let us suppose that we start out with both headline and core inflation at acceptably low levels. First, let's consider a supply shock that temporarily raises the price of energy by a large amount. In this case headline inflation will rise well above its underlying trend as the price of energy rises but will soon fall well below its underlying trend as the price of energy falls back to its initial level. On average, inflation will remain unchanged without any monetary policy action. But a tightening of monetary policy in reaction to the rise in headline inflation would lead to a decline in employment and inflation; and because of the long lags between monetary policy actions and changes in economic activity, that decline would occur some time down the road, when inflation would more likely be at or below its underlying trend. The outcome of such a policy would be a more pronounced fall in inflation with a decline in employment. Such a policy would be bad indeed because it would increase volatility in inflation and employment, which is the opposite of what a central bank should be trying to achieve as it seeks to promote price stability and maximum sustainable employment. But what if a supply shock leads to a permanent shift in the relative price of energy? Indeed, almost all commentators characterize the current oil price shock that way, in part because they see the rise of new economic powers like China as adding to the demand for energy in the foreseeable future. Although in that case the rise in relative energy prices is not reversed, therate of changein energy prices does not persist: Headline inflation will rise with the increase in energy prices, but once energy prices reach their permanently high level, headline inflation will revert to its underlying trend rate. Thus, as long as the permanent change in relative energy prices does not lead to a change in theunderlying trend rate of inflation‑‑a crucial assumption‑‑then headline inflation will come back down again. This is what we seem to have seen recently in the United States. From a low near $30 per barrel in late 2003, the price of oil rose to $70 per barrel by the middle of 2006, and it has stayed high, with the current price more than $80. That move increased headline PCE inflation to the 4 percent level for a time, but it has since retreated to around 2 percent (figure 1). Monetary policy clearly can do little about the first-round effects of a permanent rise in energy prices, which include both its direct impact on the energy component of overall consumer prices and the pass-through of higher energy costs into prices of non-energy goods and services. But policy does have a critical role to play in determining the second-round effects associated with changes in the underlying trend rate of inflation. Such second-round effects are likely to be quite limited as long as the rise in the relative price of energy does not lead to a rise in long-run inflation expectations, as has largely been the case in the recent period (figure 1). However, the stability of expectations rests on the central bank's strong long-term commitment to providing a nominal anchor, which, as I have argued elsewhere (Mishkin, 2007), describes the situation in the United States. With such a commitment firmly established, monetary policy then does not need to respond as much to the temporary rise in headline inflation to stabilize inflation over the longer run. Under these circumstances, if monetary policy is tightened appreciably in the face of a surge in headline inflation, the policy would likely be excessively tight and lead to an unnecessary decline in employment. Because the point about headline inflation is so important, I would like to illustrate it further with simulations of FRB/US, the model of the U.S. economy created and maintained by the staff at the Federal Reserve Board. To keep the experiments as clean as possible, I assume that the economy begins at full employment and with both headline and core inflation at desired levels. The economy is then assumed to experience a shock that raises the world price of oil about $30 per barrel over two years; the shock is assumed to slowly dissipate thereafter. In each of two scenarios, a Taylor rule is assumed to govern the response of the federal funds rate; the only difference between the two is that in one scenario the funds rate responds to core PCE inflation, while in the other it responds to headline PCE inflation.3Figure 2illustrates the results of these two scenarios. The federal funds rate jumps higher and faster when the central bank responds to headline inflation rather than to core inflation, as would be expected (top-left panel). Likewise, responding to headline inflation pushes the unemployment rate markedly higher than otherwise in the early going (top-right panel), and produces an inflation rate that is slightly lower than otherwise, whether measured by core or headline indexes (bottom panels). More important, even for a shock as persistent as this one, the policy response under headline inflation has to be unwound in the sense that the federal funds rate must drop substantially below baseline once the first-round effects of the shock drop out of the inflation data. Responding to headline inflation is therefore inappropriate because it generates extensive variability in the unemployment rate‑‑variability that is much more subdued when policy responds to core inflation.4 Of course, the pitfalls associated with reacting to realized headline inflation, as illustrated by this simulation, are well understood. Accordingly, advocates of targeting headline inflation generally have in mind a strategy of responding toforecastsof headline inflation‑‑forecasts that try to take account of inflation movements that are likely to be transitory. This is a further illustration of my basic point, namely, that it is important to distinguish between transitory and persistent inflation movements, and focusing on core inflation can help achieve that end.5 The focus on core instead of headline inflation‑‑and clear communication with the public about that focus‑‑can have another benefit: It may help anchor inflation expectations when headline inflation increases temporarily but core inflation remains essentially unchanged. If the public understands that the central bank is using core inflation in formulating monetary policy and trusts that the central bank is right to do so, the public will realize that the central bank does not need to respond aggressively to a surge in headline inflation to keep inflation under control. And, with core inflation stable, the public will be less likely to think that the central bank has weakened its commitment to a strong nominal anchor when it does not tighten monetary policy to stabilize headline inflation. The result is that inflation expectations are likely to remain anchored, which may lead to better outcomes not only on inflation but on employment as well, because the central bank will not have had to tighten monetary policy as much in response to the energy price shock. As I noted earlier, figure 1 offers some support for this view: It shows that the rise in headline inflation in the 2004-06 period, when core inflation remained quite stable, did not lead to an appreciable rise in long-run inflation expectations, even with a substantial decline in unemployment during this period. Is Inflation Excluding Food and Energy the Best Measure of Underlying Inflation?The most popular core inflation measures used and published in the United States are quite straightforward: They simply exclude changes in food and energy prices. However, such simple "exclusion" measures can likely be improved upon. For example, many of the food categories excluded in the standard measure of core inflation, such as food away from home (restaurants), are not highly volatile and so likely should remain in an optimal core inflation measure. On the other hand, some items that are not excluded from the U.S. core measures, such as airline fares, tobacco, and apparel, are extremely volatile and thus are unlikely to be included in an optimal core inflation measure. The Bank of Canada, for example, uses a more targeted approach to its core inflation indicator, the CPIX. Of fifty-four consumer product categories, it excludes eight, which account for about 16 percent of the consumption basket (Macklem, 2001). Most of the eight items are also excluded from the standard core measure in the United States. However, Canada's CPIX also excludes intercity transportation and tobacco, which are included in the U.S. core measures.6 Another approach to estimating core inflation measures is statistical, in which certain prices are excluded at each point on the basis of statistical criteria. Among these statistical measures are trimmed indexes, such as the trimmed mean and the weighted median consumer price indexes produced by the Cleveland Fed and the trimmed mean PCE price index produced by the Dallas Fed. Each month, these measures throw out the components with the largest price changes, both positive and negative (though the Dallas measure is asymmetric).7 Other approaches to estimating core inflation are theory-based measures employing common trends, unobserved components, or a particular model of the economy.8However, these theory-based approaches tend to be rather complex and require faith that the model they are based on is the right one. Each of these measures of core inflation can be evaluated according to a variety of criteria, including the ability to forecast headline inflation over some period and the degree of correlation with alternative definitions of trend inflation. According to some of these criteria, statistical and theory-based approaches are sometimes found to outperform simpler exclusion measures of core inflation, like the standard one excluding food and energy. As you can tell, this is an active area of research, but recent research done at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York on U.S. data finds that no one particular core measure, including the standard one, dominates the others: The relative performance of different core measures varies depending on the choice of the price index, the sample period, and the criteria for evaluating their performance (Rich and Steindel, 2007). Research on Canadian and U.K. data comes to similar conclusions (Hogan, Johnson, and Laflèche, 2001; Mankikar and Paisley, 2002). Does the lack of empirical support for any one particular type of core measure suggest that our focus on the standard core measure should be abandoned? I think not. The simplicity and long history of the standard core measure that excludes food and energy gives it several major advantages. Its simplicity makes it straightforward to explain and thus more understandable to the public‑‑assuming, of course, that we successfully communicate that we recognize the importance of food and energy items in people's consumption. Its simplicity also makes its estimation very transparent. That transparency and the fact that it has been around a long time‑‑hence the characterization as "standard"‑‑both prevent a central bank or a government authority from easily manipulating the measure to show good results. These features of the standard core measure therefore make it a credible device to keep inflation expectations anchored when supply shocks occur: If the standard measure remains stable, then a surge in headline inflation is less likely to unhinge inflation expectations, which as we have seen can lead to both better inflation and better employment performance. Why Central Banks Should also Focus on Headline InflationDespite the advantages of core measures of inflation, their use in conducting monetary policy has been criticized.9Core measures of inflation attempt to remove the most volatile or transitory components of the inflation measure. But, because the nature of price shocks may change over time, items that have been highly volatile in the past may not be so in the future; hence, any core measure will itself likely be subject to transitory shocks. Unfortunately, as noted above, empirical research suggests that no one measure of core inflation will work in all situations. Therefore, central banks do not focus solely on core inflation; rather, they devote considerable resources to understanding inflation developments in an effort to distinguish signal from noise in the incoming data.10 Another reason to keep watch over the broader inflation picture is that, if the rate of change in the price of an excluded item receives a permanent shock, then the headline inflation rate can deviate from the core measure for an extended period of time. The longer this period of high headline inflation persists, the greater is the risk of second-round effects as the public begins to build this higher inflation into its expectations. For example, from 1987 to 2002, energy price shocks appear to have been temporary in that energy prices were mean reverting; as a result, in this period, the average difference between core and headline PCE inflation was quite small. Since 2002, however, the effect of energy price shocks have been more persistent, and headline inflation has averaged more than 1/2 percentage point above core inflation over this period. Over the past year, energy prices have about leveled off on balance--or at least that was the case until a couple of weeks ago--and the rate of headline inflation for most of this year has come down close to that for core, one hopes alleviating the risk of second-round effects. But the increases in oil prices in recent days provide another reminder that shocks can persist longer than one might have at first expected. A prolonged divergence between core and headline measures of inflation could complicate central bank communications with the public because core inflation would require some adjustment before it would provide a clear gauge of underlying inflation. For example, the weighted median CPI inflation rate, one popular measure of core inflation, has tended to be a biased measure of headline inflation. The weighted median is exactly equal to owners' equivalent rent nearly half the time because that component has an extremely large share of the consumption basket and fairly low volatility (Bryan and Pike, 1991; Hogan and others, 2001; and Bryan and Meyer, 2007). However, the productivity growth rate in residential construction is not terribly high, and so this sector is likely to have below-average productivity growth and above-average price increases. Indeed, the weighted median CPI exceeded overall CPI inflation on average by 1/4 percentage point per year over the decade from 1992 to 2002, a period when changes in energy prices were transitory. Of course, to the extent that such a bias in a core inflation measure is stable or predictable, the central bank could easily take this into account in setting monetary policy. But even in that case, differences in average rates of inflation between the core measure and overall inflation could complicate communication with the public. ConclusionI have argued that a measure of core inflation that is easily understood and provides some greater signal about persistent movements in inflation than does headline inflation itself is extremely valuable for the conduct of monetary policy, and that is why the Federal Reserve pays so much attention to such measures. However, I have also argued that core measures have their limitations. A single core inflation measure cannot account for all types of shocks and can at times be misleading about what is happening to the underlying rate ofoverallinflation. And if increases in headline inflation prove more persistent than initially expected, central bankers must be vigilant to ensure that they do not become embedded into expectations and thereby generate substantial second-round effects on inflation. Finally, because price stability ultimately involves control of overall, headline inflation, which after all is the inflation measure that households really care about, central bankers should and do pay attention to headline inflation as well as to core inflation measures. A core inflation measure should not be seen as a substitute for thorough and careful analysis of the forces that are driving our economy and the inflation process. ReferencesAoki, Kosuke (2001)."Optimal Monetary Policy Responses to Relative Price Changes,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 48 (August), pp. 55-80. Armour, Jamie (2006)."An Evaluation of Core Inflation Measures,"Bank of Canada Working Paper 2006-10 (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, March). Bagliano, Fabio C., and Claudio Morana (2003)."Measuring U.S. Core Inflation: A Common Trends Approach,"Journal of Macroeconomics, vol. 25 (June), pp. 197-212. Bean, Charles (2006). "Commentary: Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy (40 KB PDF)," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 30th Annual Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26,www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/Sympos/2006/sym06prg.htm. Bernanke, Ben S. (2007)."Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting,"speech delivered at the Monetary Economics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 10, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents. Blinder, Alan S. (2006). "Monetary Policy Today: Sixteen Questions and About Twelve Answers," in S. Fernandez de Lis and F. Restoy, eds.,Central Banks in the 21st Century. Madrid: Banco de España, pp. 31-72. Bodenstein, Martin, Christopher Erceg, and Luca Guerrieri (2007). "Optimal Monetary Policy in a Model with Distinct Core and Headline Inflation Rates," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Brischetto, Andrea, and Anthony Richards (2006)."The Performance of Trimmed Mean Measures of Underlying Inflation,"Reserve Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper 2006-10. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, December, www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/RDP. _________ (2007). "The Performance of Trimmed Mean Measures of Underlying Inflation," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of DallasConference on Price Measurement for Monetary Policy, May 24-25, www.dallasfed.org/news/research/2007/07price.cfm. Bryan, Michael F., and Christopher J. Pike (1991)."Median Price Changes: An Alternative Approach to Measuring Current Monetary Inflation (197 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland,Economic Commentary, December 1, www.clevelandfed.org/Research/commentary. Bryan, Michael F., and Stephen G. Cecchetti (1994). "Measuring Core Inflation," in N. Gregory Mankiw, ed.,Studies in Business Cycles, vol. 29:Monetary Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 195-215. Bryan, Michael F., and Brent H. Meyer (2007)."Methodological Adjustments to the Median and 16 Percent Trimmed-Mean CPI Estimators,"Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, September, www.clevelandfed.org/research/inflation. Cecchetti, Stephen G. (1997)."Measuring Short-Run Inflation for Central Bankers (295 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Review, vol. 79 (May/June), pp. 143-55. Clark, Todd E. (2001)."Comparing Measures of Core Inflation,"Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,Economic Review, vol. 86 (no. 2), pp. 5-31. Clinton, Kevin (2006)."Core Inflation at the Bank of Canada: A Critique (85 KB PDF),"Queen's Economics Department Working Paper No. 1077. Kingston, ON, Canada: Queen's University (May), http://qed.econ.queensu.ca/pub/papers. Cogley, Timothy (2002)."A Simple Adaptive Measure of Core Inflation,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 34 (February), pp. 94-113. Cristadoro, Riccardo, Mario Forni, Lucrezia Reichlin, and Giovanni Veronese (2005)."A Core Inflation Indicator for the Euro Area,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 37 (June), pp. 539-60. Dolmas, Jim (2005)."Trimmed Mean PCE Inflation (1.7 MB PDF),"Working Paper Series 0506. Dallas: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, July, http://dallasfed.org/research/papers. Doménech, Rafael, and Victor Gómez (2006)."Estimating Potential Output, Core Inflation, and the NAIRU as Latent Variables,"Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,vol. 24 (July), pp. 354-65. Hogan, Seamus, Marianne Johnson, and Thérèse Laflèche (2001)."Core Inflation,"Technical Report No. 89. Ottawa: Bank of Canada, January, www.bank-banque-canada.ca/en/res/tr. Laflèche, Thérèse, and Jamie Armour (2006)."Evaluating Measures of Core Inflation,"Bank of Canada Review,2006 (Summer), pp. 19-29. Laidler, David, and Shay Aba (2000)."It's Time to Ignore Core Inflation (54 KB PDF)"C.D. Howe Institute,Backgrounder, vol. 2001 (November), pp. 1-8, www.cdhowe.org. Macklem, Tiff (2001)."A New Measure of Core Inflation,"Bank of Canada Review, 2001 (Autumn), pp. 3-12. Mankikar, Alan, and Jo Paisley (2002)."What Do Measures of Core Inflation Really Tell Us? (102 KB PDF)"Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, vol. 42 (Winter), pp. 373-83. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007)."Inflation Dynamics,"speech delivered at the Annual Macro Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 23, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2005)."Measuring and Assessing Underlying Inflation,"OECD Economic Outlook, vol. 2005 (June), pp. 270-90. Quah, Danny, and Shaun P. Vahey (1995)."Measuring Core Inflation,"Economic Journal,vol. 105 (September), pp. 1130-44. Rich, Robert, and Charles Steindel (2005)."A Review of Core Inflation and an Evaluation of its Measures,"Staff Report No. 236. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December, www.newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports. _________ (2007). "A Review of Core Inflation and an Evaluation of its Measures," speech delivered at theConference on Price Measurement for Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, May 24-25. Robalo Marques, Carlos, Pedro Duarte Neves, and Luís Morais Sarmento (2003)."Evaluating Core Inflation Indicators,"Economic Modelling, vol. 20 (July), pp. 765-75. Smith, Julie K. (2004)."Weighted Median Inflation: Is This Core Inflation?"Journalof Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 36 (May), pp. 253-63. Velde, François R. (2006)."An Alternative Measure of Inflation (591 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,Economic Perspectives, vol. 30 (no. 1), pp. 55-65. Woodford, Michael (2003).Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.Princeton: Princeton University Press. Footnotes 1.I thankAlan Kackmeister, Jean-Philippe Laforte,David Lebow,Deb Lindner, andRobert Tetlowfor their comments and assistance. The speech reflects my own views and not necessarily those of others on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.These tests allow for a nonzero constant differential between headline and core inflation. The differential often turns out to be nontrivial and statistically significant. Cogley (2002) uses published CPI over the period from 1967:Q2 to 1997:Q4 and finds that it may take about 8 quarters before there is substantial reversion of headline inflation to core inflation. Clark (2001), using 12-month CPI inflation from 1967 to 2000 finds little reversion over the next 12 months but about 50 percent reversion over 24 months, though that level is still statistically insignificant. In contrast, he finds substantial and statistically significant reversion at both the 12- and 24-month horizons using data from 1985 to 2000. Rich and Steindel (2007) find significant reversion of headline CPI inflation to core CPI inflation over 12 quarters using methodologically consistent CPI data from 1978 to 2004. An earlier version of their work (Rich and Steindel, 2005) showed similar results using PCE price inflation in the 1978-2004 and 1959-2004 periods. Internal work conducted at the Federal Reserve using 15-year rolling-window regressions suggests that the reversion of headline PCE inflation to core PCE inflation has been much stronger in samples that start after the early 1980s and also that the reversion of core inflation to headline inflation has been much weaker in that period. Results for other countries are more ambiguous. In recent years, Canada appears to have had a similar reversion of headline inflation to their version of core inflation, along with little reversion of core inflation to headline inflation (Laflèche and Armour, 2006; also, Armour, 2006; Hogan, Johnson, and Laflèche, 2001). However, the OECD (2005) has found that many countries show little reversion of headline inflation to core inflation and that, in fact, core inflation often reverts to headline inflation.Return to text 3.The Taylor rule is written as follows:whereis the four-quarter inflation rate, either core or headline,is the inflation target, taken to be the baseline inflation rate, andis the output gap. This specification means that the response coefficients on each gap variable is 1.Return to text 4.These scenarios were constructed using a rule that assumes no prior knowledge of how long the oil price shock will last. Research done by the staff at the Federal Reserve Board using other types of models also suggests that when the persistence of shocks is uncertain, using core inflation rather than headline inflation in central bank reaction functions can improve policy outcomes (Bodenstein, Erceg, and Guerrieri, 2007).Return to text 5.Economic theory also suggests an additional argument for focusing on a core measure of inflation. Because some prices are "sticky," meaning they move sluggishly in response to shocks, higher inflation generates greater dispersion of relative prices and, with that, a misallocation of resources. Responding to a core inflation measure, which puts more weight on sticky prices, can minimize this distortion and promote relative prices that better reflect the true underlying demand and supply conditions in the economy (for example, Aoki, 2001; and Woodford, 2003, chap. 6).Return to text 6.Canada’s CPIX also excludes mortgage interest costs, which are never included in measures of U.S. consumer prices because the prices of owner occupied housing services are measured on a rental equivalence basis in the United States. The other items excluded from the CPIX are fruits, vegetables, gasoline, natural gas, and fuel oil and other fuel.Return to text 7.Bryan and Cecchetti (1994); Robalo Marques, Duarte Neves, and Morais Sarmento (2003); Dolmas (2005); Brischetto and Richards (2007); Smith (2004).Return to text 8.Recent examples include: the common trends approach of Bagliano and Morana (2003), the VAR approach of Quah and Vahey (1995); the unobserved components approach of Doménech and Gomez (2006) and Velde (2006); and the factor-models approach of Cecchetti (1997) and Cristadoro and others (2005).Return to text 9.Laidler and Aba (2000); Clinton (2006); and Bean (2006) are critical of responding to core inflation; Blinder (2006) argues on the other side.Return to text 10.More details on inflation forecasting at the Board are in Bernanke (2007).Return to text
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Chairman Dodd, Ranking Member Shelby, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to appear today to provide the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on industrial loan companies (ILCs). The Board commends the Committee for holding this hearing and for considering ways of addressing the important public policy implications raised by the special exception for ILCs in federal law. The Committee is no stranger to the issues raised by the ILC exception. ILCs are state-chartered banks that have virtually all of the powers and privileges of other insured commercial banks, including the protections of the federal safety net--deposit insurance and access to the Federal Reserve's discount window and payments system. Nonetheless, ILCs operate under a special exception to the federal Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act). This special exception allows any type of firm, including a commercial firm or foreign bank, to acquire and operate an ILC chartered in one of a handful of states without complying with the standards that Congress has established for bank holding companies to maintain the separation of banking and commerce and to protect insured banks, the federal safety net and, ultimately, the taxpayer. We believe it is critical that Congress now consider and address the important public policy implications raised by the ILC exception, particularly in light of the dramatic recent growth and potential future expansion of banks operating under this special exception. Only Congress can craft a solution that addresses the full range of issues created by the ILC exception in a permanent, comprehensive and equitable manner. Your decisions on these matters also will influence the structure, soundness and resiliency of our financial system and economy. The Board believes the best way to prevent this exception from further undermining the general policies that Congress has established and further promoting competitive and regulatory imbalances within the banking system is toclosethe loophole in current law to new acquirors of ILCs. This is precisely the approach that Congress has taken on previous occasions when earlier loopholes began to be used in unintended and potentially damaging ways. The ILC Exception and its OriginsThe Board's concerns arise from the fact that the corporate owners of ILCs operate outside the prudential framework and statutory activity provisions that apply to all other corporate owners of full-service insured commercial banks. The BHC Act, originally enacted in 1956, provides a federal framework for the supervision and regulation of companies that own or control a bank and their affiliates. This comprehensive framework is intended to help protect the safety and soundness of corporately controlled banks that have access to the federal safety net and to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce in the United States. It does so principally in two ways. First, the act provides for all bank holding companies, including financial holding companies formed under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act), to be supervised on a consolidated or group-wide basis by the Federal Reserve. Second, the act prevents bank holding companies from engaging in general commercial activities. Instead, the act allows financial holding companies to engage only in activities that Congress or the Board (in consultation with the Treasury Department, in certain cases) has determined to be financial in nature or incidental or complementary to a financial activity. The act also requires as a condition for engaging in broad securities underwriting, insurance and other financial activities that the financial holding company maintain the financial and managerial strength and satisfactory Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) performance of its depository institution subsidiaries.1 The ILC exception allows a company to acquire an insured bank chartered in one of a handful of states--principally Utah and California--outside this supervisory and regulatory framework. The special exception for ILCs was enacted in 1987. At that time, the size, nature and powers of ILCs were quite restricted. ILCs engaged primarily in making small loans to industrial workers and for many years generally were not permitted to accept deposits or obtain deposit insurance from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). As of year-end 1987, the largest ILC had assets of approximately $410 millionand the average asset size of all ILCs was less than $45 million. The relevant states with ILCs also were not actively chartering new ILCs. At the time the exception was enacted, for example, Utah had only eleven state-chartered ILCs and had imposed a moratorium on the chartering of new ILCs. Moreover, interstate banking restrictions and technological limitations made it difficult for institutions chartered in an eligible state to operate a retail banking business regionally or nationally. Changing Character and Nature of ILCsWhat was once an exception with limited and local reach has now become the avenue through which large national and international financial and commercial firms have acquired federally insured banks and gained access to the federal safety net. Indeed, dramatic changes have occurred with ILCs in recent years that have made ILCs virtually indistinguishable from other FDIC-insured commercial banks. For example, in 1997, Utah lifted its moratorium on the chartering of new ILCs, allowed ILCs to call themselves banks, and authorized ILCs to exercise virtually all of the powers of state-chartered commercial banks. Since that time, Utah also has begun to charter new ILCs and to promote them as a method for companies to acquire a federally insured bank while avoiding the requirements of federal supervision and regulation under the BHC Act. As a result of these and other changes, the aggregate amount of assets and deposits held by all ILCs operating under this exception increased substantially just in the nine years between 1997 and 2006, with assets increasing by more than 750 percent (from $25.1 billion to $212.8 billion) and deposits increasing by more than 1000 percent (from $11.7 billion to $146.7 billion). In fact, in 2006 alone, the assets and deposits of ILCs increased by $62.7 billion and $38.8 billion, respectively. The number of ILCs chartered in Utah also has nearly doubled since 1997, while the number of ILCs has declined in the few other states permitted to charter exempt ILCs. The nature and size of individual ILCs and their parent companies also have changed dramatically in recent years. While the largest ILC in 1987 had assets of approximately $410 million, the largest ILC today has more than $60billionin assets and more than $51billionin deposits, placing it among the twenty largest insured banks in the United States in terms of deposits. An additional twelve ILCs each have more than $1 billion in deposits. And, far from being locally owned and focused on small-dollar consumer loans, many ILCs today are controlled by large, internationally active companies and are used to support various aspects of these organizations' complex business plans and operations. While the growth of ILCs and diversity of ownership in recent years are striking, it also is important to keep in mind that the exception currently is open-ended and subject to very few statutory restrictions. Although only a handful of states have the ability to charter exempt ILCs, there isnolimit on the number of exempt ILCs that these states may charter, and the FDIC currently has several applications pending to establish new ILCs or to acquire existing ones. Moreover, federal law places no limit on how large an ILC may become and only one restriction on the types of activities that an ILC may conduct. That restriction prevents most ILCs from accepting demand deposits that the depositor may withdraw by check or similar means for payment to third parties. This federal restriction has lost much of its meaning as ILCs have entered the world of retail banking by offering retail customers negotiable order of withdrawal (NOW) accounts--transaction accounts that are functionally indistinguishable from demand deposit accounts. Retail and corporate banking activities also are aided by the fact that federal law does not restrict ILCs of any size from collecting FDIC-insured savings or time deposits from institutional or retail customers or from offering the full range of other banking services, including commercial, mortgage, credit card, and consumer loans; cash management services; trust services; and payment-related services, such as Fedwire, automated clearinghouse (ACH) and check-clearing services. Moreover, federal law permits ILCs to branch across state lines to the same extent as other types of insured banks. And, due to advances in telecommunications and information technology, some ILCs now conduct their activities throughout the United States--without physical branches--through the Internet or through arrangements with affiliated or unaffiliated entities. Public Policy Implications of the ExceptionWithout action, further expansion of banks operating under this exception threatens to undermine several fundamental policies that Congress has established and reaffirmed governing the structure, supervision and regulation of the financial system. The ILC exception also fosters an unfair and unlevel competitive and regulatory playing field by allowing firms that acquire an insured ILC in a handful of states to operate outside the activity restrictions and consolidated supervisory and regulatory framework that apply to other community-based, regional and diversified organizations that own a similarly situated bank. Addressing these matters will only become more difficult if additional companies are permitted to acquire and operate ILCs under this special exception. Bank Affiliations with Commercial Entities. For many years, Congress has sought to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce in the United States and has acted affirmatively to close loopholes that create significant breaches in the wall between banking and commerce. For example, one of the primary reasons for enactment of the BHC Act in 1956, and its expansion in 1970 to cover companies that control only a single bank, was to help prevent and restrain combinations of banks and commercial firms under the auspices of a single holding company. And, when the so-called "nonbank bank" loophole threatened to undermine the separation of banking and commerce, Congress acted in 1987 to close that loophole. In doing so, Congress was motivated by several concerns. One concern was that allowing the mixing of banking and commerce might, in effect, lead to an extension of the federal safety net to commercial affiliates and make insured banks susceptible to the reputational, operational and financial risks of their commercial affiliates. Congress also expressed concern that banks affiliated with commercial firms may be less willing to provide credit to the competitors of their commercial affiliates or may provide credit to their commercial affiliates at preferential rates or on favorable terms. Moreover, Congress expressed concern that allowing banks and commercial firms to affiliate with each other could lead to the concentration of economic power in a few very large conglomerates.2 Congress reaffirmed its desire to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce as recently as 1999, when it passed the GLB Act. That act closed the unitary-thrift loophole, which previously allowed commercial firms to acquire a federally insured savings association. At the same time and after lengthy debate, Congress decided to allow financial holding companies to engage inonlythose activities determined to be financial in nature or incidental or complementary to financial activities. In fact, in passing the GLB Act, Congress rejected earlier proposals that would have allowed financial holding companies to engage generally in a "basket" of commercial activities or that would have allowed commercial firms to acquire a small bank without becoming subject to the BHC Act.3 The ILC exception, however, allows commercial firms to evade these decisions and acquire an FDIC-insured bank with broad deposit-taking and lending powers. It is no coincidence, for example, that commercial firms began to show an increased interest in ILCs only after Congress closed the unitary-thrift loophole in 1999. The question of whether to allow firms engaged in commercial activities to own or acquire an insured ILC is one that has potentially far-reaching implications for the structure and soundness of the American economy and financial system. We believe it is a decision that should be made deliberately by Congress after hearings, debate, and careful review of the potential benefits and costs to the taxpayer and the economy. This is not a policy that should be established by exploitation of a loophole that was intended for a few small, special purpose entities. This is especially true because pressures likely will build to expand to banking organizations more generally any new policy applied to the owners of ILCs. Once permitted, any general mixing of banking and commerce also is likely to be difficult to disentangle. Once these decisions are made, we see no reason to allow the owners of insured ILCs to make investments and conduct activities denied to owners of similarly situated full-service insured banks. Bank Affiliations with Financial Firms. Besides restricting the mixing of banking and commerce, Congress also has placed preconditions on the ability of firms that are purely financial to affiliate with banks. The GLB Act allows a bank holding company to engage in a broad range of financial activities, including securities underwriting, various insurance activities and merchant banking,onlyif the holding company keeps all of its subsidiary depository institutions well capitalized and well managed and achieves and maintains at least a satisfactory CRA record at all of the company's subsidiary insured depository institutions. These requirements help ensure that banks operating within a diversified financial company remain financially and managerially strong and help meet the credit needs of their entire communities, including low‑ and moderate-income families and communities. The ILC exception undermines these requirements by allowing financial firms to own and operate an FDIC-insured bank without abiding by the capital, managerial, and CRA standards established in the GLB Act. Consolidated Supervision of Domestic and Foreign Banking Organizations. The ILC exception in current law also undermines the supervisory framework that Congress has established for the corporate owners of insured banks, as well as for foreign banks that seek to enter the banking business in the United States. ILCs are regulated and supervised by the FDIC and their chartering state in the same manner as other types of state-chartered, nonmember insured banks and the Board has no concerns about the adequacy of this existing supervisory framework for ILCs themselves. However, due to the special exception in current law, the parent company of an ILC is not considered a bank holding company. This creates special supervisory risks because the ILC's parent company and nonbank affiliates may not be subject to supervision on aconsolidatedbasis by a federal agency. History demonstrates that financial trouble in one part of a business organization can spread, and spread rapidly, to other parts of the organization. Moreover, as recent events have confirmed, large organizations increasingly operate and manage their businesses on an integrated basis with little regard for the corporate boundaries that typically define the jurisdictions of supervisors. Risks that cross legal entities and that are managed on a consolidated basis cannot be monitored properly through supervision directed at any one, or even several, of the legal entity subdivisions within the overall organization. It was precisely to deal with these risks to safety and soundness that Congress established a consolidated supervisory framework for bank holding companies that includes the Federal Reserve as supervisor of the parent holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries in addition to having a federal supervisor for the insured depository institution itself. This framework allows the Federal Reserve to understand the financial and managerial strengths and risks within the consolidated organization as a whole and gives the supervisor the statutory authority and ability to identify and resolve significant management, operational, capital or other deficiencies within the overall organizationbeforethey pose a danger to the organization's subsidiary insured banks. These benefits help explain why many developed countries, including those of the European Union, have adopted consolidated supervision frameworks and why it is becoming the preferred approach to supervision worldwide. In the United States, the BHC Act has long provided the Federal Reserve broad authority to examine a bank holding company (including a financial holding company) and its nonbank subsidiaries, whether or not the company or nonbank subsidiary engages in transactions, or has relationships, with a depository institution subsidiary.4Pursuant to this authority, the Federal Reserve routinely conducts examinations of all large, complex bank holding companies and maintains inspection teams on-site at the largest bank holding companies on an ongoing basis. These examinations, which are conducted using well-established procedures, manuals and systems, allow the Federal Reserve to review the organization's systems for identifying and managing risk across the organization and its various legal entities and to evaluate the overall financial strength of the organization. By contrast, the primary federal supervisor of a bank, including an ILC, is authorized to examine the parent company and affiliates (other than subsidiaries) of the bank only to the extent necessary to disclose the relationship between the bank and the parent or affiliate and the effect of the relationship on the bank. Using its authority under federal law, the Federal Reserve also has established consolidated capital requirements for bank holding companies. These capital requirements help ensure that a bank holding company maintains adequate capital to support its group-wide activities, does not become excessively leveraged, and is able to serve as a source of strength, not weakness, for its subsidiary insured banks. The parent companies of exempt ILCs, however, are not subject to the consolidated capital requirements established for bank holding companies and, as the FDIC has noted, may have no expectation that they should serve as a source of strength to their subsidiary ILC. Indeed, among the factors contributing to the failure of a federally insured ILC in 1999 were the unregulated borrowing and weakened capital position of the corporate owner of the ILC and the inability of any federal supervisor to ensure that the parent holding company remained financially strong. Federal law also gives the Federal Reserve broad enforcement authority over bank holding companies and their nonbank subsidiaries. This authority includes the ability to stop or prevent a bank holding company or nonbank subsidiary from engaging in an unsafe or unsound practice in connection with its own business operations, even if those operations are not directly connected with the company's subsidiary banks. On the other hand, the primary federal bank supervisor for an ILC may take enforcement action against the parent company or a nonbank affiliate of an ILC to address an unsafe or unsound practice only if the practice occurs in the conduct of theILC'sbusiness. Thus, unsafe and unsound practices that weaken the parent firm of an ILC, such as significant reductions in its capital, increases in its debt or its failure to monitor and address the risks in its nonbanking affiliates, are generally beyond the scope of the enforcement authority of the ILC's primary federal bank supervisor. Consolidated supervisory authority is especially helpful in understanding and, if appropriate, requiring mitigation of the risks to the federal safety net when a subsidiary bank is closely integrated with, or heavily reliant on, its parent organization. In these situations, the subsidiary bank may have no business independent of the bank's affiliates, and the bank's loans and deposits may be derived or solicited largely through or from affiliates. In addition, the subsidiary bank may be substantially or entirely dependent on the parent or its affiliates for critical services, such as computer support, treasury operations, accounting, personnel, management, and even premises. This appears to be the case at a number of ILCs. For example, the FDIC noted in its recent rulemaking that some of the large corporate owners of ILCs tend to use these banks in ways that involve "unusual, affiliate-dependent" business plans and data show that seven of the ten largest ILCs each have more than $3 billion in assets but fewer than seventy-five full-time employees. In addition to constructing a consolidated supervisory framework for domestic banking organizations, Congress has made consolidated supervision a prerequisite for foreign banks seeking to acquire a bank in the United States. Following the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI)--a foreign bank that lacked a single supervisor capable of monitoring its global activities--Congress amended the BHC Act to require that the Board determine that a foreign bank is subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis in its home country before the foreign bank may acquire a U.S. bank or establish a branch, agency or commercial lending company subsidiary in the United States. The ILC exception, however, allows a foreign bank that is not subject to consolidated supervision in its home country to evade this requirement and acquire an FDIC-insured bank with broad deposit-taking and lending powers. Fair Competition and Other Issues. The supervisory and regulatory differences that I have just discussed not only have safety and soundness consequences, they also have important competitive and structural consequences. The exception in current law creates an unlevel playing field among organizations that control a bank because it allows the corporate owners of ILCs to operate under a substantially different framework than the owners of other insured banks. These advantages provide incentives for firms to continue to exploit the exception and create the opportunity for firms to engage in "regulatory arbitrage." Over time, such actions could lead to shifts in the structure and supervision of the financial system and the Federal Reserve's ability to prevent or respond quickly to financial crisis. S. 1356, the Industrial Bank Holding Company Act of 2007S. 1356, the Industrial Bank Holding Company Act of 2007, as introduced addresses some of the public policy issues raised by the ILC exception. That bill takes the important step of recognizing that the supervisory gaps created by the ILC exception need to be addressed. To do so, the bill would grant the FDIC new supervisory authority for the existing and future corporate owners of ILCs (other than those that are already supervised by a federal banking agency or the Securities and Exchange Commission) that is similar to the authority that the Federal Reserve has with respect to bank holding companies. In addition, the bill would allow a foreign bank to acquire an insured ILC only if the Board (in consultation with the FDIC) determines that the foreign bank is subject to comprehensive, consolidated supervision in its home country under the same standards in the BHC Act that apply to other banking proposals by a foreign bank. The Board supports these efforts to close the domestic and foreign supervisory gaps created by the ILC exception. On the other hand, the bill would continue to allow new and expansive combinations of banking and commerce. It also would continue to allow firms and foreign banks that engage in broad securities underwriting, insurance and other financial activities to use an ILC to evade the well-capitalized and well-managed requirements and satisfactory CRA standard established under the GLB Act. In this way, the bill would perpetuate competitive imbalances and encourage the continued growth of firms operating under the ILC exception, placing further pressure on the policies established by Congress in these areas for the corporate owners of other insured banks. With respect to the banking and commerce issue, the bill would allow any firm to acquire or establish an ILC in the future and derive up to 15 percent of its consolidated annual revenues from commercial activities. No similar "basket" is available to the corporate owners of other full-service insured banks. This 15 percent commercial "basket" also is quite sizable and potentially would allow new firms that acquire an ILC to have significant commercial holdings. For example, several existing firms that engage in financial activities could acquire an ILC and, at the same time, meet the 15 percent test in S. 1356 even if the firm owned a commercial company the size of Kohl's, U.S. Steel, Waste Management, Office Depot, Nike, Hilton Hotels or Southwest Airlines. The size of this commercial basket also may be affected by the mechanism established in S. 1356 for defining what activities would be considered "commercial" or "financial" for ILC owners. The bill does not define "financial" activities by reference to the GLB Act and, thus, would allow the development of a different definition of "financial" activities than the definition established for financial holding companies in the GLB Act. This potentially would allow the owners of ILCs to engage in activities that would be "financial" under S. 1356, but that would be considered commercial under the GLB Act. In this way, the size of the 15 percent commercial basket may be significantly larger relative to the activities permitted under the BHC Act and create even greater competitive disadvantages for regulated bank holding companies as compared to the owners of ILCs. Comprehensive SolutionThe Board believes the best way to comprehensively address the important current and potential future public policy issues raised by the ILC exception is to close--and not just narrow--the loophole going forward. This approach recognizes the simple fact that ILCsareinsured banks. Accordingly, it would require any company that acquires an ILC after a specified date to operate subject to the same activity restrictions, regulatory requirements and supervisory framework that apply to the corporate owners of other insured banks. This approach builds on and utilizes the existing regulatory and supervisory framework that Congress has established, and repeatedly reaffirmed, for the corporate owners of banks and creates a level playing field for all firms that acquire an insured bank in the future. For reasons of fairness, the Board also supports "grandfathering" the limited number of firms that currently own an ILC and are not otherwise subject to the BHC Act. Such a grandfather provision would allow these firms to continue to engage in activities not permissible for bank holding companies. However, to protect the federal safety net and limit the potential for grandfathered ILCs to operate in ways clearly at odds with the original exception, the Board believes that any grandfathered firm should be subject to consolidated supervision by a federal agency and appropriate restrictions. We would be pleased to work with the Committee and its members in developing the appropriate restrictions that would apply to the limited set of grandfathered firms. This type of coordinated and comprehensive solution--closing the loophole and "grandfathering" existing owners--is precisely the type of approach that Congress took in 1970, 1987 and 1999 in closing previous exceptions in the banking laws that were undermining the separation of banking and commerce and other important public policy objectives. It also is the right approach to fix the ILC loophole. ConclusionThank you for the opportunity to discuss the Board's views on ILCs. The Board and its staff would be pleased to continue to work with the Committee in developing and improving legislative language that appropriately addresses the core public policy issues raised by the ILC exception. Footnotes 1.Bank holding companies that do not meet these tests of strong capital and management and satisfactory CRA performance are permitted to engage only in a narrower range of activities that have been found to be "closely related to banking."Return to text 2.SeeS. Rep. No. 100-19 (1987); S. Rep. No. 91-1084 (1970); H.R. Rep. No. 84-609 (1955).Return to text 3.The GLB Act did provide certain nonbanking firms that became a financial holding company after November 1999 up to ten years todivesttheir impermissible commercial holdings if the firm was and remained "predominantly financial."See12 U.S.C. § 1843(n). All commercial investments held under this authority must be divested no later than November 12, 2009.Return to text 4.In the case of certain functionally regulated subsidiaries of bank holding companies, the BHC Act directs the Board to rely to the fullest extent possible on examinations of the subsidiary conducted by the functional regulator for the subsidiary, and requires the Board to make certain findings before conducting an independent examination of the functionally regulated subsidiary. 12 U.S.C. §1844(c)(2)(B). These limitations also apply to the FDIC and other federal banking agencies in the exercise of their more limited examination authority over the nonbank affiliates of an insured bank, such as an ILC. See 12 U.S.C. § 1831v.Return to text
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Conference on John Taylor's Contributions to Monetary Theory and Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Dallas, Texas The Role of Simple Rules in Monetary PolicymakingIt is a pleasure and an honor to speak at this conference honoring John Taylor and his contributions to monetary theory and policy. As you have already heard from Chairman Bernanke and the other speakers today, John has made a number of seminal contributions to the field of macroeconomics. What has distinguished John's work, in my view, is that he takes policymaking in the real world seriously.1 Taking policymaking seriously involves understanding the constraints imposed on our decisions by partial information and incomplete knowledge of economic relationships. It also implies the use of empirically valid models that acknowledge the efforts of households and businesses to anticipate the future and maximize their welfare over time. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, macroeconomics was focused mainly on real business cycles and endogenous growth theory. During this period, John was one of a very small number of academic economists who continued to pursue research aimed at informing the conduct of monetary policy. John's Carnegie Rochester conference paper published in 1993 is an excellent example of this research. Importantly, John's legacy to the Federal Reserve has not been confined to enhancing our understanding of monetary policy. In addition, he has turned out legions of students who have followed in his footsteps in their interest in policy. Many of them have spent time in the Federal Reserve, producing a rich array of contributions to policymaking and research. John and I have spent countless hours discussing how the Federal Reserve arrives at decisions about monetary policy and how itshouldarrive at decisions. Those conversations began in earnest in the late 1980s, when John was on the Council of Economic Advisers, and they have continued to the present day. They have occurred not only in offices and classrooms in Washington and Stanford and at numerous conferences around the globe, but also around dinner tables in Washington and Palo Alto and on hiking trails from Vermont to Wyoming. Those conversations made me a better policy adviser and then policymaker, and they have had the added and very special bonus of allowing Gail and me to count John and Allyn among our friends. I can't think of a better way to honor John's contributions than to continue that discussion around the dinner tables of Dallas by reflecting on the role of simple rules in informing policymaking. Three Benefits of Simple Rules in Monetary PolicymakingIn his Carnegie Rochester conference paper, John considered a simple policy rule under which the nominal federal funds rate is adjusted in response to both the gap between real and trend gross domestic product (GDP) and the gap between the inflation rate and policymakers' target. Based on data for the previous few years, John calibrated the long-run target for inflation and the two parameters that determine the responsiveness of the federal funds rate to the two gaps. The equilibrium real interest rate was based on a longer history of actual real interest rates. In the handout,Figure 1Adepicts the actual nominal funds rate and the Taylor rule prescriptions between 1987 and 1992, as presented in John's paper. Despite its simplicity, this policy rule fits the data remarkably well; it described a period of generally successful policymaking; and it adhered to the Taylor principle of adjusting the nominal rate more than one-for-one with changes in the inflation rate, so it provided a plausible template for future success. It is no wonder that John has been such a dedicated salesman and that his efforts have been so well received in academia and policy councils. Following John's seminal contribution, many other economists have engaged in research on similar policy rules and, together with John, have identified several benefits of such rules in conducting monetary policy. I will elaborate on three of them. The first benefit of looking at a simple rule like John's is that it can provide a useful benchmark for policymakers. It relates policy setting systematically to the state of the economy in a way that, over time, will produce reasonably good outcomes on average. Importantly, the emphasis is on levels and gaps, not growth rates, as inputs to the policy process. This emphasis can be a problem when a level, say of potential GDP, is in question, but in many respects it is also a virtue. For the United States, the two gaps relate directly to the legislative mandate of the Federal Reserve to achieve stable prices and maximum employment. Moreover, those two gaps fit directly into most modern macroeconomic theories, which tell us something about their relationship and how that relationship can be affected by the type of shock hitting the economy. Model uncertainties make the simplicity of the rule particularly important for the policymaker because research suggests that the prescriptions from simple rules can be more robust than optimal-control policies. Optimal-control policies can depend critically on the exact specification of the model, and clearly there is no consensus about which model best describes the U.S. economy. Federal Reserve policymakers are shown several versions of Taylor rules in the material we receive before each meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). I always look at those charts and tables and ask myself whether I am comfortable with any significant deviation of my policy prescription from those of the rules. A second benefit of simple rules is that they help financial market participants form a baseline for expectations regarding the future course of monetary policy. Even if the actual policy process is far more sophisticated than any simple rule could completely describe, the rule often provides a reasonably good approximation of what policymakers decide and a framework for thinking about policy actions. Indeed, many financial market participants have used the Taylor rule to understand U.S. monetary policy over the past fifteen years. Investors and other market participants are going to form expectations about policy and act on those expectations. The more accurate and informed those expectations are, the more likely are their actions to reinforce the intended effects of policy. A third benefit is that simple rules can be helpful in the central bank's communication with the general public. Such an understanding is important for the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. Giving the public some sense of how the central bank sees the output and inflation gaps and how they are expected to evolve will help it understand the central bank's objectives and how policymakers are likely to respond to surprises in incoming data. Four Limitations of Simple RulesSimple rules have limitations, of course, as benchmarks for monetary policy. To quote from John's Carnegie Rochester paper, "a policy rule can be implemented and operated more informally by policymakers who recognize the general instrument responses that underlie the policy rule, but who also recognize that operating the rule requires judgment and cannot be done by computer" (p. 198). In that context, four limitations of simple rules are important. The first limitation is that the use of a Taylor rule requires that a single measure of inflation be used to obtainthe rule prescriptions. The price index used by John in the Carnegie Rochester paper was the GDP price deflator. Other researchers have used the inflation measure based on the consumer price index (CPI). Over the past fifteen years, the Federal Reserve has emphasized the inflation rate as measured by changes in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE). Many researchers have also explored the use of core price indexes, which exclude the volatile food and energy components, as better predictors of future inflation or as more robust indicators of the sticky prices that some theories say should be the targets of policy. To be sure, over long periods, most of these measures behave very similarly. But policy is made in the here and now, and the various indexes can diverge significantly for long stretches, potentially providing different signals for the appropriate course of monetary policy. Second, the implementation of the Taylor rule and other related rules requires determining the level of the equilibrium real interest rate and the level of potential output; neither of them are observable variables, and both must be inferred from other information. John used 2 percent as a rough guess as to the real federal funds rate that would be consistent with the economy producing at its potential. But the equilibrium level of the real federal funds rate probably varies over time because it depends on factors such as the growth rate of potential output, fiscal policy, and the willingness of savers to supply credit to households and businesses. Inaccurate estimates of this rate will mislead policymakers about the policy stance required to achieve full employment. In a similar vein, real-time estimates of potential output can be derived in a number of ways and--as shown by Orphanides (2003) and others--they are subject to large and persistent errors. If policymakers inadvertently rely on flawed estimates, they will encounter persistent problems in achieving their inflation objective. The third limitation of using simple rules for monetary policymaking stems from the fact that, by their nature, simple rules involve only a small number of variables. However, the state of a complex economy like that of the United States cannot be fully captured by any small set of summary statistics. Moreover, policy is best made looking forward, that is, on the basis of projections of how inflation and economic activity may evolve. Lagged or current values of the small set of variables used in a given simple rule may not provide a sufficient guide to future economic developments, especially in periods of rapid or unusual change. For these reasons, central banks monitor a wide range of indicators in conducting monetary policy. In his Carnegie Rochester paper, John mentioned the stock market crash of October 1987 as an example of how other variables can and should influence the course of monetary policy in some situations. The final limitation I want to highlight is that simple policy rules may not capture risk-management considerations. In some circumstances, the risks to the outlook or the perceived costs of missing an objective on a particular side may be sufficiently skewed that policymakers will choose to respond by adjusting policy in a way that would not be justified solely by the current state of the economy or the modal outlook for output and inflation gaps. Policy Rules around 2003Some of the ambiguities and potential pitfalls in the use of simple policy rules are highlighted by considering their prescriptions for a period earlier in this decade. Turning toFigure 1B, the solid line indicates the actual federal funds rate between the first quarter of 1993 and the second quarter of 2007, and the dashed line shows the prescriptions of the Taylor rule using the same methodology that John used in his Jackson Hole remarks this year.2For the earlier part of the sample, the prescription from this simple rule tracks the actual funds rate relatively well. As John pointed out, a notable deviation happened beginning in 2002, and I would like to discuss that period to illustrate the limitations I noted earlier. Inflation MeasureThe first limitation is related to the measure used for the inflation variable included in the rules. The rule prescriptions depicted by the dashed line in Figure 1B are based on the headline CPI. But as you know, the FOMC often looks at core inflation, stripping out the effects of energy and food prices, as a better indicator of future price behavior. The dotted line represents the rule prescriptions based on the chain-weighted core CPI, which the Bureau of Labor Statistics has produced since 2000. Using this measure lowers the prescribed funds rate by about 2 percentage points during 2003, bringing the rule prescriptions much closer to the actual path of policy. The reason for the improvement is evident fromFigure 2A, on the other side of the handout: Even though the headline and core CPI measures were broadly similar in the mid- to late 1990s, these measures diverged substantially between 2003 and 2005. Potential OutputThe second limitation relates to the challenge of judging the level of potential output in real time. To illustrate this point,Figure 2Bplots three measures of the output gap. The solid line is the real-time estimate by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) that was used in the Taylor rule prescriptions in Figure 1B, while the dashed line depicts the CBO's ex post estimate of the output gap as of the third quarter of 2007. Back in 2003, the CBO estimated that output at that time was below potential by only 1 percent. With the benefit of four more years of data, the CBO currently estimates that the output gap for the first half of 2003 was considerably wider--about 3 percent. In addition, the dotted line represents an alternative measure of resource utilization derived from the unemployment rate and an estimate of the natural rate of unemployment (NAIRU) taken from the Board staff's FRB/US model. In fact, the unemployment rate was rising through the middle of 2003, so the FOMC had every reason to believe that the output gap was widening at that time. Using this unemployment-based measure rather than the real-time CBO measure would reduce the prescriptions of simple policy rules by roughly 1/2 percentage point in early 2003. Other VariablesThe third limitation in my list was that the small set of economic measures included in simple rules may not fully reflect the state of the economy. Around 2003, financial market conditions may not have been adequately summarized by the assumed 2 percent equilibrium federal funds rate. Accounting scandals caused economic agents to lose confidence in published financial statements and in bond ratings. The result was higher uncertainty about the financial health of firms, and credit spreads widened substantially.Figure 2Cshows that risk spreads on corporate bonds were elevated in this period. Other things equal, such spreads would reduce the federal funds rate needed to achieve full employment, perhaps explaining a portion of the gap between the actual federal funds rate and the outcome from the policy rule during this period. Risk ManagementThe last item on my list of limitations was that simple rules do not take account of risk-management considerations. As shown in Figure 2A, the core CPI inflation rate for 2003 was falling toward 1 percent. The real-time reading of the core PCE inflation rate (not shown) was on average even lower than the comparable CPI figure. Given these rates, the possibility of deflation could not be ruled out. We had carefully analyzed the Japanese experience of the early 1990s; our conclusion was that aggressively moving against the risk of deflation would pay dividends by reducing the odds on needing to deal with the zero bound on nominal interest rates should the economy be hit with another negative shock. This factor is not captured by simple policy rules. A Final NoteI have offered this analysis in the spirit of so many of the discussions I have had with John. His framework has been enormously important to policymaking in the Federal Reserve, and it has yielded many benefits. Nevertheless, it's important to keep in mind that some significant practical limitations also are associated with the application of such rules in real time. In other words, it's not so simple to use simple rules! ReferencesOrphanides, Athanasios (2003). "The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 50 (April), pp. 633-63. Poole, William (2007). "Understanding the Fed (210 KB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Review,vol. 89 (January/February), pp. 3-14, http://research.stlouisfed.org/publications/review/past/2007. Taylor, John B. (1993). "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,vol. 39, pp. 195-214, http://econpapers.repec.org/article/eeecrcspp/default1993.htm. _________ (2007). "Housing and Monetary Policy (244 KB PDF)," speech delivered at "Housing, Housing Finance, and Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1, www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2007/pdf/2007.09.04.Taylor.pdf. Footnotes 1.I am sure my colleagues join me in honoring John. However, my thoughts on policy rules are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Jinill KimandAndrew Levin, of the Board's staff, contributed to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text 2.Following John, the rule specification and the data used for the prescriptions closely follow the implementation of the Taylor rule in Bill Poole's speech in August 2006 (Poole, 2007). The inflation measure used for this rule is the four-quarter average headline CPI inflation rate, with the benchmark value set to 2 percent. Through 2001, the gap between real GDP and its potential is the value measured in real time by the staff of the Board of Governors. Because subsequent staff estimates of the output gap are not yet publicly available, the rule prescriptions for the post-2001 period are computed with the real-time output gap as constructed by the Congressional Budget Office.Return to text
Governor Randall S. Kroszner Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives BackgroundSubprime mortgages are loans intended for borrowers who are perceived to have higher than typical credit risk. In recent years, the subprime market has grown dramatically because of advances in credit scoring and underwriting technology, which enables lenders to charge different borrowers different prices on the basis of calculated creditworthiness. These loans are recognized by the higher prices they carry, which reflect subprime lenders' decisions to seek additional compensation for the credit risk they incur. As the overall mortgage market has grown, many new lenders and distribution channels have developed and most of those are outside the direct jurisdiction of the federal banking agencies. A review of data provided by mortgage lenders pursuant to the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act reveals that lenders that are not subject to oversight by a federal banking agency originated just under half of the higher-priced conventional first lien mortgage loans reported in 2006. While the expansion of the subprime mortgage market over the past decade has increased access to credit, the subprime mortgage market during recent years was also accompanied by a deterioration in underwriting standards. In some cases, abusive or fraudulent lending practices resulted in homeowners taking on mortgage obligations they could not afford, with terms they may not have fully understood. Delinquencies and foreclosures have increased. During the past two years, serious delinquencies among subprime adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) have increased dramatically, reaching nearly 16 percent in August, roughly triple the recent low in mid-2005. For so-called near-prime loans in alt-A securitized pools (those made to borrowers who typically have higher credit scores than subprime borrowers but still pose more risk than prime borrowers), the serious delinquency rate has also risen, to 3 percent from 1 percent only a year ago. These patterns contrast sharply with those in the prime-mortgage sector, in which less than 1 percent of loans are seriously delinquent. Higher delinquencies have begun to show through to foreclosures. About 320,000 foreclosures were initiated in each of the first two quarters of this year (just more than half of them on subprime mortgages), up from an average of about 225,000 during the past six years. Foreclosure starts tend to be high in states with stressed economic conditions and to rise where house prices have decelerated or fallen. Adjustable-rate subprime mortgages originated in 2006 have performed the worst, with some of them defaulting after only one or two payments (or even no payment at all). Relative to earlier vintages, more of these loans carried greater risks beyond weak borrower credit histories--including very high initial cumulative loan-to-value ratios and less documentation of borrower income. The recent increase in delinquencies and foreclosures has created personal, financial, and social distress for many homeowners and communities. We encourage servicers of securitized mortgages to reach out to financially stressed homeowners. Keeping families in their homes is a matter of great importance to the Federal Reserve. In fact, the twelve Federal Reserve Banks are working closely around the country with community and industry groups dedicated to reducing homeowners' risks of foreclosure. Each of the Reserve Bank community affairs offices provides significant leadership and technical assistance in this area. I am also pleased to serve as the Federal Reserve's representative on the board of directors of NeighborWorks America, which has a program to encourage borrowers facing mortgage payment difficulties to seek help by making early contact with their lenders, servicers, or trusted counselors. NeighborWorks' Center for Foreclosure Prevention Center recently launched a national advertising campaign to raise awareness about its 24-hour national hotline that connects struggling borrowers with homeownership counselors. Since the launch of the campaign this past June, the daily call volume has almost doubled from 1,000 to almost 2,000 calls a day. The Board's Response to Problems in the Subprime MarketThe Federal Reserve has primary rule-writing authority for many consumer protection laws. Consumer protection laws take two complementary approaches to consumer protection: one focuses on the provision of information, and the other involves the development and enforcement of rules against abusive practices. The Board believes it is extremely important to strike the right balance by seeking to protect consumers from predatory lending practices without restricting credit from responsible lenders to borrowers with shorter or lower-rated credit histories. To achieve that balance, we coordinate with other federal and state agencies, and consult with consumer advocates, lenders, investors, and other interested parties. Consumer protection regulations The Board believes it is important to provide consumers with pertinent and accurate information. Clearly, information is critical to the effective functioning of markets. A core principle of economics is that markets are more competitive, and therefore more efficient, when accurate information is available to both consumers and suppliers. When information on alternatives is readily available, product offerings must meet customers' demands and offering prices must reflect those of market competitors. If consumers are well informed, they are in a better position to make decisions that are in their best interest. As a result, a significant component of the rule-writing process involves crafting disclosure requirements that provide consumers with consistent and relevant information about the terms and fees of financial products. To be effective, disclosures must give consumers information that they can readily understand at a time when the information is relevant. To that end, the Federal Reserve will propose improvements to the rules governing the disclosure of mortgage loan terms and conditions and the timing of those disclosures. We will soon begin an extensive consumer testing process to ensure that the new disclosures we propose will be comprehensible and useful to borrowers. To further improve consumers' access to meaningful information, we are also developing proposed changes to the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) rules to address concerns about incomplete or misleading mortgage loan advertisements and solicitations, and to require lenders to provide mortgage disclosures more quickly so that consumers can get the information they need when it is most useful to them. The Federal Reserve is keenly aware, however, that disclosure alone may not be sufficient to combat abusive practices. In addition to providing consumers with better information, the Federal Reserve plans to exercise its rulemaking authority under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) to address unfair or deceptive mortgage lending practices. We plan to propose rules by the end of this year that would apply to subprime loans offered by all mortgage lenders. We share the concerns of Congress that certain lending practices may have led to the problems we are seeing in the subprime market today. We are looking closely at practices such as prepayment penalties, failure to offer escrow accounts for taxes and insurance, stated-income and low-documentation lending, and the failure to give adequate consideration to a borrower's ability to repay. To ensure that any new rules will protect consumers without inappropriately reducing access to credit, the Board has obtained input from a wide variety of interested parties. I chaired a full day hearing in June that yielded valuable insight from both industry and consumer groups. The Board also solicited written comments from the public on the practices discussed at the hearing. The Board received nearly 100 comment letters, and staff is closely examining the issues raised and discussing possible remedies. Other federal and state agencies have been consulted as part of our efforts under HOEPA. We have also sought the views of our Consumer Advisory Council, which advises the Board on matters in the area of consumer financial services. The council's members represent the interests of consumers, communities, and the financial services industry. Coordinated enforcement of consumer protection laws Enforcement of consumer protection measures is also critical to protecting consumers from irresponsible or predatory lending. Indeed, the consumer financial services laws implemented by the Federal Reserve contain a number of substantive protections, reflecting carefully considered judgments by Congress that certain practices should be restricted or prohibited. The Federal Reserve enforces these rules through oversight of the institutions it examines for compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. The regulatory scheme for the mortgage industry has become extremely complex as the breadth and depth of this market has grown over the past decade and the role of nonbank mortgage lenders, particularly in the subprime market, has increased. As I mentioned previously, data collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act show that independent mortgage companies made about half of higher-priced mortgages in 2006. In addition, there has been an increased presence of mortgage brokers, often independent entities who take loan applications and shop them to depository institutions or other lenders. These market developments have resulted in mortgage lending extending beyond the federal banking agencies' oversight, and this underscores the importance of collaborating with the state banking agencies and other organizations to address concerns in the subprime mortgage market. To this end, we have launched a cooperative pilot project with other federal and state agencies to conduct reviews of non-depository lenders with significant subprime mortgage operations. The reviews will evaluate the companies' underwriting standards and senior-management oversight of risk-management strategies for ensuring compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. Our partners in this initiative are the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal Trade Commission, and state agencies represented by the Conference of State Banking Supervisors (CSBS) and the American Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators (AARMR). At the conclusion of the reviews, the agencies will analyze the results and determine whether to continue the project and, if so, how to focus future reviews. Loss mitigation efforts The Board also has worked with the other federal financial agencies to guide federally supervised institutions as they deal with borrower mortgage default. In April 2007, the federal financial institution agencies issued aStatement on Working with Mortgage Borrowers(20 KB PDF).The statement encourages federally regulated institutions to work constructively with residential borrowers at risk of default and to consider prudent workout arrangements that avoid unnecessary foreclosures. In cooperation with CSBS, the federal financial agencies issued aStatement on Loss Mitigation Strategies for Servicers of Residential Mortgages(21 KB PDF)in September 2007 to address subprime and other mortgage loans that have been transferred into securitization trusts. The statement calls on servicers of securitized mortgages to review the governing documents for the trusts to determine the full extent of their authority to restructure loans that are delinquent or in default or are in imminent risk of default. To the extent possible, efforts should be made to avoid foreclosure. We encourage servicers to reach out to financially stressed homeowners, to make every effort to keep them in their homes. Lenders and servicers, for example, may be able to assist troubled borrowers by modifying the loan, deferring payments, extending the loan maturities, converting an adjustable-rate mortgage to a fixed-rate or fully-indexed loan, or capitalizing delinquent amounts. The best outcome is a loss mitigation strategy that results in a mortgage obligation that the borrower can meet in a sustained manner. The use of these and other loss-mitigation techniques is consistent with the interagency guidance that emphasizes the importance of prudent underwriting practices to help ensure that borrowers can meet the terms of their mortgage obligations and maintain homeownership. Legislative ResponsesCongress is appropriately concerned about problems in the mortgage market. The Mortgage Reform and Anti-Predatory Lending Act of 2007 takes a comprehensive approach and is appropriately focused on the more problematic practices in the subprime mortgage market. We share Congress's concerns with these practices. As with regulations, it is important that new laws carefully target lending abuses without unduly restraining responsible lending. Getting this balance right is particularly critical now, as many borrowers facing rate adjustments may need to refinance into more affordable loans. The Mortgage Reform and Anti-Predatory Lending Act of 2007 would provide greater oversight and regulation of mortgage brokers, an approach that has merit. A nationwide registration and licensing system for all mortgage loan brokers would help limit the ability of bad actors to move to a new state after having run afoul of regulators in other states. The CSBS and AARMR have a promising initiative to establish a national registry. It would be appropriate for any new legislation to ensure that all individual brokers are included in the same nationwide registry. The Mortgage Reform and Anti-Predatory Lending Act of 2007 also addresses concerns about loans made without consideration of a borrower's ability to repay. The Board firmly believes that lenders should give due consideration to a borrower's ability to repay a loan, before the loan is extended. We and the other regulators have emphasized this several times in a variety of guidance statements on mortgage lending. This is also one of the areas we are looking at in our revisions to the HOEPA rules. In developing laws or rules to address repayment ability, the rules must be specific enough so that creditors can determine whether their practices are in compliance because legal uncertainty could have the unintended effect of reducing credit options for creditworthy subprime borrowers. At the same time, rules must be flexible enough to allow creditors to consider the pertinent factors and individual circumstances of particular consumers and to innovate prudently and fairly. The Mortgage Reform and Anti-Predatory Lending Act of 2007 would require originators to present borrowers with loans that are appropriate to the borrower's circumstances. In the case of refinancings, the bill provides that the loan must provide a "net tangible benefit" to the borrower. As I have discussed, the Board supports the goal of ensuring that consumers do not receive unaffordable and abusive loans. However, it is critical to carefully craft such laws or rules to ensure that they do not inappropriately reduce credit availability in the mortgage market, to the detriment of consumers. The Mortgage Reform and Anti-Predatory Lending Act of 2007 would hold securitizers and loan purchasers ("assignees") liable for the actions of mortgage originators. The securitization market is critical to increasing the resources available to fund home purchases and great care should be taken to ensure that investors in the securitization market can quickly and accurately assess and mitigate the risks, including the compliance risks, of mortgages sold in this market. Such laws should be very clearly delineated to ensure that they do not have a detrimental impact on the ability of lenders to securitize loans. Specifically, assignees must be able to conduct due diligence and determine whether an originator has complied with the law, so that they can evaluate and price for any risks. Finally, the bill would enhance HOEPA's protections by prohibiting abusive practices, such as prohibiting the financing of single-premium credit life insurance. HOEPA's points and fees trigger would be lowered and additional fees added. These potential actions merit discussion, and we welcome the opportunity to continue to work with congressional staff on these and other provisions in new legislation. ConclusionThe Board is engaged in several activities to assist consumers, and continues to develop rules that will improve consumer disclosures, address unfair or deceptive practices, and help consumers facing default and foreclosure. We look forward to working with Congress to enhance consumer protection laws while maintaining access to credit.
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the National Bankers Association 80th Annual Convention, Durham, North Carolina It is a pleasure to take part in this event. I commend our hosts for bringing together such a broad range of participants and for developing an agenda that addresses issues of great significance to the banking community. My goal today is to offer a broad perspective of the Federal Reserve's various responsibilities and complementary roles. The roles of the Federal Reserve may seem somewhat obscure and, to many, even disconnected. I would venture a guess that as bankers, you think first of examiners when you hear "Federal Reserve"--and perhaps do so with a groan. But as you know, bank supervision is only one of the Federal Reserve's functions. In my remarks today, I will speak about some of the Federal Reserve's responsibilities and discuss how they relate to markets, financial institutions, and consumers. The Central Bank and Monetary PolicyAs the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve has the unique power in the U.S. financial system to create money, giving it the ability to conduct monetary policy for the U.S. economy. That power also enables the Federal Reserve to provide liquidity--a capability that is particularly important when the financial system is under stress. Indeed, the Federal Reserve was established in 1913 as a means of addressing the periodic financial panics and accompanying economic downturns that had afflicted the nation at various times. The Congress has given the Federal Reserve specific objectives for the conduct of monetary policy--in particular, to conduct monetary policy in a way that promotes the long-run objectives of maximum sustainable employment and stable prices. Monetary policy is implemented primarily through open market operations--that is, the purchase and sale of securities in the open market--which gives the Federal Reserve the ability to control short-term interest rates. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) oversees the conduct of open market operations and formulates monetary policy by setting an operating target for the federal funds rate that is judged to be consistent with fostering the Federal Reserve's long-run objectives. As part and parcel of its pursuit of maximum sustainable employment and stable prices, the Federal Reserve has a broad responsibility to foster financial stability. I should hasten to add that financial stability does not imply that asset prices will be stable at all times or that investors will be protected from significant losses. Rather, financial stability is fundamentally about the efficient functioning of financial markets in channeling credit and financial resources to the most productive ends and allowing investors to effectively manage risks. During periods of financial distress, the Federal Reserve can promote financial stability by providing liquidity through both open market operations and the discount window. It can provide liquidity through open market operations by purchasing assets in the open market in exchange for newly created reserves. It can also address the liquidity needs of solvent but temporarily illiquid banks by lending to them through the discount window. Such lending can allow banks to meet payment obligations; to avoid "fire sales" of assets, which can disrupt financial markets; and to continue to lend to customers without tightening terms or credit standards, which can limit economic growth. It is important to note that the ability and willingness of the central bank to provide liquidity may be useful in reducing market uncertainty and bolstering investor confidence, even if the actual amount of liquidity provided turns out to be rather modest. For these reasons, the ability to provide liquidity is a critical tool of a central bank. This brief overview of the role of the Federal Reserve in fostering financial stability is instructive in considering the policy actions undertaken in response to recent disruptions and strains in financial markets. The Federal Reserve used a range of policy tools--including adjustments in short-term interest rates and the provision of liquidity--during this time of market unrest to counter the potential ill effects on the economy. On August 10, the Federal Reserve issued a statement announcing that it was providing liquidity to facilitate the orderly functioning of financial markets and would provide reserves as necessary to promote trading in the federal funds market at rates close to the target rate of 5-1/4 percent. The announcement also noted that the discount window was available as a source of funding. On August 17, the FOMC issued a statement noting that financial market conditions had deteriorated and that tighter credit conditions and increased uncertainty had the potential to dampen economic growth. The FOMC said that it judged the downside risks to growth to have increased appreciably and stated that it was prepared to act as needed to mitigate adverse effects on the economy arising from the disruptions in financial markets. At the same time, the Board of Governors announced that it had approved a 50 basis point reduction in the primary credit rate at the discount window, to 5-3/4 percent, to promote the restoration of orderly conditions in financial markets. Given the turbulence in the short-term funding market, the Board also approved a change in the administration of the discount window that would allow the provision of term financing for as long as thirty days, renewable by the borrower. And on August 21, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York announced some temporary changes to the terms and conditions of the System Open Market Account securities lending program, including a reduction in the minimum fee, in an effort to facilitate lending of securities by the Fed to address heightened safe-haven demands for Treasury securities. These actions appeared helpful in mitigating some of the strains in financial markets, but financial market functioning had not returned to normal by the time of the September FOMC meeting. At that time, we judged that a 50 basis point lowering of the target federal funds rate was appropriate to offset the effects of tighter financial conditions on the economic outlook and reduce the risks that a further tightening in credit conditions could impact the housing market and lead to significant broader weakness in output and employment. Bank SupervisionWhile the Federal Reserve's role in conducting monetary policy and providing liquidity garners a great deal of media attention, its role in bank supervision and regulation is no less important. The Federal Reserve shares responsibility for regulating and supervising the safety and soundness of the U.S. banking system with a number of federal and state government agencies. The Federal Reserve supervises state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System, the U.S. operations of foreign banks, and, in some cases, the foreign operations of U.S. banks. In addition, it is the umbrella supervisor of all bank holding companies and financial holding companies. Although the banks and nonbank subsidiaries of these entities are often supervised by other agencies, the Federal Reserve coordinates with the primary supervisors in assessing the overall financial condition of the consolidated organization. The scope of the Federal Reserve's supervisory activities includes regular examinations of depository institutions and inspections of holding companies to assess the safety and soundness of these entities and to ensure that they comply with relevant banking laws and regulations. In addition, the Federal Reserve contributes to the development of policies regarding banking supervision and regulation, collaborating with the other agencies to issue rules and guidance that help ensure that federally supervised banking entities are adhering to the high prudential standards that are essential to maintain a stable banking system. The Federal Reserve plays an instrumental role in developing policies that affect both domestic and international banking organizations. One visible example of such collaboration is the international effort known as Basel I and II that ultimately resulted in a framework that established minimum regulatory capital requirements, increased supervisory attention to banking institutions' capital adequacy and risk-management techniques, and enhanced public disclosure of banking organizations' risk exposures. These standards promote safety and soundness and reduce competitive inequi­ties among banking organizations operating within an increasingly global market. The full range of its supervisory activities gives the Federal Reserve ongoing access to critical information about the banking system that is pertinent to our assessment of the state of the overall economy and has proved highly valuable during the most recent market stress. With data on financial institutions' managerial, operational, and risk-management systems, the Federal Reserve has information about the overall condition of the banking institutions it supervises as well as insight into developments in the broader financial markets. Such knowledge allows for a broad and deep understanding of developments in financial markets and financial institutions. These supervisory activities provide the Federal Reserve with access to real-time information that facilitates the formulation of policy responses during periods of financial stress. For example, we are all well aware that the subprime mortgage market has presented supervisory concerns. The Federal Reserve has collaborated with various agencies to address these concerns, working to overcome challenges presented by the rapid pace of financial innovation and the complex regulatory scheme of the mortgage market. The federal supervisory agencies first issued guidance on subprime lending in 1999 and expanded it in 2001 to emphasize that lending standards should include well-defined underwriting parameters, such as acceptable loan-to-value and debt-to-income ratios and minimum acceptable credit scores. Further, it advises institutions actively involved in the securitization and sale of subprime loans to develop contingency plans that include alternate funding sources and measures for raising additional capital if necessary. As the mortgage industry continued to expand its product offerings, the Federal Reserve and the other federal agencies observed in 2005 that lenders were increasingly offering nontraditional, or "exotic," mortgage loans, which defer the repayment of principal and, sometimes, interest. Of particular concern with these types of loans were the lack of principal amortization and the potential for negative amortization. Moreover, the easing of underwriting standards and the marketing of these products to a wider spectrum of borrowers held the potential to create larger risks. In 2006, the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies issued guidance on nontraditional mortgage products to address these concerns. This guidance underscores the sound underwriting procedures, portfolio-risk management strategies, and consumer protection practices that institutions should follow to prudently originate and manage nontraditional mortgage loans. A major aspect of this guidance is the recommendation that a lender's analysis of repayment capacity include an evaluation of the borrower's ability to repay the debt by final maturity at the fully indexed rate, assuming a fully amortizing repayment schedule. Continuing concerns about the subprime market led the federal regulators to issue further guidance this year regarding adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs). Of particular concern were those ARM products that allow for low initial payments based on a fixed introductory rate that expires after a short period and then adjust to a variable rate, plus a margin, for the remaining term of the loan. These products may result in payment shock to some borrowers, heightening risks to both lenders and borrowers. Consumer Protection in Financial ServicesAs you can see, the scrutiny of safety and soundness issues in the subprime mortgage market also raised concerns relating to consumer protection--another area of significant responsibility for the Federal Reserve. Toward this end, the Federal Reserve has primary rule-writing authority for many consumer protection laws. It takes two fundamental approaches to consumer protection: one focuses on the provision of information, and the other involves the development and enforcement of rules against abusive and unfair practices. I will speak first about the importance of providing consumers with pertinent and accurate information. Clearly, information is critical to the effective functioning of markets. A core principle of economics is that markets are more competitive, and therefore more efficient, when accurate information is available to both consumers and suppliers. When information on alternatives is readily available, product offerings must meet customers' demands and offering prices must reflect those of market competitors. If consumers are well informed, they are in a better position to make decisions that are in their best interest. Information helps and empowers individual consumers by improving their ability to compare products and choose those that will help them meet their personal goals, and this informed comparison shopping enhances competition. As a result, a significant component of the rule-writing process involves crafting disclosure requirements that provide consumers with consistent and relevant information about the terms and fees of financial products. The Federal Reserve is keenly aware, however, that information alone may not always be sufficient to combat abusive practices--which brings me to the importance of rules and the enforcement of consumer protection measures. Indeed, the consumer financial services laws implemented by the Federal Reserve contain a number of substantive protections, reflecting carefully considered legislative judgments that certain practices should be restricted or prohibited. Enforcement of these rules is carried out through the Federal Reserve's supervisory oversight for compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. As consumer protection issues have emerged in relation to subprime mortgage lending, the Federal Reserve has sought to address concerns by using its various supervisory and rule-writing tools. In doing so, it is extremely important to strike the right balance by seeking to protect consumers from abusive lending practices without restricting credit from responsible lenders to borrowers with shorter or lower-rated credit histories. The guidance pieces on subprime and nontraditional mortgages that I mentioned earlier address many issues relating to consumer protection, in addition to safety and soundness. We are also undertaking other actions to address concerns related to the flow of information to consumers and enforcement of consumer protections. One concern is the need to improve the mortgage information that consumers receive. As I mentioned earlier, effective disclosure empowers consumers and enhances competition. But to be effective, disclosures must give consumers information that they can readily understand at a time when the information is relevant. I anticipate that to that end, the Federal Reserve will propose improvements to the rules governing the disclosure of mortgage loan terms and conditions and the timing of those disclosures. We will soon begin an extensive consumer testing process in order to ensure that the new draft disclosures we propose will be comprehensible and useful to borrowers. To further improve consumers' access to meaningful information, the Federal Reserve also plans to propose rule changes to address misleading practices in mortgage loan advertisements and solicitations. In addition to providing consumers with better information, the Federal Reserve plans to exercise its rule-making authority under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) to address unfair or deceptive mortgage lending practices. We plan to propose rules by the end of this year that would apply to subprime loans offered by all mortgage lenders. The practices that may be addressed involve prepayment penalties, stated-income lending, failure to require escrows for taxes and insurance, and making loans without regard to the borrower's ability to repay. In the many Federal Reserve efforts to gather input from a variety of stakeholders, including a full-day hearing I chaired in June that yielded valuable insight from both the industry and consumer groups, these areas have been highlighted as practices for which there is a potential for abuse. With respect to supervision of consumer protection in subprime lending, I would like to highlight an important collaboration with other federal and state agencies to expand consumer compliance reviews to include selected non-depository mortgage lenders. As I mentioned earlier, the regulatory scheme for the mortgage industry has become extremely complex as the breadth and depth of this market has grown over the past decade and the role of nonbank mortgage lenders, particularly in the subprime market, has increased. In fact, data collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act show that independent mortgage companies--those that are not depository institutions, subsidiaries of depository institutions, or holding company affiliates--made about 46 percent of higher-priced first-lien mortgages in 2006.1In addition, there has been an increased presence of mortgage brokers, often independent entities who take loan applications and shop them to depository institutions or other lenders. The increased fragmentation of the mortgage process, from marketing of products to servicing of loans after origination, has created a number of challenges in monitoring practices of various nonbank market players. These market developments have resulted in the oversight of mortgage lending extending beyond the federal banking agencies, and this underscores the importance of collaborating with the state banking agencies and other organizations to address concerns in the subprime mortgage market. Various outreach and research efforts have revealed the value of increasing the scrutiny of these lenders, to deepen our understanding of their policies and practices. To this end--and to take advantage of the dual-supervisory roles of federal and state agencies--we have launched a cooperative pilot project to conduct reviews of non-depository lenders with significant subprime mortgage operations. The reviews will evaluate the companies' underwriting standards and senior-management oversight of risk-management strategies for ensuring compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. Our partners in this initiative are the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal Trade Commission, and state agencies represented by the Conference of State Banking Supervisors (CSBS) and the American Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators. As part of this project, the Federal Reserve will review nonbank subsidiaries of bank holding companies for compliance with a number of regulations, including TILA, HOEPA, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act, and the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act. The other partners in the project will conduct similar reviews of non-depository subsidiaries of thrift holding companies, independent mortgage lending companies, and mortgage brokers doing business with these entities. The partner agencies intend to share information about their findings with each other, review the lessons learned, and seek additional ways to cooperate to ensure effective and consistent supervision of these entities. At the conclusion of the reviews, the agencies will analyze the results and determine whether to continue the project and, if so, how to focus future reviews. Finally, I would like to say a few words about what the Federal Reserve is doing to help borrowers who may be facing difficulty paying their mortgages. Undoubtedly, foreclosures can have a devastating impact on borrowers, lenders, families, and communities. To the extent possible, efforts should be made to avoid foreclosure. Toward that end, the Federal Reserve along with the other agencies have encouraged lenders and servicers to identify opportunities to work with borrowers confronting mortgage delinquency or foreclosure. For example, lenders and servicers may be able to assist troubled borrowers by modifying the loan, deferring payments, extending the loan maturities, converting an adjustable-rate mortgage to a fixed-rate or fully-indexed loan, or capitalizing delinquent amounts. The best outcome is a loss mitigation strategy that results in a mortgage obligation that the borrower can meet in a sustained manner. The use of these and other loss mitigation techniques is consistent with guidance that emphasizes the importance of prudent underwriting practices to help ensure that borrowers can meet the terms of their mortgage obligation and maintain homeownership. ConclusionIn closing, I would like to reiterate that the Federal Reserve is committed to using its broad range of policy and supervisory tools to support efficient and fair markets. I have touched on the ways the Federal Reserve has used some of its tools and described the various efforts we have under way. I assure you that the Federal Reserve will continue to use these tools, as well as to examine various other authorities, to respond in a deliberative and balanced manner that is in the interests of markets, financial institutions, and consumers. Footnotes 1.Robert B. Avery,Kenneth P. Brevoort,andGlenn B. Canner,"The 2006 HMDA Data (1.31 MB PDF),"The Federal Reserve Bulletin, September 2007, http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2007/pdf/hmda06draft.pdf.Return to text
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Watt, Ranking Member Miller, and members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate this opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve's work in support of minority-owned depository institutions. I serve as the Director of the Federal Reserve Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs. The Federal Reserve recognizes the important role that minority-owned banks play in the financial services market through the services they provide to their communities. In my testimony, I will focus primarily on a new program we have developed that builds on our long-standing commitment to minority-owned depository institutions and discuss our ongoing initiatives to benefit these institutions. Federal Reserve System's Minority-Owned Institutions (MOI) ProgramNationally, there are about 200 minority-owned depository institutions serving a broad range of communities and populations. Many of these institutions provide access to credit and financial services in markets that have historically been underserved and as a group they play a unique and important role that extends beyond their particular markets. The Federal Reserve System supervises nineteen minority-owned state banks that are geographically dispersed across eight of the System's twelve districts.1They are diverse in terms of their minority ownership (e.g., African American, Native American, Asian, and Hispanic) and the markets they serve. Some are quite profitable and operate in higher-income markets, while others serve lower-income communities and, in some cases, struggle to achieve earnings commensurate with their peers. Their challenges are similar to those faced by many other banks--controlling overhead expenses, difficulty in retaining qualified management, and meeting competition from larger institutions in their markets. The Federal Reserve is committed to the provision of financial services to all consumers and communities. One of the many ways we achieve this goal is by promoting the safety and soundness of all the institutions we supervise, including those that are minority owned. Through our regulatory, supervisory, and community development functions, we consistently provide assistance that addresses the unique challenges and needs of minority-owned banks, while at the same time holding these institutions to the same supervisory standards that we apply to all state member banks. We view this strategy as integral to our efforts to promote a safe, sound, and competitive banking system that also protects consumer interests. To enhance our support of minority-owned institutions, the Federal Reserve has been developing an innovative and comprehensive training and technical assistance program for minority-owned depository institutions. This program, which we expect to be fully operational in 2008, reflects our own experience with addressing the needs of these institutions, as well as the insights in the 2006 report on minority banks issued by the Government Accountability Office. In developing its program, Federal Reserve staff from across the System met with a number of minority-owned and de novo banking organizations across the country, as well as trade groups, bank consultants, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and other state and federal banking agencies, to learn about the challenges institutions confront in raising capital, growing, and attracting talent. These meetings provided valuable information about the special needs of minority-owned banks and also enhanced our understanding of the various issues that new and smaller institutions face. The resulting program includes training and technical assistance to address the unique needs of minority-owned institutions. To provide broad access to the program, the Federal Reserve will make all aspects of the training program available through classroom-style workshops, self-paced PC-based programs, and a web-based resource and information center. Elements of the program such as guidance for accessing capital, organizing boards of directors, regulatory expectations, and selecting vendors are applicable for non-minority de novo and community banks, and will be marketed to them as well. The training program consists of three modules that focus on issues that are most relevant at a particular point in a bank's life cycle. The modules have value for potential entrants to the industry as well as those that have been in the market for many years. They draw on data and experiences from experts in the fields of economics, accounting, finance, and compliance, and focus on the particular challenges of establishing and sustaining robust and vibrant minority-owned depository institutions. The first module, "Getting Started," addresses the steps involved in filing an application and other issues related to obtaining a bank charter, such as raising capital, assembling a successful board of directors and management team, and conducting market analyses. The second module, "Managing Transition in Years 1 - 5," targets institutions that need to manage growth and other transitions during the first five years of their existence. Training at this stage focuses on the institution's need to stabilize operations in a competitive environment and addresses issues essential to sustainability, such as maintaining capital and liquidity, managing credit and interest rate risk, ensuring compliance with banking laws and regulations, and developing new products. The third module, "Growing Shareholder Value," as its name implies, focuses on growing the institution and shareholder value. Participants in this portion of the training will learn more about how to achieve growth in a safe and sound manner, how to measure the performance of the board of directors and management team, and how to expand their market presence. Given that our minority-owned institutions are geographically dispersed and serve different types of communities, a great deal of flexibility is being built into the curriculum so that modules can be tailored to address institution-specific concerns or issues. In addition, each module features a section on supervisory and regulatory relations, aimed at building and reinforcing a strong dialogue between minority-owned banks and their regulators. To ensure that the program provides a consistent message while remaining responsive to the needs of its audience, the program includes uniform instructor training, individual coaching, and a way to obtain continuous feedback on the usefulness of course materials. The Federal Reserve is committed to respond to changes in the training needs of minority institutions by reviewing and adapting the curriculum as needed. An important benefit of the program is the impact we expect it will have on the Federal Reserve's supervision of these banks. Concepts underpinning the MOI training program are being incorporated into our examiner education curricula to provide staff with a deeper understanding of the issues unique to minority-owned depositories. This training responds directly to the comments expressed by bankers in our outreach and development phase of the program who indicated that it was important to improve the supervisory agencies' understanding of their business models and strategies. At the same time, they indicated it was important to hold minority-owned institutions to the same supervisory standards as other depository institutions. The pilot for the program will be launched on November 1, by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, starting with a "Growing Shareholder Value" workshop. We expect representatives from six different minority-owned institutions to attend. Three more workshops will be held in selected Federal Reserve Districts by the end of January, along with the roll-out of some web-based training. During the pilot period and after the full program begins in early 2008, the Federal Reserve will continue to work with the industry and interagency partners to identify ways to increase the training's value to minority-owned institutions. This new and innovative initiative underscores our commitment to providing essential information and supervisory support that will enable the banks we supervise to improve their operating efficiency--including reducing costs and regulatory burden--and enhance their ability to serve their communities more effectively. Federal Reserve's Ongoing InitiativesIn addition, the Federal Reserve has had other ongoing efforts that specifically provide support to minority-owned institutions. We joined the other banking agencies in 2006 and 2007 in hosting national conferences for Federally-insured minority-owned institutions. The conferences focused on the challenges these institutions face and the developments that are key to ensuring their long-term success and viability. System staff have also been participating in regional interagency and FDIC-hosted events for minority-owned institutions. These conferences and events have presented a unique opportunity for minority bankers, regulatory officials, and private industry representatives to exchange knowledge and increase awareness of matters affecting minority-owned institutions. We plan to present our new program at the 2008 Interagency National Conference next summer. Our ongoing commitment is further demonstrated through coaching and mentoring minority-owned banks that have struggled to manage growth while remaining profitable. We have also assisted the institutions through the applications process, including branch acquisitions. Branch acquisitions can provide a minority-owned institution with greater opportunities for growth and profitability. At the same time, sellers of the branches can receive positive consideration under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) by contributing the branches to minority-owned institutions. The Federal Reserve also sponsors numerous outreach events to which minority-owned institutions are routinely invited. Although the events, typically seminars and presentations, may not be specifically designed for minority-owned institutions, they cover an array of supervisory and other topics that are of interest to community bank senior officers and directors, regardless of ownership or affiliation. Innovation related to these outreach activities comes from throughout the Federal Reserve System, particularly since each Reserve Bank has local knowledge about specific concerns within its communities. For example, we have developed a brochure entitled "Delivering Financial Services to Indian Country" in response to routine inquiries from Native American tribes on how to start a Native American-owned financial institution. On the regulatory front, the banking agencies recently issued for comment a proposed document regarding the Community Reinvestment Act. One of the proposed questions and answers indicates that non-minority-owned banks' investments in minority-owned banks receive favorable consideration under the investment test, even if the minority-owned institution is not located in, and the activities do not benefit, the assessment area(s) of the investing institution. Our Response to the GAO's RecommendationIn your invitation letter, you asked us to discuss the status of the Federal Reserve's consideration of the GAO's recommendations made in its October 2006 report entitled "Minority Banks: Regulators Need to Better Assess Effectiveness of Support Efforts," in particular, the GAO's recommendation that the Federal Reserve improve its minority bank outreach. Since the GAO report was issued, the Federal Reserve has increased its resources dedicated to the support of minority-owned institution. System-wide, nearly thirty people have been actively involved in the development of the MOI program. These resources do not include the Community Affairs and supervisory staff involved in the Federal Reserve's extensive outreach efforts to its supervised institutions. We believe the actions we have taken since the GAO report was issued, discussed above, are consistent with the recommendations that we improve minority bank outreach. As I noted previously, while developing our new program for minority-owned institutions, the Federal Reserve obtained input from minority-owned institutions through face-to-face interviews and meetings with trade associations and state and federal banking agencies. The banking agencies have also surveyed attendees at the interagency conferences mentioned above. Additionally, we incorporated a mechanism to gain timely and continuous feedback on the effectiveness of our new program and plan to include minority institutions as a special topic at our next senior examiner training forum in the spring of 2008. Through a variety of methods, the Federal Reserve will continue to enhance our understanding of the needs of minority-owned institutions and the effectiveness of our programs. Finally, your letter asked if the Federal Reserve supports expanding Section 308 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA)2to include the Federal Reserve. While the Federal Reserve does not believe this is necessary, given our efforts to comply with the spirit of that provision, we certainly have no objection. The Federal Reserve at every level is committed to providing significant assistance and support to the minority institutions it supervises, and that support will expand once our pilot program is perfected and put into general operation. ConclusionIn closing, I would like to reiterate the Federal Reserve's commitment to promoting vibrant, competitive, and diverse banking markets. We are dedicated to using our roles as supervisors, regulators, community development facilitators, and consumer educators to support the minority-owned institutions and other organizations that contribute to our robust financial services system--and the consumers who are vital to that system's success. Footnotes 1.The state member minority-owned banks are in the Federal Reserve Districts of New York, Philadelphia, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco.Return to text 2.Section 308 of FIRREA established goals that the FDIC and the OTS must work toward to preserve and promote minority-owned institutions. The FDIC and OTS, in consultation with Department of Treasury, are required to provide minority banks with technical assistance and training and educational programs and to work toward preserving the character of minority banks in cases involving mergers or acquisitions of these institutions.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from August 16 through September 18, 2007. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Tuesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 18, 2007.The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The summary description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting.FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board’s web site athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/fomc.Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 18, 2007 The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Tuesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 18, 2007. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The summary description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board’s web site athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/fomc. Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 18, 2007
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the 32nd Annual Economic Policy Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (via videoconference) Bill Poole's career in the Federal Reserve System spans two decades separated by a quarter of a century. From 1964 to 1974 Bill was an economist on the staff of the Board's Division of Research and Statistics. He then left to join the economics faculty at Brown University, where he stayed for nearly twenty-five years. Bill rejoined the Fed in 1998 as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, so he is now approaching the completion of his second decade in the System. As it happens, each of Bill's two decades in the System was a time of considerable research and analysis on the issue of how economic uncertainty affects the making of monetary policy, a topic on which Bill has written and spoken many times. I would like to compare the state of knowledge on this topic during Bill's first decade in the System with what we have learned during his most recent decade of service. The exercise is interesting in its own right and has the added benefit of giving me the opportunity to highlight Bill's seminal contributions in this line of research. Developments during the First Period: 1964-74In 1964, when Bill began his first stint in the Federal Reserve System, policymakers and researchers were becoming increasingly confident in the ability of monetary and fiscal policy to smooth the business cycle. From the traditional Keynesian perspective, which was the dominant viewpoint of the time, monetary policy faced a long-term tradeoff between inflation and unemployment that it could exploit to keep unemployment low over an indefinitely long period at an acceptable cost in terms of inflation. Moreover, improvements in econometric modeling and the importation of optimal-control methods from engineering were seen as having the potential to tame the business cycle. Of course, the prevailing optimism had its dissenters, notably Milton Friedman. Friedman believed that the inherent complexity of the economy, the long and variable lags with which monetary policy operates, and the political and bureaucratic influences on central bank decisionmaking precluded policy from fine tuning the level of economic activity. Friedman advocated the use of simple prescriptions for monetary policy--such as thekpercent money growth rule--which he felt would work reasonably well on average while avoiding the pitfalls of attempting to fine-tune the economy in the face of pervasive uncertainty (Friedman, 1968). Other economists were more optimistic than Friedman about the potential benefits of activist policies. Nevertheless, they recognized that the fundamental economic uncertainties faced by policymakers are a first-order problem and that improving the conduct of policy would require facing that problem head on. During this decade, those researchers as well as sympathetic policymakers focused especially on three areas of economic uncertainty: the current state of the economy, the structure of the economy (including the transmission mechanism of monetary policy), and the way in which private agents form expectations about future economic developments and policy actions. Uncertainty about the current state of the economy is a chronic problem for policymakers. At best, official data represent incomplete snapshots of various aspects of the economy, and even then they may be released with a substantial lag and be revised later. Apart from issues of measurement, policymakers face enormous challenges in determining the sources of variation in the data. For example, a given change in output could be the result of a change in aggregate demand, in aggregate supply, or in some combination of the two. As most of my listeners know, Bill Poole tackled these issues in a landmark 1970 paper, which examined how uncertainty about the state of the economy affects the choice of the operating instrument for monetary policy (Poole, 1970). In the simplest version of his model, Bill assumed that the central bank could choose to specify its monetary policy actions in terms of a particular level of a monetary aggregate or a particular value of a short-term nominal interest rate. If the central bank has only partial information about disturbances to money demand and to aggregate demand, Bill showed that the optimal choice of policy instrument depends on the relative variances of the two types of shocks. In particular, using the interest rate as the policy instrument is the better choice when aggregate demand is relatively stable but money demand is unstable, with money growth being the preferable policy instrument in the opposite case. Bill was also a pioneer in formulating simple feedback rules that established a middle ground between the mechanical approach advocated by Friedman and the highly complex prescriptions of optimal-control methods. For example, Bill wrote a Federal Reserve staff paper titled "Rules-of-Thumb for Guiding Monetary Policy" (Poole, 1971). Because his econometric analysis of the available data indicated that money demand was more stable than aggregate demand, Bill formulated a simple rule that adjusted the money growth rate in response to the observed unemployment rate. Bill was also practical in noting the pitfalls of mechanical adherence to any particular policy rule; in this study, for example, he emphasized that the proposed rule was not intended "to be followed to the last decimal place or as one that is good for all time [but] . . . as a guide--or as a benchmark--against which current policy may be judged" (p. 152). Uncertainty about the structure of the economy also received attention during that decade. For example, in his elegant 1967 paper, Bill Brainard showed that uncertainty about the effect of policy on the economy may imply that policy should respond more cautiously to shocks than would be the case if this uncertainty did not exist. Brainard's analysis has often been cited as providing a theoretical basis for the gradual adjustment of policy rates of most central banks. Alan Blinder has written that the Brainard result was "never far from my mind when I occupied the Vice Chairman's office at the Federal Reserve. In my view, . . . a little stodginess at the central bank is entirely appropriate" (Blinder, 1998, p. 12). A key source of uncertainty became evident in the late 1960s and 1970s as a result of highly contentious debates about the formation of expectations by households and firms. Friedman (1968) and Ned Phelps (1969) were the first to highlight the central importance of expectations formation, arguing that the private sector's expectations adjust in response to monetary policy and therefore preclude any long-run tradeoff between unemployment and inflation. However, Friedman and Phelps retained the view that monetary policy could exert substantial effects on the real economy over the short to medium run. In contrast, Robert Lucas and others reached more dramatic conclusions, arguing that only unpredictable movements in monetary policy can affect the real economy and concluding that policy has no capacity to smooth the business cycle (Lucas, 1972; Sargent and Wallace, 1975). Although these studies highlighted the centrality of inflation expectations for the analysis of monetary policy, the profession did not succeed in reaching any consensus about how those expectations evolve, especially in an environment of ongoing structural change. Developments during the Second Period: 1998-2007Research during the past ten years has been very fruitful in expanding the profession's understanding of the implications of uncertainty for the design and conduct of monetary policy. On the issue of uncertainty about the state of the economy, Bill's work continues to provide fundamental insights regarding the choice of policy instrument. Money demand relationships were relatively stable through the 1950s and 1960s, but, in the wake of dramatic innovations in banking and financial markets, short-term money-demand relationships became less predictable, at least in the United States. As a result, consistent with the policy implication of Bill's 1970 model, the Federal Reserve (like most other central banks) today uses the overnight interbank rate as the principal operating target of monetary policy. Bill's research also raised the possibility of specifying the operating target in other ways, for example, as an index of monetary or financial conditions; and it provided a framework for evaluating the usefulness of intermediate targets--such as core inflation or the growth of broad money--that are only indirectly controlled by policy. More generally, the task of assessing the current state of the economy remains a formidable challenge. Indeed, our appreciation of that challenge has been enhanced by recent research using real time data sets.1For example, Athanasios Orphanides has shown that making such real-time assessments of the sustainable levels of economic activity and employment is considerably more difficult than estimating those levels retrospectively. His 2002 study of U.S. monetary policy in the 1970s shows how mismeasurement of the sustainable level of economic activity can lead to serious policy mistakes. On a more positive note, economists have made substantial progress over the past decade in developing new econometric methods for summarizing the information about the current state of the economy contained in a wide array of economic and financial market indicators (Svensson and Woodford, 2003). Dynamic-factor models, for example, provide a systematic approach to extracting information from real-time data at very high frequencies. These approaches have the potential to usefully supplement more informal observation and human judgment (Stock and Watson, 2002; Bernanke and Boivin, 2003; and Giannone, Reichlin, and Small, 2005). The past decade has also witnessed significant progress in analyzing the policy implications of uncertainty regarding the structure of the economy. New work addresses not only uncertainty about the values of specific parameters in a given model of the economy but also uncertainty about which of several competing models provides the best description of reality. Some research has attacked those problems using Bayesian optimal-control methods (Brock, Durlauf, and West, 2003). The approach requires the specification of an explicit objective function as well as of the investigator's prior probabilities over the set of plausible models and parameter values. The Bayesian approach provides a useful benchmark for policy in an environment of well-defined sources of uncertainty about the structure of the economy, and the resulting policy prescriptions give relatively greater weight to outcomes that have a higher probability of being realized. In contrast, other researchers, such as Lars Hansen and Thomas Sargent, have developed robust-control methods--adapted from the engineering literature--that are aimed at minimizing the consequences of worst-case scenarios, including those with only a low probability of being realized (Hansen and Sargent, 2007). An important practical implication of all this recent literature is that Brainard's attenuation principle may not always hold. For example, when the degree of structural inertia in the inflation process is uncertain, the optimal Bayesian policy tends to involve a more pronounced response to shocks than would be the case in the absence of uncertainty (Söderstrom, 2002). The concern about worst-case scenarios emphasized by the robust-control approach may likewise lead to amplification rather than attenuation in the response of the optimal policy to shocks (Giannoni, 2002; Onatski and Stock, 2002; and Tetlow and von zur Muehlen, 2002). Indeed, intuition suggests that stronger action by the central bank may be warranted to prevent particularly costly outcomes. Although Bayesian and robust-control methods provide insights into the nature of optimal policy, the corresponding policy recommendations can be complex and sensitive to the set of economic models being considered. A promising alternative approach--reminiscent of the work that Bill Poole did in the 1960s--focuses on simple policy rules, such as the one proposed by John Taylor, and compares the performance of alternative rules across a range of possible models and sets of parameter values (Levin, Wieland, and Williams, 1999 and 2003). That approach is motivated by the notion that the perfect should not be the enemy of the good; rather than trying to find policies that are optimal in the context of specific models, the central bank may be better served by adopting simple and predictable policies that produce reasonably good results in a variety of circumstances. Given the centrality of inflation expectations for the design of monetary policy, a key development over the past decade has been the burgeoning literature on the formation of these expectations in the absence of full knowledge of the underlying structure of the economy.2For example, considerations of how the public learns about the economy and the objectives of the central bank can affect the form of the optimal monetary policy (Gaspar, Smets, and Vestin, 2006; Orphanides and Williams, 2007). Furthermore, when the public is unsure about the central bank's objectives, even greater benefits may accompany achieving a stable inflation rate, as doing so may help anchor the public's inflation expectations. These studies also show why central bank communications is a key component of monetary policy; in a world of uncertainty, informing the public about the central bank's objectives, plans, and outlook can affect behavior and macroeconomic outcomes (Bernanke, 2004; and Orphanides and Williams, 2005). ConclusionUncertainty--about the state of the economy, the economy's structure, and the inferences that the public will draw from policy actions or economic developments--is a pervasive feature of monetary policy making. The contributions of Bill Poole have helped refine our understanding of how to conduct policy in an uncertain environment. Notably, we now appreciate that policy decisions under uncertainty must take into account a range of possible scenarios about the state or structure of the economy, and those policy decisions may look quite different from those that would be optimal under certainty. For example, policy actions may be attenuated or augmented relative to the "no-uncertainty benchmark," depending on one's judgments about the possible outcomes and the costs associated with those outcomes. The fact that the public is uncertain about and must learn about the economy and policy provides a reason for the central bank to strive for predictability and transparency, avoid overreacting to current economic information, and recognize the challenges of making real-time assessments of the sustainable level of real economic activity and employment. Most fundamentally, our discussions of the pervasive uncertainty that we face as policymakers is a powerful reminder of the need for humility about our ability to forecast and manage the future course of the economy. ReferencesBernanke, Ben S. (2004). "Fedspeak," speech delivered at the Meetings of the American Economic Association, San Diego, January 3, www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2004/200401032/default.htm. _________ (2007)."Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting,"speech delivered at the Monetary Economics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 10, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20070710a.htm. Bernanke, Ben S., and Jean Boivin (2003)."Monetary Policy in a Data-Rich Environment,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (April), pp. 525-46. Blinder, Alan S. (1998).Central Banking in Theory and Practice. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Brainard, William C. (1967). "Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy,"American Economic Review, vol. 57 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 411-25. Brock, William A., Steven N. Durlauf, and Kenneth D. West (2003). "Policy Analysis in Uncertain Economic Environments,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2003 (no. 1), pp. 235-322. Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2007)."Comparing Greenbook and Reduced Form Forecasts Using a Large Realtime Dataset (259 KB PDF),"paper presented at "Real-Time Data Analysis and Methods in Economics," a conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, April 19-20, www.phil.frb.org/econ/conf/rtconference2007/papers/Paper-Wright.pdf. Friedman, Milton (1968). "The Role of Monetary Policy."American Economic Review,vol. 58 (March), pp. 1-17. Gaspar, Vitor, Frank Smets, and David Vestin (2006)."Adaptive Learning, Persistence, and Optimal Monetary Policy,"Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 4 (April-May), pp. 376-85. Giannone, Domenico, Lucrezia Reichlin, and David Small (2005). "Nowcasting GDP and Inflation: The Real-Time Informational Content of Macroeconomic Data Releases," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2005-42. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October, www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2005. Giannoni, Marc P. (2002). "Does Model Uncertainty Justify Caution? Robust Optimal Monetary Policy in a Forward-Looking Model,"Macroeconomic Dynamics, vol.6 (February), pp. 111-44. Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent (2007).Robustness. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Levin, Andrew, Volker Wieland, and John Williams (1999). "Robustness of Simple Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty," in Taylor, John, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 263-99. _________ (2003)."The Performance of Forecast-Based Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty,"American Economic Review, vol. 93 (June), pp. 622-45. Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1972)."Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,"Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 4 (June), pp.103-24. Onatski, Alexei, and James H. Stock (2002)."Robust Monetary Policy under Model Uncertainty in a Small Model of the U.S. Economy,"Macroeconomic Dynamics, vol. 6 (March), pp. 85-110. Orphanides, Athanasios (2002)."Monetary-Policy Rules and the Great Inflation,"American Economic Review, vol.92 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 115-20. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (2005)."Inflation Scares and Forecast-based Monetary Policy,"Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 8 (April), pp. 498-527. _________ (2007)."Robust Monetary Policy with Imperfect Knowledge,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 54 (July), pp. 1406-35. Phelps, Edmund S. (1969). "The New Microeconomics in Inflation and Employment Theory,"American Economic Review, vol. 59 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 147-60. Poole, William (1970)."Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in a Simple Stochastic Macro Model,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 84 (May), pp. 197-216. _________ (1971). "Rules-of-Thumb for Guiding Monetary Policy," inOpen Market Policies and Operating Procedures--Staff Studies. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, pp. 135-89. Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace (1975)."'Rational' Expectations, the Optimal Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 83 (April), pp. 241-54. Söderstrom, Ulf (2002)."Monetary Policy with Uncertain Parameters,"Scandinavian Journal of Economics, vol. 104 (February), pp. 125-45. Stock, James, and Mark Watson (2002)."Forecasting Using Principal Components from a Large Number of Predictors,"Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 97 (December), pp. 1167-79. Svensson, Lars E.O., and Michael Woodford (2003)."Indicator Variables for Optimal Policy,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (April), pp. 691-720. Tetlow, Robert, and Peter von zur Muehlen (2001)."Robust Monetary Policy with Misspecified Models: Does Model Uncertainty Always Call for Attenuated Policy?"Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 25 (June), pp. 911-49. Footnotes 1.A recent example is Faust and Wright (2007).Return to text 2.Bernanke (2007) and the references therein.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke To the Conference on John Taylor's Contributions to Monetary Theory and Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Dallas, Texas(via videoconference) It is a privilege for me to open this conference dedicated to our colleague and friend, John Taylor. John's influence on monetary theory and policy has been profound indeed. That influence has been manifest in undergraduate lecture halls and graduate seminar rooms, in the best research journals, and in the highest ranks of government. His ability to crystallize important analytical insights and apply them to policy issues is unsurpassed. Indeed, in a speech a few years ago, I noted three concepts named after John that are central to understanding our macroeconomic experience of the past three decades--the Taylor curve, the Taylor rule, and the Taylor principle (Bernanke, 2004). I'd like to take a few minutes to review John's career and impressive body of work. After receiving his Ph.D. from Stanford nearly thirty-five years ago, John began his career as an assistant professor at Columbia University. Even in those early years, John revealed his interest in applying the analytical tools of economics to practical policy issues. He took a leave of absence from academia in 1976-77 to serve on the staff of the Council of Economic Advisers. I suspect that the circumstances of the mid-1970s intensified John's motivation to help improve economic performance through sound policymaking. During the late 1970s and early 1980s, John published a number of highly influential papers, including: "Conditions for Unique Solutions in Stochastic Macroeconomic Models with Rational Expectations," "Estimation and Control of a Macroeconomic Model with Rational Expectations," "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," and "Solution and Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Dynamic Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models." (As you can tell, John has always had a penchant for catchy titles.) Beyond its important technical contributions, this work showed that the insights and methods of the rational expectations revolution could be applied to models with sticky wages and prices. That observation has proved enormously influential in subsequent policy research. The rational expectations revolution helped to kill the idea of a long-run tradeoff between thelevelsof inflation and unemployment. However, John's analysis showed that, in the presence of aggregate supply shocks, attempts by monetary policymakers to reduce thevolatilityof inflation over time could be associated with higher volatility in unemployment, and vice versa. John's visual depiction of this policy tradeoff has come to be known as the Taylor curve. Interestingly, John's work anticipated the possibility that improvements in the conduct of monetary policy or changes in the structure of the economy could result in a shift of the Taylor curve--that is, a change in the ability of policy to smooth both inflation and employment. And indeed, what economists have dubbed the Great Moderation--a simultaneous reduction in the volatility of inflationandthe volatility of real economic activity--has occurred in the United States and in many other economies over the past quarter-century. Over the course of the 1980s, John continued his work on rational expectations issues and monetary policy and macroeconomics more generally. He also began to broaden his focus to matters of international economics. He developed a multi-country rational expectations econometric model--a truly ambitious undertaking, especially in light of the limited computing capabilities of the era. By this point in his career, John had firmly established his reputation as a leader in the profession. In 1989, John became a member of the first President Bush's Council of Economic Advisers. During the next four years, he played a key role in shaping the Administration's positions on macroeconomic, fiscal, international finance, and trade issues. The U.S. economy was entering a difficult period at that point. Among other problems, significant pressures on bank balance sheets were beginning to emerge that would damp economic growth for the next several years. While dealing with the serious economic issues of the time, John and the other members of the Council simultaneously produced an impressive manifesto for policymaking. They developed a rules-based approach to the conduct of monetary and fiscal policy and published it in 1990 in theEconomic Report of the President. That essay laid the foundation for what is perhaps John's most well-known contribution to economics--the simple description of the determinants of monetary policy that eventually became known as the Taylor rule.1John's analysis triggered an avalanche of studies examining the stabilization properties of Taylor rules in the context of macroeconomic models. Other work investigated the ability of variants of the Taylor rule to describe empirically the actual course of monetary policy in the United States and in other economies. The Taylor rule also embeds a basic principle of sound monetary policy that has subsequently been referred to as the Taylor principle.2According to this principle, when a shock causes a shift in the inflation rate, the central bank must adjust the nominal interest rate by more than one-for-one. This ensures that the real interest rate moves in the right direction to restore price stability. The Taylor principle provides essential guidance for central banks on how to anchor long-run inflation expectations and foster stable growth and low inflation. Ever since its inception, John has emphasized that the Taylor rule should not be applied mechanistically. The world is far too complicated for that. But he has argued that such rules can serve as useful benchmarks for the practical conduct of monetary policy. In fact, policymakers at the Federal Reserve and many other central banks do routinely consult various policy rules as they make judgments on the appropriate stance of monetary policy. After a decade back at Stanford, John was called again to Washington by President Bush--this time the current President Bush. He served as Under Secretary for International Affairs at the U.S. Treasury from 2001 through 2005. Our economy faced severe challenges during that period--the terrorist attacks of September 11, a recession and the threat of deflation, corporate governance scandals, and economic issues posed by the conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq. Suffice it to say, John earned his stripes as the leader of the "Global Financial Warriors." As detailed in his book of the same title, John worked extensively on the financial reconstruction of Iraq and on the development of financial tools for fighting terrorism. The Treasury Department recognized his efforts in 2004 with its Distinguished Service Award and in 2005 with the Alexander Hamilton Award for leadership in international finance. After his stint at Treasury, John returned once again to the less tumultuous life of a professor, ensconced in his offices at Stanford University and the Hoover Institution. I'm sure that, in between teaching and guiding the work of graduate students, he will continue to offer insightful commentary on monetary policy and other economic issues. And doubtless he will also continue to do pathbreaking research. Indeed, with our appetites whetted by the Taylor rule, principle, and curve, we now look forward to the Taylor dictum, the Taylor hyperbola, and maybe even the Taylor conundrum. Before closing my remarks, I would like to express my appreciation to President Fisher and the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas for hosting this conference. It is a terrific opportunity for celebrating John's contributions to monetary theory and policy. The papers on the program testify to the breadth and depth of John's work. I wish I could be there with you today to listen to the presentations and participate in the discussions. However, I know that you will have a productive and collegial gathering over the next two days. And I wish all of you--but especially my friend and colleague John Taylor--all the best in your endeavors. References Bernanke, Ben S. (2004). "The Great Moderation." Remarks at the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, February 20, Washington, D.C. http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2004/20040220/default.htm Bryant, R., Hooper, P. and Mann, C., (1993).Evaluating Policy Regimes:New Research in Empirical Macroeconomics. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution. Woodford, M., (2001)."The Taylor Rule and Optimal Monetary Policy."American Economic Review, 91(2), pp. 232-237. Footnotes 1.The number "two" and its inverse, one-half, played a key role in this rule: The benchmark setting for the federal funds rate would be 2 percent, plus the current rate of inflation, plus one-half times the gap between current inflation and 2 percent, plus one-half times the output gap.Return to text 2.This principle originally became apparent through numerical simulations of macroeconomic models with rational expectations (including Taylor's multicountry model); refer also to Bryant, Hooper, and Mann (1993). The phrase "Taylor principle" was introduced by Woodford (2001), who demonstrated this principle analytically in a stylized New Keynesian model.Return to text
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the Institute of International Bankers Annual Breakfast Dialogue, Washington, D.C. Price DiscoveryWhen markets are functioning properly, one of the key roles that they perform is what economists refer to as "price discovery."2Essentially, price discovery is the process by which buyers and sellers’ preferences, as well as any other available market information, results in the "discovery" of a price that will balance supply and demand and provide signals to market participants about how most efficiently to allocate resources.. This market-determined price will, of course, be subject to change as new information becomes available, as preferences evolve, as expectations are revised, and as costs of production change. In well-functioning markets, the price discovery process represents the efforts of market participants to use all available information to decide whether to buy or to sell or to abstain from buying and selling. In efficient and competitive markets, participants will tend to undertake a certain amount of due diligence before making their decisions. This means that prices do not just appear by themselves; a substantial amount of work is required by buyers and sellers for markets to produce prices that clear markets and provide useful signals to consumers and producers. Indeed, this is one of the brilliant aspects of the market mechanism in that a number of participants, each pursuing their own interests and trying to maximize their own welfare and profits, determine a market-clearing price. A core principle of economics is that markets are more competitive, and therefore more efficient, when accurate information is available to both buyers and sellers. But for markets to work best, market participants must utilize available information, including analysis of costs and benefits of obtaining such information. In the case of new and innovative products, there might be a particularly strong demand for information. Then this information must be processed appropriately before decisions are made about whether to buy or sell. In some instances, the price discovery process can break down and buyers and sellers are unable to discover any price at all--perhaps because of a lack of information or because of general uncertainty among market participants. I would suggest that this is fundamentally what has occurred in some financial markets over the past several months. This has certainly not been the case in all markets. For example, while equity markets in the United States have experienced greater price volatility in recent months, and credit spreads have widened in markets for highly-rated, traditional debt instruments, I believe this has been a function of reassessing risk rather than a broader failure of the price discovery process itself. Moreover, investment-grade corporations faced little trouble in issuing traditional debt instruments during the market turbulence in August and did so in significant volumes. In some financial markets, however, the price discovery process appears to have actually broken down. In particular, I am referring to markets for structured credit products (for example, collateralized loan obligations and collateralized debt obligations) that are often complex and opaque, as well as instruments that are linked to these structured products, such as asset-backed commercial paper. Why did the price discovery process fail in these markets but not in others? I would suggest that there are two principal related causes. First, some investors may not have done sufficient due diligence with regard to complex structured products. Prior to the recent market disruptions, many buyers and sellers of complex structured products appear not to have demanded sufficient information from sellers, and simply accepted investment-grade ratings of these securities as a substitute for their own risk analysis. When the problems in the subprime mortgage market began to emerge and delinquencies on subprime mortgages in pools backing these securities exceeded rating agency estimates, subsequently resulting in a number of downgrades, investors lost confidence in the quality of these ratings, and hence the quality of the information they had about these instruments, and pulled back from markets for structured products across the board. A second, related factor contributing to the breakdown in price discovery is the recognition by investors of complexity and lack of transparency, both in the instruments themselves and in the markets more broadly. The complex structures of the innovative instruments, and the lack of transparency with regard to the underlying assets backing these instruments, made them more difficult and costly to value than many investors originally thought. At the same time, many investors realized that it was difficult to identify where the risks were lodged. This uncertainty, of course, is one of the trade-offs of a more market-intermediated finance system in which risks are more widely dispersed rather than concentrated in the banking system. As problems in the subprime mortgage market became more apparent, investors became unwilling to purchase products that could have any exposure not only to subprime mortgages, but to housing-related assets and other structured products more generally. Put simply, investors suddenly realized that they were much less informed than they originally thought. In these circumstances, it is not necessarily surprising that investors pulled back from purchasing certain instruments at any price. Prospects for Market RecoveryIn light of these factors, what is the prognosis for recovery in markets for complex structured credit instruments? I would suggest that, while we have seen more normal price discovery activity slowly returning to some markets, the recovery may be a relatively gradual process, and these markets may not look the same when they re-emerge. Both investors and sellers will need to take steps for the price discovery process to be re-established in these markets. In observing the challenges to price discovery and the repricing of risk in many markets recently, I have been reminded of a Russian proverb that was made famous in the context of international relations but applies equally to investment decisions: "Trust, but verify." Let me explain. As I mentioned earlier, one of the reasons that the price discovery mechanism has broken down in some U.S. markets in recent months is that a number of investors failed to exercise due diligence and relied on rating agency assessments. That is, there was a lot of trust but not much verification. I would suggest that the value of independent due diligence on the part of investors is especially high for newer and more-complex products compared with more traditional, familiar, and less-complex products. Reducing the chance of unanticipated losses may require significant effort on the part of investors looking to purchase complex structured products and the creators or sellers of those products. To be able to better understand the risk profile of such instruments, some market participants will have to invest in three ways to revive the price discovery mechanism. First, they will likely need to collect more detailed data. In particular, investors will need to gather data more systematically to help them understand the nature and risks of the underlying assets and the structures of the instruments. Second, investors will likely require enhanced systems to warehouse and model data related to these instruments to better understand their risk profile, especially under stress conditions. Third, investors will likely need to ensure that they have the appropriate human capital expertise--that is, people--to interpret, understand, and act appropriately on the results of their modeling and analysis. The investment in data, modeling, and assessment will take time so there may be an extended period before normal price discovery will return in markets for some existing products. In turn, given the likely increase in the costs of producing and evaluating certain complex instruments, these actions and efforts may affect investors’ risk-reward calculus by increasing required returns--or the "hurdle rates"--on these investments. Creators and sellers may respond by reducing complexity, improving quality of underlying assets or increasing transparency and disclosure. In light of recent events, market innovation may result in new instruments that satisfy the needs of both buyers and sellers--instruments that, of course, should not just be accepted on their face but should be subject to proper due diligence. In the end, investors will decide for themselves whether acquiring the data and expertise necessary to participate in certain markets is worth the cost. As a result, it is likely that these markets and instruments will look different than they did prior to the recent market turmoil. Let me close by highlighting the role of the Federal Reserve over the past several months as a backstop source of liquidity in interbank funding markets. As price discovery broke down in a variety of markets, financial institutions, as intermediaries and liquidity providers themselves in the affected markets, became protective of their liquid reserves and balance sheet capacity. As a result, overnight and term interbank funding markets have come under pressure. The Federal Reserve accordingly took a number of steps to try to alleviate these pressures. The Fed’s initial action in early August was to increase liquidity in short-term money markets through larger open-market operations--the standard means by which it seeks to ensure that the federal funds rate is maintained at or close to the target rate set by the Federal Open Market Committee. This extra provision of liquidity helped bring the funds rate down to its target early in the day; it also eased banks’ concerns about the availability of funding and thus assisted the functioning of the interbank market. The vigorous provision of funds through open market operations succeeded in damping pressures in overnight funding markets. Yet, markets for term interbank funding remained strained. On August 17, the Federal Reserve Board took further action by cutting the discount rate--the rate at which it lends directly to banks--by 50 basis points, or half a percentage point. The Fed also adjusted its usual practices to facilitate the provision of financing for as long as thirty days, renewable at the request of the borrower. These actions also appear to have improved market functioning, though strains, particularly in term funding markets, persist even now. Moreover, judging from forward curves in interbank and overnight indexed swaps markets, market participants expect pressures in term funding markets to persist for several quarters. I should emphasize that the purpose of these actions was not to insulate financial institutions from the consequences of their business decisions, but rather to facilitate the orderly function of markets more broadly in the face of risks to the overall economy. I believe that this provision of liquidity has contributed, at least in part, to the recent improvements we have seen in the functioning of financial markets. Importantly, the Federal Open Market Committee’s most recent action, the 50 basis point cut in the target federal funds rate in September, was an attempt to help offset the potential effects of financial market turmoil on real economic activity. The breakdown in the price discovery process can, after all, have real economic consequences that the Federal Reserve should, in my opinion, consider when fulfilling its statutorily mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability. ConclusionIn the months ahead, the Federal Reserve will continue to monitor developments in the financial markets and act as needed to support the effective functioning of these markets and to foster sustainable economic growth and price stability. In addition, we will be reviewing the events of the past several months to understand the likely causes and effects. Thank you very much, and I look forward to a lively dialogue following my esteemed colleagues’ remarks. Footnotes 1.These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Reserve System as a whole.Return to text 2.See, for example, the work of Friedrich A. Hayek, including "Competition as a Discovery Procedure" inNew Studies in Philosophy, Politics, Economics and the History of Ideas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve’s public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur.
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Subcommittee on Domestic Policy, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, U.S. House of Representatives In my testimony today, I will first provide an overview of the Federal Reserve System’s Consumer Compliance Supervision Program, and then address the examination processes for both fair lending and the CRA. Finally, I will describe how we consider fair lending violations when we evaluate a bank’s CRA performance. An Overview of Consumer Compliance SupervisionThe Board has a long-standing commitment to ensuring that every bank it supervises complies fully with federal financial consumer protection laws, including the fair lending laws, and that every bank meets its obligations under the CRA. This commitment is rooted in the Board’s mission, which specifically calls for the effective implementation of statutes designed to inform and protect the consumer. The Federal Reserve fulfills this mission in four complementary ways. The first is regularly examining supervised financial institutions for compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. This includes taking supervisory action as appropriate to enforce the laws and resolve any consumer complaints. The second is rulewriting--issuing regulations, either separately (as with the Equal Credit Opportunity Act) or jointly with other federal agencies (as with the CRA), to implement consumer financial services and fair lending laws. The third is promoting consumer education through publications and through partnerships with other organizations. And the fourth is promoting community development and fair access to credit by conducting outreach and educational activities directed toward lower-income communities and traditionally underserved markets. Consumer compliance supervision, which includes the administration of the CRA and fair lending laws, has been a distinct function at the Board and the Federal Reserve Banks for more than thirty years. The Board’s Division of Consumer and Community Affairs (DCCA) is staffed with approximately 100 professionals, including attorneys, analysts, and economists who have responsibility for carrying out the Board’s programs relating to rulemaking, policy development, community affairs, consumer education, examiner training, fair lending enforcement, and oversight of the supervisory and consumer complaint functions at the Reserve Banks. A specialized Fair Lending Enforcement Section within the division works closely with Reserve Bank staff to provide guidance on fair lending matters and to ensure that the fair lending laws are enforced consistently and rigorously throughout the Federal Reserve System. The Federal Reserve Banks are instrumental in carrying out the Board’s mission of consumer protection through their supervision of the approximately 900 state member banks for which the System has regulatory responsibility. As of June 30, 2007, the twelve Federal Reserve Banks had a professional staff of 287 specializing in consumer compliance. Federal Reserve consumer compliance examiners focus exclusively on consumer compliance supervision and are required to complete a comprehensive training program that includes specialized, intensive coursework on CRA and fair lending. The examination force is complemented by supervisory staff and management at each Reserve Bank who also dedicate their energies to consumer compliance activities. One objective of our consumer compliance examination program is to identify and control compliance risks before they harm consumers. In conducting a consumer compliance examination at a state member bank, examiners review the commitment and ability of bank management to comply with consumer protection laws and the bank’s actual compliance with such laws. Examinations follow a risk-focused approach tailored to fit the risk profile of the bank. This approach directs supervisory attention and resources to the products, services, and areas of the bank’s operations that pose the greatest risk to consumers. Our examiners prepare a stand-alone consumer compliance examination report bearing a distinct consumer compliance rating for each state member bank we supervise. These confidential reports include an evaluation of the bank’s compliance management program, a summary of the fair lending review, and a discussion of identified violations of laws and regulations. When examiners identify banks with weak and ineffective compliance programs, they take appropriate supervisory action, including documenting the weaknesses in the examination report. Banks with a poor record of compliance1are examined more frequently than those with favorable records.2To ensure that banks with performance deficiencies give appropriate attention to supervisory concerns, we may require them to enter into informal enforcement actions, such as a Memorandum of Understanding. When necessary to obtain compliance with consumer protection laws, we can use formal, public enforcement actions, such as civil money penalties, Written Agreements, or Cease and Desist Orders. However, most banks voluntarily address any violations and weaknesses in compliance management programs that our examiners identify. Examiners also prepare a separate CRA public performance evaluation that describes a bank’s record of helping to meet the lending, service, and investment needs of their communities. The public performance evaluation includes a CRA rating that reflects the institution’s overall CRA performance as dictated by the statute.3The interagency CRA regulations and examination procedures also stipulate that examiners will take any adverse findings from the fair lending review conducted as part of the consumer compliance examination, as well as findings of other illegal credit practices, into consideration when assigning a CRA rating. Fair Lending SupervisionCentral to the fair lending laws and the strength of our economy is the principle that each individual should have equal access to credit, without suffering discrimination based on race, ethnicity, national origin, gender, or certain other factors not related to creditworthiness. The Board takes a multi-pronged approach to promoting fair access to credit. We rigorously enforce the fair lending laws through the examination function. We also promote fair lending through rulemaking, consumer education, economic and consumer research, and the investigation of individual consumer complaints. My remarks today will focus on our fair lending examination responsibilities. Evaluating a bank’s compliance with the fair lending laws, namely the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) and the Fair Housing Act (FHA), is an integral part of every consumer compliance examination conducted by the Federal Reserve. Following the Interagency Fair Lending Examination Procedures, each fair lending examination includes an assessment of the bank’s fair lending risk across its business lines. Based on this assessment of risk, examiners identify specific business lines on which to focus, and in every examination they evaluate in detail at least one product or class of products. When conducting these evaluations, consumer compliance examiners perform two distinct functions. First, examiners evaluate the bank’s overall fair lending compliance program. They make sure that management is committed to fair lending and has the appropriate systems, policies, and staff in place to prevent violations. They also assess whether the bank devotes a level of resources to consumer compliance that is commensurate with its size, the complexity of its business lines, and the fair lending risk posed by its business practices. Examiners require that every bank makes fair lending a high priority, from the loan officer up to the board of directors. If a bank’s staff or systems fall short, examiners direct the bank to take corrective action. Second, examiners determine if the bank has, in fact, violated the fair lending laws. They review lending policies and practices to make sure they are not discriminatory. Examiners also test the institution’s actual lending record for specific types of discrimination, such as underwriting discrimination in consumer loans, or pricing discrimination in mortgage or automobile lending. This testing for discrimination may use statistical techniques, manual reviews of loan files, or both. When examiners find evidence of potential discrimination, they coordinate closely with the Board’s Fair Lending Enforcement Section, which brings additional legal and statistical expertise to bear. Because the Federal Reserve expects the banks we supervise to devote significant resources to fair lending, and because we examine them routinely for fair lending compliance, we expect fair lending violations--especially those involving a pattern or practice of discrimination--to be rare among the banks we supervise. Our experience has been that such violations are indeed rare, but when they do occur, we do not hesitate to take strong action. If we have reason to believe that an institution has engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination under ECOA, the Board, like the other federal banking agencies, has a statutory responsibility under that Act to refer the matter to the Department of Justice (DOJ), which reviews the referral and decides if further investigation is warranted. A DOJ investigation may result in a public civil enforcement action or settlement. The DOJ may instead return the matter to the Federal Reserve for administrative enforcement. When this occurs, we ensure that the institution corrects the problems and makes appropriate amends to the victims. We take our responsibility to refer matters to the DOJ seriously. To date in 2007, we have referred six institutions after concluding that we had reason to believe that they had engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination. These referrals involved:ethnic and racial discrimination in mortgage pricing,racial discrimination in the pricing of automobile loans,restrictions on lending on Native American lands,restrictions on row house lending that discriminated on the basis of race,discrimination against unmarried people in the underwriting of consumer loans, anddiscrimination on the basis of marital status by improperly requiring spousal signatures.In 2006, we referred four institutions to the DOJ for a wide range of issues after concluding that we had reason to believe they had engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination. These issues included pricing discrimination in auto lending, mortgage redlining, and age discrimination.Our referral record, which is publicly documented in our annual reports to Congress, demonstrates the Board’s strong commitment to rigorous fair lending enforcement. Our referrals account for two of the three public fair lending enforcement actions that the DOJ has brought in the past five years based on agency fair lending referrals. One of these enforcement actions involved redlining in mortgage, consumer, and small business lending; the other involved marital status discrimination in the pricing of automobile loans.4Even if a bank’s fair lending violations do not constitute a pattern or practice, the Federal Reserve makes sure they are remedied by the bank. For example, when we find isolated violations where a bank has illegally required spousal signatures on loan documents, constituting discrimination on the basis of marital status, we direct the bank to offer to release the spouse from any obligation for repayment of the debt. As discussed in more detail below, we consider any findings of fair lending violations--whether or not they constitute a pattern or practice--when we evaluate a bank’s CRA performance.CRA ExaminationsThe CRA affirms that federally insured banks and thrifts have an obligation to help meet the credit needs of the entire communities they serve, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, in a safe and sound manner. The statute requires the federal financial supervisory agencies to evaluate the performance of depository institutions they supervise in meeting this obligation, and directs the agencies to assign one of four ratings--Outstanding, Satisfactory, Needs to Improve, or Substantial Noncompliance--to describe an institution’s performance. Each rating encompasses a range of performance outcomes that are further detailed in the interagency regulations and examination procedures. The statute requires that an institution’s CRA evaluation, its rating, and supporting quantitative and qualitative data, be made public.During a CRA examination, examiners assess the bank’s performance within the context of all relevant factors, such as its business strategy, capacity, and constraints, the overall economic conditions and credit needs in its assessment area, and the availability of community development activities appropriate to the institution. Our attention to the performance context also reflects the obligation of federally insured depository institutions to help meet the specific credit needs of the particular communities in which they are chartered in a safe and sound manner. Thus, we do not apply a single performance template to all depository institutions and all communities.The community also has a role in the CRA examination process. The public can offer comments on an institution’s CRA performance. Our examiners review the bank’s public comment file and take any comments into account when evaluating its overall CRA performance.The agencies’ CRA regulations specify different performance expectations, and therefore different evaluation methods, depending on an institution’s size and its operations. A large institution, one with assets of $1.033 billion or more, is examined according to performance criteria under three separate tests. These tests measure the institution’s performance with respect to making and purchasing loans, providing qualified investments, and supplying services in its local community. A small institution, one with assets of less than $258 million, is examined under a streamlined method that focuses primarily on its lending performance. An institution with assets of at least $258 million, but less than $1.033 billion, is reviewed according to performance under a lending test and a community development test. In addition, wholesale and limited purpose institutions are subject to a community development test, which focuses on community development lending, investments, and services. Alternatively, any institution, regardless of its size, may elect to have its CRA performance evaluated under a strategic plan tailored to the needs of its community. The strategic plan is developed with community input, and must be approved by the institution’s primary regulator.Discrimination and other illegal credit practices are contrary to meeting the credit needs of a community and, as I will discuss, will adversely affect a bank’s CRA evaluation. There are, however, important differences between the CRA and the fair lending laws. The fair lending laws prohibit discrimination on specific bases, such as the applicant’s race, national origin and sex, but do not impose affirmative obligations on banks to serve low- or moderate-income communities. The CRA, on the other hand, recognizes that insured depository institutions have an affirmative obligation to help meet the credit needs of their entire communities, including low- and moderate-income areas, and requires the relevant supervisory agencies to evaluate their performance. The statute, however, does not address the distribution of credit with respect to the prohibited bases contained in the relevant fair lending laws.A bank’s CRA performance is evaluated, therefore, primarily on the distribution of its lending within its assessment area across borrowers and neighborhoods of different income levels. For residential mortgage lending products, CRA evaluations consider the distribution of loans across low-, moderate-, middle-, and upper-income borrowers and areas, with a special focus on lending to low- and moderate-income borrowers and areas. For small business lending products, CRA evaluations consider the distribution of small loans (loans of $1 million or less) across businesses with differing levels of revenue, with a particular focus on loans to firms with annual revenues of $1 million or less. For institutions of appropriate size, CRA evaluations also focus on their record of making investments in their communities, and of meeting the needs of their assessment areas through the provision of retail and community services.A bank’s CRA performance is evaluated within its assessment area. Under the CRA regulations, a bank must delineate an assessment area or areas that correspond to commonly recognized metropolitan areas or political subdivisions that surround its main office, branches and deposit-taking ATMs in which the bank has originated or purchased a substantial portion of its loans. The assumption underlying this approach is that branches, and certain ATMs, serve as the deposit-taking arm of the institution and, therefore, define its community for reinvestment purposes. The assumption also encompasses one of Congress’s findings in passing the CRA--that regulated financial institutions are required by law to demonstrate that their deposit facilities serve the convenience and needs of the communities in which they are chartered to do business.A bank is permitted to limit its assessment area to the portion of a political subdivision it can reasonably be expected to serve. But, the assessment area may not reflect illegal discrimination and may not arbitrarily exclude low- or moderate-income geographies, taking into account the bank’s size and financial condition. Although the assessment area is not separately evaluated as an aspect of CRA performance, the delineation is reviewed for compliance with the assessment area requirements of the regulation at the outset of the CRA examination. An assessment area that is not in compliance with regulatory requirements will be redrawn by the examiners and the CRA evaluation will be based on this new delineation.Pursuant to the CRA regulations, the evaluation of a bank’s CRA performance takes into account evidence that a bank engaged in illegal lending discrimination or other illegal credit practices that are inconsistent with helping to meet community credit needs.5Federal Reserve examiners conduct a fair lending review concurrently with, or close in time to each CRA evaluation, and the findings from that review are factored into the CRA evaluation.The public CRA performance evaluation summarizes a bank’s record of complying with the fair lending laws, and states whether violations were found and, if so, whether they negatively impacted the bank’s overall CRA rating. Pursuant to the CRA regulations, various factors relating to the violations will be considered when determining the bank’s assigned CRA rating, including the nature and extent of discriminatory practices, the policies and procedures in place to prevent such practices, and corrective action taken by the bank. A finding of discrimination could result, for example, in a downgrade of the rating otherwise earned to either Needs to Improve or Substantial Noncompliance, or from Outstanding to Satisfactory. However, if the discrimination was isolated, or occurred despite the existence of internal controls to prevent such practices, the violation may be reported in the written CRA Performance Evaluation without actually lowering the bank’s CRA rating. This reflects the fact that each rating encompasses a range of conduct and performance. An inadvertent or isolated violation may not be sufficient to move the bank’s overall performance assessment out of that range. I would like to give examples to illustrate different outcomes in CRA examinations.The 2001 CRA performance evaluation for First American Bank, Carpentersville, Illinois, provides an example of a bank whose CRA rating was downgraded as a result of fair lending violations. The public CRA performance evaluation explains that the examiners’ review of the bank’s delineated assessment areas raised substantive concerns, leading to the delineation of a new assessment area. The examiners then evaluated the bank’s CRA record based on the revised assessment area. The CRA performance evaluation notes that the bank would have received a CRA rating of Needs to Improve, but that the rating was downgraded to Substantial Noncompliance, the lowest possible rating, as a result of substantive fair lending violations. As documented in the DOJ’s publicly filed complaint, the Federal Reserve concluded that there was reason to believe that the bank had engaged in illegal redlining, in violation of the ECOA, and referred the matter to the DOJ. The Federal Reserve’s referral led to an investigation by the DOJ, which was ultimately resolved in a consent decree filed in July 2004.First State Bank of Porter, Porter, Indiana, provides an example of a situation where examiners did not downgrade the bank’s CRA rating based on identified fair lending violations for the reasons articulated in the 2006 public CRA performance evaluation, which states:Bank management is knowledgeable overall regarding the substantive provisions of anti-discriminatory laws and regulations. Policies and procedures have been implemented to ensure compliance with the regulatory requirements of the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (implemented by Regulation B) and the Fair Housing Act. Nevertheless, during the examination, a substantive violation of Regulation B was identified involving a product advertisement. The extent of the violation was limited in nature.The bank’s CRA rating was not negatively impacted by this violation due to the bank’s overall level of compliance with fair lending laws and regulations, the limited nature of the violation, the bank’s record of meeting the credit needs of the local community, the enhanced policies and procedures the bank has in place to ensure continued compliance, and management’s prompt, voluntary implementation of corrective action.Thus, as the examples illustrate, fair lending violations are taken into account in the CRA performance evaluation and can affect the overall CRA rating.ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is committed to safeguarding consumer rights in financial services. Key to this commitment is ensuring that every bank the Federal Reserve supervises meets its CRA obligation and complies fully with the federal fair lending laws. It is essential that every bank fulfills its obligation to help meet the credit needs of the communities that it serves, including low- and moderate-income-neighborhoods, while not discriminating on any prohibited basis in granting credit to individuals. Our supervisory process evaluates each bank’s compliance with the fair lending laws and takes that record into account when evaluating its CRA performance. Finally, our record of referrals to the DOJ demonstrates our firm commitment to enforcing the fair lending laws.Footnotes1.In evaluating a bank’s overall compliance with consumer regulations, the Federal Reserve uses an interagency uniform rating system. The rating system is based upon a scale of 1 through 5 in increasing order of supervisory concern. Thus "1" represents the highest rating, and ratings between "3" and "5" reflect escalating degrees of deficient performance and supervisory concern.Return to text2.Banks with less than satisfactory compliance or CRA ratings are typically examined every twelve months. Banks with assets greater than $250 million and satisfactory or better ratings are examined every twenty-four months. Small banks (i.e., those with assets less than $250 million) with satisfactory or outstanding ratings are typically examined every forty-eight to sixty months.Return to text3.Pursuant to the CRA statute, the public performance evaluation must include a CRA rating for the institution for each state where the bank maintains a branch, and for each multistate metropolitan statistical area (MSA) in which the bank has branches in more than one state of the multistate MSA.Return to text4.SeeUnited Statesv.First American Bank, Civil Action No. 04C 4585 (N.D. Ill. July 13, 2004), andUnited Statesv.Compass Bank, Civil Action No. 07-H-0102-S (N.D. Ala. January 12, 2007).Return to text5.In addition to findings involving discrimination in violation of the ECOA or FHA, other violations that affect the evaluation of a bank’s CRA performance include: violations of Section 32 of the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA), which addresses "high cost" mortgages; violations involving kickbacks and unearned fees under Section 8 of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA); violations of the Truth in Lending Act’s (TILA) provisions regarding a consumer’s right of rescission; and unfair or deceptive practices in violation of Section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (FTC Act).Return to text Our referral record, which is publicly documented in our annual reports to Congress, demonstrates the Board’s strong commitment to rigorous fair lending enforcement. Our referrals account for two of the three public fair lending enforcement actions that the DOJ has brought in the past five years based on agency fair lending referrals. One of these enforcement actions involved redlining in mortgage, consumer, and small business lending; the other involved marital status discrimination in the pricing of automobile loans.4 Even if a bank’s fair lending violations do not constitute a pattern or practice, the Federal Reserve makes sure they are remedied by the bank. For example, when we find isolated violations where a bank has illegally required spousal signatures on loan documents, constituting discrimination on the basis of marital status, we direct the bank to offer to release the spouse from any obligation for repayment of the debt. As discussed in more detail below, we consider any findings of fair lending violations--whether or not they constitute a pattern or practice--when we evaluate a bank’s CRA performance. CRA ExaminationsThe CRA affirms that federally insured banks and thrifts have an obligation to help meet the credit needs of the entire communities they serve, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, in a safe and sound manner. The statute requires the federal financial supervisory agencies to evaluate the performance of depository institutions they supervise in meeting this obligation, and directs the agencies to assign one of four ratings--Outstanding, Satisfactory, Needs to Improve, or Substantial Noncompliance--to describe an institution’s performance. Each rating encompasses a range of performance outcomes that are further detailed in the interagency regulations and examination procedures. The statute requires that an institution’s CRA evaluation, its rating, and supporting quantitative and qualitative data, be made public. During a CRA examination, examiners assess the bank’s performance within the context of all relevant factors, such as its business strategy, capacity, and constraints, the overall economic conditions and credit needs in its assessment area, and the availability of community development activities appropriate to the institution. Our attention to the performance context also reflects the obligation of federally insured depository institutions to help meet the specific credit needs of the particular communities in which they are chartered in a safe and sound manner. Thus, we do not apply a single performance template to all depository institutions and all communities. The community also has a role in the CRA examination process. The public can offer comments on an institution’s CRA performance. Our examiners review the bank’s public comment file and take any comments into account when evaluating its overall CRA performance. The agencies’ CRA regulations specify different performance expectations, and therefore different evaluation methods, depending on an institution’s size and its operations. A large institution, one with assets of $1.033 billion or more, is examined according to performance criteria under three separate tests. These tests measure the institution’s performance with respect to making and purchasing loans, providing qualified investments, and supplying services in its local community. A small institution, one with assets of less than $258 million, is examined under a streamlined method that focuses primarily on its lending performance. An institution with assets of at least $258 million, but less than $1.033 billion, is reviewed according to performance under a lending test and a community development test. In addition, wholesale and limited purpose institutions are subject to a community development test, which focuses on community development lending, investments, and services. Alternatively, any institution, regardless of its size, may elect to have its CRA performance evaluated under a strategic plan tailored to the needs of its community. The strategic plan is developed with community input, and must be approved by the institution’s primary regulator. Discrimination and other illegal credit practices are contrary to meeting the credit needs of a community and, as I will discuss, will adversely affect a bank’s CRA evaluation. There are, however, important differences between the CRA and the fair lending laws. The fair lending laws prohibit discrimination on specific bases, such as the applicant’s race, national origin and sex, but do not impose affirmative obligations on banks to serve low- or moderate-income communities. The CRA, on the other hand, recognizes that insured depository institutions have an affirmative obligation to help meet the credit needs of their entire communities, including low- and moderate-income areas, and requires the relevant supervisory agencies to evaluate their performance. The statute, however, does not address the distribution of credit with respect to the prohibited bases contained in the relevant fair lending laws. A bank’s CRA performance is evaluated, therefore, primarily on the distribution of its lending within its assessment area across borrowers and neighborhoods of different income levels. For residential mortgage lending products, CRA evaluations consider the distribution of loans across low-, moderate-, middle-, and upper-income borrowers and areas, with a special focus on lending to low- and moderate-income borrowers and areas. For small business lending products, CRA evaluations consider the distribution of small loans (loans of $1 million or less) across businesses with differing levels of revenue, with a particular focus on loans to firms with annual revenues of $1 million or less. For institutions of appropriate size, CRA evaluations also focus on their record of making investments in their communities, and of meeting the needs of their assessment areas through the provision of retail and community services. A bank’s CRA performance is evaluated within its assessment area. Under the CRA regulations, a bank must delineate an assessment area or areas that correspond to commonly recognized metropolitan areas or political subdivisions that surround its main office, branches and deposit-taking ATMs in which the bank has originated or purchased a substantial portion of its loans. The assumption underlying this approach is that branches, and certain ATMs, serve as the deposit-taking arm of the institution and, therefore, define its community for reinvestment purposes. The assumption also encompasses one of Congress’s findings in passing the CRA--that regulated financial institutions are required by law to demonstrate that their deposit facilities serve the convenience and needs of the communities in which they are chartered to do business. A bank is permitted to limit its assessment area to the portion of a political subdivision it can reasonably be expected to serve. But, the assessment area may not reflect illegal discrimination and may not arbitrarily exclude low- or moderate-income geographies, taking into account the bank’s size and financial condition. Although the assessment area is not separately evaluated as an aspect of CRA performance, the delineation is reviewed for compliance with the assessment area requirements of the regulation at the outset of the CRA examination. An assessment area that is not in compliance with regulatory requirements will be redrawn by the examiners and the CRA evaluation will be based on this new delineation. Pursuant to the CRA regulations, the evaluation of a bank’s CRA performance takes into account evidence that a bank engaged in illegal lending discrimination or other illegal credit practices that are inconsistent with helping to meet community credit needs.5Federal Reserve examiners conduct a fair lending review concurrently with, or close in time to each CRA evaluation, and the findings from that review are factored into the CRA evaluation. The public CRA performance evaluation summarizes a bank’s record of complying with the fair lending laws, and states whether violations were found and, if so, whether they negatively impacted the bank’s overall CRA rating. Pursuant to the CRA regulations, various factors relating to the violations will be considered when determining the bank’s assigned CRA rating, including the nature and extent of discriminatory practices, the policies and procedures in place to prevent such practices, and corrective action taken by the bank. A finding of discrimination could result, for example, in a downgrade of the rating otherwise earned to either Needs to Improve or Substantial Noncompliance, or from Outstanding to Satisfactory. However, if the discrimination was isolated, or occurred despite the existence of internal controls to prevent such practices, the violation may be reported in the written CRA Performance Evaluation without actually lowering the bank’s CRA rating. This reflects the fact that each rating encompasses a range of conduct and performance. An inadvertent or isolated violation may not be sufficient to move the bank’s overall performance assessment out of that range. I would like to give examples to illustrate different outcomes in CRA examinations. The 2001 CRA performance evaluation for First American Bank, Carpentersville, Illinois, provides an example of a bank whose CRA rating was downgraded as a result of fair lending violations. The public CRA performance evaluation explains that the examiners’ review of the bank’s delineated assessment areas raised substantive concerns, leading to the delineation of a new assessment area. The examiners then evaluated the bank’s CRA record based on the revised assessment area. The CRA performance evaluation notes that the bank would have received a CRA rating of Needs to Improve, but that the rating was downgraded to Substantial Noncompliance, the lowest possible rating, as a result of substantive fair lending violations. As documented in the DOJ’s publicly filed complaint, the Federal Reserve concluded that there was reason to believe that the bank had engaged in illegal redlining, in violation of the ECOA, and referred the matter to the DOJ. The Federal Reserve’s referral led to an investigation by the DOJ, which was ultimately resolved in a consent decree filed in July 2004. First State Bank of Porter, Porter, Indiana, provides an example of a situation where examiners did not downgrade the bank’s CRA rating based on identified fair lending violations for the reasons articulated in the 2006 public CRA performance evaluation, which states: Thus, as the examples illustrate, fair lending violations are taken into account in the CRA performance evaluation and can affect the overall CRA rating. ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is committed to safeguarding consumer rights in financial services. Key to this commitment is ensuring that every bank the Federal Reserve supervises meets its CRA obligation and complies fully with the federal fair lending laws. It is essential that every bank fulfills its obligation to help meet the credit needs of the communities that it serves, including low- and moderate-income-neighborhoods, while not discriminating on any prohibited basis in granting credit to individuals. Our supervisory process evaluates each bank’s compliance with the fair lending laws and takes that record into account when evaluating its CRA performance. Finally, our record of referrals to the DOJ demonstrates our firm commitment to enforcing the fair lending laws. Footnotes
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York The past several months have been an eventful period for the U.S. economy. In financial markets, sharpened concerns about credit quality induced a retrenchment by investors, leading in some cases to significant deterioration in market functioning. For some households and firms, credit became harder to obtain and, for those who could obtain it, more costly. Tightening credit conditions in turn threatened to intensify the ongoing correction in the housing market and to restrain economic growth. In response to these developments, the Federal Reserve has taken a number of measures to help ensure the normal functioning of financial markets and to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability. In my remarks this evening I will review recent events, discuss the Federal Reserve's responses to those events, and conclude with some comments on the economic outlook in light of recent developments. Although financial markets around the world have come under pressure in the past few months, I will focus my comments primarily on the United States. I will also have little to say this evening about the serious implications of rising rates of mortgage delinquency and foreclosure for troubled borrowers and their communities or about the Federal Reserve's responses to these important problems; I have discussed these issues several times in the past and will return to them in the future. The Origins and Evolution of the Financial TurmoilOverall, U.S. economic performance so far this year has been reasonably good. The rate of economic expansion slowed somewhat in late 2006 and early 2007, but growth in the second quarter was solid and some of that momentum appears to have carried over into the third quarter. The pace of private-sector job creation has slowed this year, but the unemployment rate has moved up only a little from its recent lows. And, although energy prices have been volatile, indicators of the underlying inflation trend, such as core inflation, have moderated since the middle of last year. Moderate growth in overall economic activity has continued despite a notable contraction in the housing sector that began in the second half of 2005. The housing correction has intensified this year as demand has declined further, inventories of unsold new homes have climbed relative to sales, and house prices have decelerated, with some areas of the country experiencing outright declines in home values. In response to weak demand and bloated inventories, homebuilders have sharply curtailed new construction. The decline in residential investment directly subtracted about 3/4 percentage point from the average pace of U.S. economic growth over the past year and a half. In its regular reports to Congress, most recently in July, the Federal Reserve Board has highlighted as a downside risk the possibility that housing weakness might spill over to other parts of the economy--for example, by acting as a restraint on consumer spending. Thus far, however, direct evidence of such spillovers onto the broader economy has been limited. The housing correction has taken a more visible toll on the financial markets. In particular, since early this year, investors have become increasingly concerned about the credit quality of mortgages, especially subprime mortgages. The rate of serious delinquencies has risen notably for subprime mortgages with adjustable rates, reaching nearly 16 percent in August, roughly triple the recent low in mid-2005.1Subprime mortgages originated in late 2005 and 2006 have performed especially poorly, in part because of a deterioration in underwriting standards. Moreover, many recent-vintage subprime loans will experience their first interest-rate resets in coming quarters. With the softness in house prices likely to make refinancing more difficult, delinquencies on these mortgages are expected to rise further. At one time, most mortgages were originated by depository institutions and held on their balance sheets. Today, however, mortgages are often bundled together into mortgage-backed securities or structured credit products, rated by credit rating agencies, and then sold to investors. As mortgage losses have mounted, investors have questioned the reliability of the credit ratings, especially those of structured products. Since many investors had not performed independent evaluations of these often-complex instruments, the loss of confidence in the credit ratings led to a sharp decline in the willingness of investors to purchase these products. Liquidity dried up, prices fell, and spreads widened. Since July, few securities backed by subprime mortgages have been issued. Investors' reluctance to buy has not been confined to securities related to subprime mortgages. Notably, the secondary market for private-label securities backed by prime jumbo mortgages has also contracted, and issuance of such securities has dwindled.2Even though default rates on such mortgages have remained very low, the experience with subprime mortgages has evidently made investors more sensitive to the risks associated with other housing-related assets as well. The problems in the mortgage-related sector reverberated throughout the financial system and particularly in the market for asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP). In this market, various institutions have established special-purpose vehicles to issue commercial paper to help fund a variety of assets, including some private-label mortgage-backed securities, mortgages warehoused for securitization, and other long-maturity assets. Investors had typically viewed the commercial paper backed by these assets as quite safe and liquid, because of the quality of the collateral and because the paper is often supported by banks' commitments to provide lines of credit or to assume some credit risk. But the concerns about mortgage-backed securities and structured credit products (even those unrelated to mortgages) greatly reduced the willingness of investors to roll over ABCP, particularly at maturities of more than a few days. The problems intensified in the second week of August after the announcement by a large overseas bank that it could not value the ABCP held by some of its money funds and was, as a result, suspending redemptions from those funds. Some commercial paper issuers invoked their right to extend the maturity of their paper, and a few issuers defaulted. In response to the heightening of perceived risks, investors fled to the safety and liquidity of Treasury bills, sparking a plunge in bill rates and a sharp widening in spreads on ABCP. The retreat by investors from structured investment products also affected business finance. In particular, issuance of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) and collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), which in turn had been major buyers of leveraged syndicated loans, fell off significantly during the summer. Demand for leveraged loans slowed sharply, reducing credit access for private equity firms and other borrowers seeking to finance leveraged buyouts (LBOs). Concerns about liquidity and credit risk surfaced even in markets in which securitization plays a much smaller role. For example, spreads on lower-tier unsecured commercial paper jumped and issuance was limited to very short maturities. In corporate bond markets, issuance of speculative-grade bonds dropped off sharply as risk spreads widened. And although equity prices have moved up on balance since late spring, swings in prices have been large; indeed, the expected stock-price volatilities implicit in options prices roughly doubled during the summer before falling back more recently. As the strains in financial markets intensified, many of the largest banks became concerned about the possibility that they might face large draws on their liquidity and difficult-to-forecast expansions of their balance sheets. They recognized that they might have to provide backup funding to programs that were no longer able to issue ABCP. Moreover, in the absence of an active syndication market for the leveraged loans they had committed to underwrite and without a well-functioning securitization market for the nonconforming mortgages they had issued, many large banks might be forced to hold those assets on their books rather than sell them to investors as planned. In these circumstances of heightened volatility and diminished market functioning, banks also became more concerned about the possible risk exposures of their counterparties and other potential contingent liabilities. These concerns prompted banks to become protective of their liquidity and balance sheet capacity and thus to become markedly less willing to provide funding to others, including other banks. As a result, both overnight and term interbank funding markets came under considerable pressure. Interbank lending rates rose notably, and the liquidity in these markets diminished. A number of the U.S. ABCP programs that had difficulty rolling over paper were sponsored by or had backup funding arrangements with European banks. As a result, some of these banks faced potentially large needs for dollar funding, and their efforts to manage their liquidity likely contributed to the pressures in global money and foreign exchange swap markets. The U.S. subprime mortgage market is small relative to the enormous scale of global financial markets. So why was the impact of subprime developments on the markets apparently so large? To some extent, the outsized effects of the subprime mortgage problems on financial markets may have reflected broader concerns that problems in the U.S. housing market might restrain overall economic growth. But the developments in subprime were perhaps more a trigger than a fundamental cause of the financial turmoil. The episode led investors to become more uncertain about valuations of a range of complex or opaque structured credit products, not just those backed by subprime mortgages. They also reacted to market developments by increasing their assessment of the risks associated with a number of assets and, to some degree, by reducing their willingness to take on risk more generally. To be sure, these developments may well lead to a healthier financial system in the medium to long term: Increased investor scrutiny of structured credit products is likely to lead to greater transparency in these products and more rigor in the credit-rating process. And greater caution on the part of investors seems appropriate given the very narrow spreads and the loosening in some underwriting standards seen before the recent episode began. In the shorter term, however, these developments do imply a greater measure of financial restraint on economic growth as credit becomes more expensive and difficult to obtain. The Federal Reserve's Response to the Financial TurmoilFortunately, the financial system entered the episode of the past few months with strong capital positions and a robust infrastructure. The banking system is healthy. Despite a few notable failures, hedge funds overall seem to have held up well, and their counterparties have not sustained material losses. The clearing and settlement infrastructure generally worked well despite trading volumes that were extremely high in some cases. Nevertheless, the market strains were serious, as I have discussed, and they posed risks to the broader economy. The Federal Reserve accordingly took a number of steps to help markets return to more orderly functioning. The Federal Reserve's initial action was to increase liquidity in short-term money markets through larger open market operations--the standard means by which it seeks to ensure that the federal funds rate stays at or near the target rate set by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). A number of other central banks took similar steps. One source of pressure in the overnight market was the demand for dollar funding by European banks to which I alluded earlier. As Europe is in the latter part of its trading day when U.S. markets open, this extra demand for dollars at times led the federal funds rate to open well above the target. The extra provision of liquidity by the Fed helped counter the resulting pressure on the funds rate early in the day; it also eased banks' concerns about the availability of funding and thus assisted the functioning of the interbank market. To be clear, an open market operation can provide market participants with increased liquidity; but the intervention does not directly increase participants' capital or allow them to shed risk. In essence, these operations are short-term loans collateralized by government securities. The vigorous provision of funds through open market operations succeeded in damping pressures in overnight funding markets. Yet markets for term funding, including commercial paper markets as well as the interbank markets, remained strained, and signs of broader financial stress persisted. On August 17, the Fed took further action when the Federal Reserve Board cut the discount rate--the rate at which it lends directly to banks--by 50 basis points, or 1/2 percentage point. The Fed also adjusted its usual practices to facilitate the provision of financing for as long as thirty days, renewable at the request of the borrower. Loans through the discount window differ from open market operations in that they can be made directly to specific banks with strong demands for liquidity. (In contrast, open market operations are arranged with a limited set of dealers of government securities.) In addition, whereas open market operations typically involve lending against government securities, loans through the discount window can be made against a much wider range of collateral, including mortgages and mortgage-backed securities. As with open market operations, however, Fed lending through the discount window provides banks with liquidity, not risk capital. In particular, the strong collateralization accompanying discount window credit eliminates essentially all risk for the Federal Reserve System and the taxpayer. Nonetheless, the availability of the discount window is potentially significant for banks, as it gives them greater confidence that they can obtain additional liquidity as necessary. Access to a backstop source of liquidity in turn reduces the incentives of banks to limit the credit they provide to their customers and counterparties. The Federal Reserve also took some other steps in response to strains in financial markets, including reducing the fee that it charges for lending Treasury securities from its portfolio, thus helping to meet the heavy demands in the market for those securities. The Federal Reserve's actions to ease the liquidity strains in financial markets were similar to actions that central banks have taken many times in the past. Promoting financial stability and the orderly functioning of financial markets is a key function of central banks. Indeed, a principal motivation for the founding of the Federal Reserve nearly a century ago was the expectation that it would reduce the incidence of financial crises by providing liquidity as needed. In its supervisory role, the Federal Reserve--like other bank regulators--attempts to ensure that individual banks maintain adequate liquidity on hand and make provision to raise additional funds quickly when the need arises. We must be wary of a subtle fallacy of composition, however. Even if each market participant holds a significant reserve of what--in normal times, at least--would be considered highly liquid assets, for the system as a whole the only truly liquid assets are cash and its equivalents. The quantity of cash assets in the system at a point in time is, in turn, essentially fixed, being determined directly or indirectly by the central bank. Thus, whenever an investor sells less liquid assets to raise cash, the cash holdings of other market participants are reduced by an equal amount. Consequently, in highly stressed financial conditions, when the marketwide demand for liquidity rises sharply, one of two things must happen: Either the central bank provides the liquidity demanded by lending against good collateral, or forced sales of illiquid assets will drive the prices of those assets well below their longer-term fundamental values, raising the risk of widespread insolvency and intensifying the crisis. If the crisis becomes sufficiently severe, history suggests that damage to the broader economy is likely to follow. In his classic 1873 treatise,Lombard Street, Walter Bagehot famously articulated the need for central banks to be prepared to lend freely against good collateral (what he called "good banking security") but at a penalty rate.3A panic, said Bagehot, is a "species of neuralgia" and as such must not be starved (p. 25). Of course, judgment is required to assess whether a particular set of market conditions is severe enough to warrant extraordinary injections of liquidity by the central bank; a too-aggressive intervention could unduly reduce the incentives of market participants to insure against more-normal liquidity risks. In the steps it took, the Federal Reserve strove to reach a middle ground, signaling its willingness and ability to provide liquidity to markets as needed without significantly distorting the incentives of individual banks and other market participants to manage their liquidity prudently. The Federal Reserve's efforts to provide liquidity appear to have been helpful on the whole. To be sure, the volume of loans to banks made through the discount window, though it increased for a time, has been modest. However, collateral placed by banks at the discount window in anticipation of possible borrowing rose sharply during August and September, suggesting that some banks viewed the discount window as a potentially valuable option. On the other hand, no amount of liquidity provision by the central bank can be expected to solve the problems regarding the valuation of complex securitized assets or to reverse the credit losses on subprime mortgages. These underlying difficulties will be resolved only over time by financial markets. Since mid-August the functioning of financial markets has improved to some degree, supported not only by liquidity provision but also by the monetary policy action taken in September, to which I will return in a moment. Interest rate spreads on ABCP have fallen by more than half from their recent peaks, and overall commercial paper outstanding has edged up this month after declining sharply over August and September. Interbank term funding markets have improved modestly, though spreads there remain unusually wide. Some progress has been made in bringing pending LBO-related loans to market, albeit at discounts and with tightened terms. Risk spreads in corporate bond markets have narrowed somewhat, the issuance of speculative-grade bonds has restarted, and investment-grade issuance has been strong. Volatility in many asset markets has declined toward more-normal levels. Perhaps most important, in many markets investors are showing an increased capacity and willingness to differentiate among assets of varying quality. In contrast, despite a few encouraging signs, conditions in mortgage markets remain difficult. The markets for securitized nonprime (that is, subprime and so-called alt-A) loans are showing little activity, securitizations of prime jumbo mortgages reportedly have increased only slightly from low levels, and the spread between the interest rates on nonconforming and conforming mortgages remains elevated. These continued problems suggest that investors will need more time to gather information and reevaluate risks before they are willing to reenter these markets. Monetary Policy and the Economic OutlookThe Federal Reserve's efforts to support the normal functioning of financial markets have as their ultimate objective the stability and efficiency of the broader economy. In addition, of course, the Federal Reserve can adjust the stance of monetary policy by changing its target for the federal funds rate. The FOMC manages monetary policy to further its dual mandate to promote maximum sustainable employment and price stability. The turmoil in financial markets significantly affected the Committee's outlook for the broader economy. Indeed, in a statement issued simultaneously with the Federal Reserve Board's August 17 announcement of the cut in the discount rate, the FOMC noted that the downside risks to growth had increased appreciably. However, to allow time to gather and evaluate incoming information, possible policy action was deferred until the Committee's next regularly scheduled meeting on September 18. A key issue at that meeting was the extent to which the market disturbances had affected the outlook for the housing sector. Financial markets overall had improved somewhat, but tighter terms and standards in the mortgage market--particularly in the nonprime and jumbo segments--appeared likely to intensify the correction in housing significantly, with adverse implications for construction activity and house prices. Indeed, incoming housing data had continued to soften even before the advent of the stress in financial markets. A further sharp contraction in residential construction seemed likely to hold down overall economic growth in the fourth quarter and in early 2008. As they had at earlier meetings, the participants in the September meeting evaluated the potential effects of housing-market developments on other parts of the economy. They agreed that significant spillovers to household and business spending were not yet evident. For example, auto sales had picked up in August from the low levels of earlier in the summer; and business investment did not appear to have been seriously affected by financial market developments, as highly rated firms continued to enjoy good access to credit. Strong growth abroad was also viewed as supporting U.S. exports and domestic production. And as I have noted, the available evidence suggested that overall economic growth in the third quarter remained moderate. However, downside risks to both household and business spending had clearly increased over the period since the Committee's previous meeting. Notably, the weak housing market, somewhat downbeat consumer sentiment, and slower growth in private-sector employment increased the likelihood that consumption spending would slow in coming quarters. Participants at the September meeting also reported somewhat greater caution in the outlooks of their business contacts. Financial market conditions were expected to improve slowly at best; and even if conditions began to normalize, credit would likely remain noticeably tighter for many borrowers than had been the case during the summer. Furthermore, any weakening in the economy could itself have a negative effect on still-fragile credit markets, possibly leading credit conditions to tighten further. Regarding the other half of its mandate, to promote price stability, the Committee noted some improvement over the past year in measures of the trend component of inflation, such as core inflation. Moreover, slower growth in aggregate demand would help to ease pressure on resources. But inflation risks remained, including still-high levels of resource utilization and elevated prices for oil and other commodities. The Committee agreed that continued close attention to inflation developments was warranted. Overall, given the great difficulty of knowing how financial conditions would evolve or the extent of their effect on the economy, Committee members judged the level of uncertainty in the outlook to be unusually high. As you know, the Committee chose to cut its target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points at the September meeting. This action was intended to help offset the tightening of credit conditions resulting from the financial turmoil. Risk-management considerations also played a role in the decision, given the possibility that the housing correction and tighter credit could presage a broader weakening in economic conditions that would be difficult to arrest. By doing more sooner, policy might be able to forestall some part of the potential adverse effects of the disruptions in financial markets. As most of the meeting participants saw growth likely to run below trend for a while and with the incoming inflation data on the favorable side, the risks to inflation from this action seemed acceptable, especially as the Committee was prepared to reverse the policy easing if inflation pressures proved stronger than expected. Since the September meeting, the incoming data have borne out the Committee's expectations of further weakening in the housing market, as sales have fallen further and new residential construction has continued to decline rapidly. The further contraction in housing is likely to be a significant drag on growth in the current quarter and through early next year. However, it remains too early to assess the extent to which household and business spending will be affected by the weakness in housing and the tightening in credit conditions. We will be following indicators of household and business spending closely as we update our outlook for near-term growth. The evolution of employment and labor income also will bear watching, as gains in real income support consumer spending even if the weakness in house prices adversely affects homeowners' equity. The labor market has shown some signs of cooling, but these are quite tentative so far, and real income is still growing at a solid pace. On the inflation side, prices of crude oil and other commodities have increased somewhat in recent weeks, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar has weakened. However, overall, the limited data that we have received since the September FOMC meeting are consistent with continued moderate increases in consumer prices. As the Committee noted in its post-meeting statement, we will continue to monitor inflation developments carefully. It does seem that, together with our earlier actions to enhance liquidity, the September policy action has served to reduce some of the pressure in financial markets, although considerable strains remain. From the perspective of the near-term economic outlook, the improved functioning of financial markets is a positive development in that it increases the likelihood of achieving moderate growth with price stability. However, in such situations, one must also take seriously the possibility that policy actions that have the effect of reducing stress in financial markets may also promote excessive risk-taking and thus increase the probability of future crises. As I indicated in earlier remarks, it is not the responsibility of the Federal Reserve--nor would it be appropriate--to protect lenders and investors from the consequences of their financial decisions. But developments in financial markets can have broad economic effects felt by many outside the markets, and the Federal Reserve must take those effects into account when determining policy. In particular, as I have emphasized, the Federal Reserve has a mandate from the Congress to promote maximum employment and stable prices, and its monetary policy actions will be chosen so as to best meet that mandate. Indeed, although the Federal Reserve can seek to provide a more stable economic background that will benefit both investors and non-investors, the truth is that it can hardly insulate investors from risk, even if it wished to do so. Developments over the past few months reinforce this point. Those who made bad investment decisions lost money. In particular, investors in subprime mortgages have sustained significant losses, and many of the mortgage companies that made those loans have failed. Moreover, market participants are learning and adjusting--for example, by insisting on better mortgage underwriting and by performing better due diligence on structured credit products. Rather than becoming more crisis-prone, the financial system is likely to emerge from this episode healthier and more stable than before. ConclusionI have sought this evening to put recent financial market developments in context and to explain the thinking behind the steps taken by the Federal Reserve. This has been a challenging period. Conditions in financial markets have shown some improvement since the worst of the storm in mid-August, but a full recovery of market functioning is likely to take time, and we may well see some setbacks. In particular, investors are continuing to reassess the risks they face and have not yet fully regained confidence in their ability to accurately price certain types of securities. The ultimate implications of financial developments for the cost and availability of credit, and thus for the broader economy, remain uncertain. In coming months, the Federal Reserve, together with other agencies both here and abroad, will perform comprehensive reviews of recent events to better understand the episode and to draw lessons for the future. For now, the Federal Reserve will continue to watch the situation closely and will act as needed to support efficient market functioning and to foster sustainable economic growth and price stability. Footnotes 1.Estimates of delinquencies are based on data from First American LoanPerformance.Return to text 2.Jumbo mortgages are those mortgages for which the principal value does not conform to the limit set annually by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac for loans they will purchase; the amount for 2007 is $417,000. Jumbo loans are thus a type of "nonconforming" loan. Prime loans are those made to borrowers with good credit records.Return to text 3.Walter Bagehot (1962 reprint),Lombard Street(Westport, Conn.: Hyperion Press).Return to text