The first new $5 bill was issued by the Federal Reserve today during a commemorative transaction at President Lincoln's Cottage at the Soldiers' Home in Washington, D.C., a historic site used by the former president as a White House summer retreat. Officials from the Federal Reserve Board, U.S. Treasury, Bureau of Engraving and Printing and U.S. Secret Service ushered the new $5 bill into circulation at the Lincoln Cottage gift shop.Michael Lambert, Assistant Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems at the Federal Reserve Board, spent the first new $5 bill on a book of President Lincoln's speeches. President Lincoln’s portrait continues to be featured on this redesign of the $5 bill. "The redesigned $5 bill's enhanced security features help ensure we stay ahead of counterfeiters and protect your hard-earned money," Lambert said. "It only takes a few seconds to check the new $5 bill to make sure it's genuine. If you know how to check its security features, you can easily be confident it's real."Today, Federal Reserve banks will begin distributing the redesigned $5 bills to customer banks, which will then distribute them to businesses and consumers. The new $5 bill designs will circulate first in the U.S. and gradually spread to other countries as international banks place orders for them from the Federal Reserve. You don't have to trade in your old bills for new ones. Both the new $5 bills and the older-design $5 bills will continue to maintain their full face value.The new $5 bill incorporates state-of-the-art security features that are easy to use by cash handlers and consumers alike. Hold the bill to the light to check for these features: •Watermarks:There are now two watermarks on the redesigned $5 bill. A large number "5" watermark is located in a blank space to the right of the portrait replacing the previous watermark portrait of President Lincoln found on the older-design $5 bills. A second watermark -- a column of three smaller “5”s -- has been added to the new $5 bill design and is positioned to the left of the portrait.•Security Thread:The embedded security thread runs vertically and is now located to the right of the portrait on the redesigned $5 bill. The letters "USA" followed by the number "5" in an alternating pattern are visible along the thread from both sides of the bill. The thread glows blue when held under ultraviolet light. President Lincoln's Cottage at the Soldiers' Home in Washington, D.C. (http://www.lincolncottage.org/), which has recently been restored and is now open to the public, was chosen as the location to spend the first new $5 bill because of its historic significance to President Lincoln, the subject of the bill's portrait. President Lincoln established the United States Secret Service the same evening he was assassinated and made safeguarding the nation's currency from counterfeiters the agency's primary mission.Every person or business that gets a counterfeit bill experiences a real economic loss, and in 2007, $61.4 million in counterfeit money was passed in the United States. "Everyone who uses U.S. currency is on the front line of defense against counterfeiters," said Michael Merritt, Deputy Assistant Director, U.S. Secret Service. "The best way to protect yourself is to learn the security features. It’s simple, it’s quick, and it can save you from accepting a fake."Treasurer of the United States Anna Escobedo Cabral encouraged businesses and individuals to visitwww.moneyfactory.gov/newmoneyto order or download educational materials about the new $5 bill and other recently redesigned currency, including the $10, $20 and $50 bills. "Each time we introduce a new bill, we provide the information businesses and individuals need to empower themselves -- to learn how to use the security features and verify that a bill is genuine."Free educational materials are available to businesses, financial institutions, trade and professional associations, citizen groups and individuals to prepare cash handlers and consumers to recognize the new design and protect themselves against counterfeits. Since 2003, the U.S. government has distributed about 80 million pieces of public education and training materials about the new $5, $10, $20 and $50 bill redesigns. Materials are available to order or download in multiple languages atwww.moneyfactory.gov/newmoney.Manufacturers and users of cash-handling equipment are also an important audience for education about new currency designs. "Because the $5 bill is used so heavily in vending, self-service and transit farecard machines, we began working with the manufacturers of those and other cash-oriented machines in 2006 to make sure they had enough time to make the necessary adjustments that would allow for their machines to accept the new $5 bill," said Pamela Gardiner, Deputy Director of the Treasury’s Bureau of Engraving and Printing. As with the redesigned $10, $20 and $50 bills that preceded it, the new $5 bill features an American symbol of freedom printed in the background. The Great Seal of the United States, featuring an eagle and shield, is printed in purple on the front of the bill. Additional design elements include: •The large, easy-to-read number "5" in the lower right corner on the back of the bill, which helps those with visual impairments distinguish the denomination, has been enlarged in the new $5 bill design and is printed in high-contrast purple ink.•The oval borders around President Lincoln's portrait on the front and the Lincoln Memorial vignette on the back have been removed. Both engravings have been enhanced.•Small yellow "05"s are printed to the left of the portrait on the front of the bill and to the right of the Lincoln Memorial vignette on the back. The new $5 bill's most noticeable design difference is the addition of light purple in the center of the bill, which blends into gray near the edges. Because color can be duplicated, consumers and cash-handlers should use the key security features – on the new $5 bill, the watermarks and security thread – not color, to check the authenticity of paper money.
The federal bank, thrift, credit union, and Farm Credit System regulatory agencies today requested public comment on new and revised interagency questions and answers regarding flood insurance.TheInteragency Questions and Answers Regarding Flood Insurancewere first published in 1997 under the auspices of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council. The agencies are proposing new questions and answers, as well as substantive and technical revisions to the existing guidance, to help financial institutions meet their responsibilities under federal flood insurance legislation and to increase public understanding of the flood insurance regulations. The proposed changes include substantive modifications to questions and answers pertaining to construction loans and condominiums. The agencies are also proposing new questions and answers in a number of areas, including second lien mortgages, the imposition of civil money penalties, and loan syndications/participations. Finally, the agencies are proposing to revise and reorganize certain existing questions and answers to clarify areas of potential misunderstanding and to provide clearer guidance to users. After public comments are received and considered and the Interagency Questions and Answers are final, they would supersede the 1997 Interagency Questions and Answers and supplement other guidance or interpretations issued by the agencies and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The agencies invite comment on the proposed changes and, more generally, on other issues regarding compliance with the federal flood insurance statutes and regulations. Comments are due May 20, 2008. TheFederal Registernotice is attached. Federal Register Notice131 KB PDF|TEXT View comments
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the notice under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by The Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc, Edinburgh, Scotland, to engage, on a limited basis, in physical commodity trading, energy management services, and energy tolling as activities that are complementary to a financial activity.Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the proposal by Toronto-Dominion Bank, Toronto, Canada, to form bank holding companies, and to acquire Commerce Bancorp, Inc. (“Commerce”), Cherry Hill, New Jersey, and Commerce’s two subsidiary banks, Commerce Bank/North, Ramsey, New Jersey, and Commerce Bank, National Association, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; and to acquire Commerce’s minority interest in Pennsylvania Commerce Bancorp, Inc., Harrisburg, a bank holding company that controls one subsidiary bank, Commerce Bank/Harrisburg, National Association, Lemoyne, both of Pennsylvania. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday approved action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, decreasing the discount rate at the Banks from 3-1/2 percent to 2-1/2 percent, effective immediately.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Cleveland, Richmond, Chicago, Minneapolis, Kansas City, and San Francisco, decreasing the discount rate at the Banks from 3-1/2 percent to 3-1/4 percent, effective immediately.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Chicago, and Kansas City, decreasing the discount rate at the Banks from 3-1/4 percent to 2-1/2 percent, effective immediately. The Board also approved an action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, decreasing the discount rate at the Bank from 3-1/2 percent to 2-1/2 percent, effective immediately. And, the Board approved an action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, decreasing the discount rate at the Bank from 3-1/2 percent to 2-1/2 percent, effective March 19, 2008.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and Minneapolis, decreasing the discount rate at the Banks from 3-1/4 percent to 2-1/2 percent, effective immediately. The Board also approved an action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, decreasing the discount rate at the Bank from 3-1/2 percent to 2-1/2 percent, effective immediately.
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the Sandridge Lecture of the Virginia Association of Economists and the H. Parker Willis Lecture of Washington and Lee University, Lexington, Virginia It's a genuine pleasure to address the Virginia Association of Economists here at Washington and Lee University on an important issue in monetary policy. Some of you may be wondering about the meaning of my speech title--"Comfort Zones, Shmumfort Zones." Well, putting the "shm" before a word is a way to cast a bit of skepticism on it. Thus, if your friend tells you that you are "fancy, shmancy," then you might be overdressed for the occasion. And if you exclaim, "Email, shmemail!" then you've just found your inbox overloaded. Of course, there's also a significant distinction between the expressions "shlemiel" and "shlimazel," but that's more-advanced material that I will defer until another speech. Although this speech has a somewhat humorous title, my remarks will address a serious and important topic, namely, how central banks promote the stability of prices and economic activity and how this policy framework is communicated to the public. More specifically, I will consider whether central banks should describe price stability in terms of a desired range of inflation outcomes--often referred to as a "comfort zone" for inflation--or in terms of a specific numerical value at which the inflation rate is expected to settle down over some reasonable time horizon. After a brief review of the academic literature regarding the level of inflation that best promotes longer-run economic growth and employment, I will discuss several conceptual issues regarding the pitfalls of comfort zones and the benefits of specifying a point objective for inflation. Finally, I will move from theory to practice and consider the experiences of other major industrial countries. As usual, my remarks reflect only my own views and are not intended to reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System.1 What is the Optimal Level of the Inflation Rate?Research in monetary economics usually specifies monetary policy objectives in terms of stabilizing both inflation and economic activity.2Those two goals are related: Maintaining price stability promotes stronger economic activity in the long run. What do we mean by price stability? A widely cited definition is that the inflation rate is sufficiently low so that households and businesses do not need to take inflation into account in making everyday decisions.3Broadly speaking, I believe this definition of price stability is a reasonable one, and in practice, central banks around the world have chosen average levels of inflation between 0 and 3 percent as consistent with this criterion. However, this range can be narrowed a bit further by considering the implications of economic theory and empirical evidence about the average inflation rate that produces the best economic outcomes. In particular, the literature on the optimal inflation rate not only bolsters the case for low inflation but also highlights the risks of maintaining an excessively low inflation rate. The Case for Low InflationAll economists agree that hyperinflations, such as the one in Germany in the 1920s, are particularly damaging due to the resulting distortion of economic incentives and the waste of valuable resources. Even rates of inflation far short of hyperinflation appear detrimental to economic performance, as evidenced by the double-digit inflation rates of the 1970s. And over the past decade or so, central bankers and academic economists have reached a remarkable degree of consensus about the desirability of low and stable inflation--and as you know, arriving at a consensus is quite rare for economists. The average rate of inflation distorts the efficient allocation of resources through three main channels. First, because some firms face costs in changing their prices, a rise in the general price level tends to generate undesirable movements in relative prices, thereby leading to an inefficient allocation of resources. This relative price dispersion increases with inflation, and the desirability of minimizing these relative price distortions provides a key rationale for price stability.4 Second, inflation is an implicit tax on capital. In an imperfectly indexed tax system, inflation seriously distorts saving and investment because investment income is taxed on the basis of its nominal rather than inflation-adjusted or real value. In those circumstances, price stability may considerably improve the efficiency of the economy.5Third, a higher average inflation rate tends to generate distortions by raising the cost of holding currency and other non-interest-bearing assets.6 Can Inflation Be Too Low?While the benefits of low inflation are now widely recognized, somewhat less attention has been given to the pitfalls of maintaining inflation rates very close to zero, so I will now discuss this issue in somewhat greater detail. Specifically, if the average inflation rate is too low, then the economy faces a greater risk that a given adverse shock could distort labor markets, induce debt deflation, or cause monetary policy to become constrained by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. These risks imply that undershooting a zero inflation objective is potentially more costly than overshooting that objective by the same amount, and that setting the inflation objective at a rate a bit above zero provides some insurance against these risks. Downward nominal wage rigidities.Inflation at rates close to zero might create nonnegligible costs to the economy because firms may be relatively reluctant to cut nominal wages.7Sticky nominal wages can prevent labor markets from reaching the optimal equilibrium. However, empirical evidence from Switzerland and Japan indicates that in an environment of deflation or very low inflation, downward nominal wage rigidities become less prevalent.8 Debt deflation.Keeping the average inflation rate close to zero increases the likelihood that the economy will experience occasional episodes of deflation. Deflation can be particularly dangerous for an advanced economy, in which debt contracts often have long maturities. As described by Irving Fisher (1933), an episode of deflation can lead to "debt deflation," that is, a substantial rise in the real indebtedness of households and firms, because the nominal values of debt obligations are largely predetermined whereas the nominal values of household income and business revenue are falling together with the general price level.9Indeed, the deterioration of the balance sheets of households and firms can result in financial turmoil that contributes to further deflation and greater macroeconomic instability. The zero lower bound.With a very low average inflation rate, monetary policy is also more likely to encounter circumstances in which short-term interest rates are constrained by the so-called zero lower bound on nominal interest rates.10Specifically, investors will never choose to lend money at a negative nominal interest rate because they always have the option of simply holding cash at a zero interest rate; thus, nominal interest rates cannot fall below zero. A number of researchers in the Federal Reserve System and elsewhere have analyzed the implications of the zero lower bound in estimated dynamic rational expectations models.11If the economy faces a large contractionary shock, the optimal monetary policy response is to push the short-term nominal interest rate below the level of expected inflation, thereby reducing real interest rates enough to mitigate the impact of the shock. But if the central bank has an inflation objective very close to zero, the zero lower bound can prevent the full implementation of this policy response, and hence the economy will tend to exhibit greater volatility of economic activity and inflation. In contrast, given shocks like those seen over the past several decades, an average inflation rate higher than about 1 percent substantially reduces the frequency with which the economy hits the zero lower bound. An inflation objective of about 2 percent implies that monetary policy is rarely constrained by the zero lower bound and thereby minimizes the adverse consequences for macroeconomic stability. Why Comfort Zones?These considerations provide the foundations for a broad consensus among academic economists and monetary policymakers around the world that the optimal inflation rate is in the range of about 1 to 3 percent; that is, an average inflation rate outside this range would be detrimental to longer-run health of the economy. In light of that consensus, it might seem natural to specify price stability in terms of a range of acceptable outcomes for inflation. Indeed, several present and past FOMC participants have used the term "comfort zone" and specified a 1 to 2 percent range, thereby providing valuable information regarding their views about what levels of inflation are consistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate.12 The Analytical Case for a Point ObjectiveNevertheless, while a "comfort zone" approach may seem appealing, analytical considerations reveal some disadvantages of that approach as well as some significant benefits of specifying and maintaining a point objective for inflation. The Pitfalls of Comfort ZonesIn particular, I would like to highlight three specific pitfalls associated with the "comfort zone" approach. Confusion about objectives.First, when the price stability objective is formulated in terms of an acceptable range of inflation outcomes, the policy implications may be difficult to interpret. For example, if the comfort zone spans a range from 1 to 2 percent, does that mean that policymakers are equally comfortable with inflation rates of 1.1 percent and 1.9 percent? Furthermore, confusion about inflation objectives might make it harder for a committee of policymakers to decide on the appropriate course of monetary policy. When one member advocates a more accommodative policy stance than other members, it may not be clear whether that reflects a more negative outlook for the economy or a greater willingness to allow inflation to settle in or near the top of the comfort zone. Thus, the comfort zone approach might lead to greater confusion in policy deliberations and hence produce a less effective decisionmaking process. Perverse expectations dynamics.Second, framing price stability in terms of a comfort zone could lead to perverse expectations dynamics and thereby generate larger fluctuations in economic activity, especially if policymakers maintain a neutral stance regardless of where the inflation rate falls within the comfort zone. For instance, a negative shock to aggregate demand that brought inflation near the bottom end of the range might cause long-run expected inflation to fall, which would raise the real interest rate if the nominal interest rate remained unchanged. This rise in the real interest rate would exert a further drag that could exacerbate the adverse impact of the original negative shock on the economy. Similarly, a positive shock to aggregate demand that raised inflation to the upper end of the range might cause a rise in expected inflation and thus a decline in the real interest rate, which would provide further stimulus to the economy. The result would then be more pronounced swings in economic activity. Nonlinearities and macroeconomic stability.Third, if a central bank places a high degree of emphasis on the boundaries of the comfort zone, then these threshold effects imply nonlinearities in the conduct of monetary policy that are likely to produce less desirable economic outcomes (Orphanides and Wieland, 2000). For example, the stance of policy would remain roughly neutral in response to a shock that leaves inflation just below the upper end of the comfort zone, whereas a slightly larger shock that pushes inflation just above that boundary would cause an abrupt shift to a contractionary policy stance. Such a "stop-start" approach is likely to cause greater uncertainty in financial markets and would also tend to generate greater volatility of the macroeconomy. The Benefits of Maintaining a Point ObjectiveIn contrast to the various pitfalls associated with comfort zones, there are a number of significant benefits to maintaining a point objective for inflation. Clarity in communication.First, as I have emphasized in several previous speeches, communication plays a crucial role in the success of monetary policy (Mishkin, 2007b and 2007c). And in this regard, it seems virtually self-evident that communicating about a single numerical value for the inflation objective is more straightforward than communicating about an interval or range of numbers. Of course, regardless of whether the central bank has a point objective or a comfort zone, it is inevitable that the inflation rate will fluctuate in response to various shocks; that's why it is also crucial for policymakers to communicate clearly about the outlook for the macroeconomy and about the central bank's strategy for promoting the stability of prices and economic activity. Anchoring inflation expectations.An explicit point objective anchors inflation expectations more effectively than a comfort zone. If the comfort zone is considered to be a zone of indifference, then the inflation rate might well exhibit highly persistent fluctuations inside the zone, perhaps even looking like a random walk within that range. In that case, if inflation drifts up to the top of the comfort zone, then the private sector could take the view that inflation might remain at that rate for an extended period of time, especially if policymakers are not taking any action to bring inflation back toward the midpoint of the range. Thus, the comfort zone might then generate somewhat larger fluctuations in longer-run inflation expectations, which would in turn tend to contribute to wider fluctuations in actual inflation. In contrast, with a transparent and credible point objective, longer-run inflation expectations will be firmly anchored at that rate. The insurance motive.Even if policymakers are relatively indifferent about the level of inflation within a comfort zone, research on the optimal design of monetary policy indicates that they shouldn't be: The central bank should actively seek to bring inflation back to the midpoint of its comfort zone, thereby minimizing the probability that inflation wanders outside the boundaries of that zone. In effect, the optimal policy strategy takes into account the benefits of insurance, and hence the midpoint of the zone becomes the point objective for inflation (Mishkin and Westelius, 2006). The Empirical Case for a Point ObjectiveNow let's turn to the international experience.13As shown in table 1, a number of major industrial economies have adopted explicit inflation objectives In 1990, the newly independent Reserve Bank of New Zealand became the first central bank to establish such an objective. Many governments have followed in New Zealand's footsteps, and the inflation objectives have been variously expressed in the form of a point, a range with a preferred midpoint, or a comfort zone (that is, a range of indifference). In some cases, the inflation objective was adopted in part as a way to lock in the benefits of recent disinflation and to prevent the return of adverse inflation outcomes. New Zealand, whose inflation performance in the 1970s and 1980s was the worst among the industrialized economies, is arguably one such example. In other instances, inflation had already been kept low and stable for some time, and the adoption of an explicit inflation objective followed from extensive research and debate on issues such as the benefits of low and stable inflation, the presence of biases in the measurement of inflation, and the importance of central bank communications. Although the mix of reasons and circumstances that led to the adoption of an explicit inflation objective varies across economies, there is a remarkable degree of similarity in the characteristics of these policy frameworks, from which three broad conclusions can be drawn. First, there is a fairly general consensus among central banks throughout the world that the average inflation rate should be somewhere between about 1 percent and 3 percent. Second, point objectives have proven more effective than ranges in anchoring inflation expectations. Third, when the inflation objective is formulated in terms of a range, the implied degree of nonlinearity in the central bank's policy actions can be alleviated by placing increased emphasis on the midpoint of the range. New ZealandThe monetary policy objective of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand is to "keep future CPI inflation outcomes between 1 and 3 per cent on average over the medium term." The narrowness of this range may seem surprising, especially given the historical volatility of inflation in New Zealand. After all, New Zealand is a small open economy with a large commodity-producing sector, and as a result the economy is particularly subject to external shocks that can have a relatively large impact on consumer prices. In this context, the use of a narrow comfort zone would increase the odds that inflation would fall outside the band at certain times. Some observers have argued that such outcomes may undermine the public's trust in the central bank's ability to deliver inflation outcomes in line with its stated objective, and hence that the inflation band should be widened.14Nevertheless, a wider band would hinder the anchoring of inflation expectations, which is pivotal to the successful pursuit of an explicit inflation objective. As the previous discussion has illustrated, expressing an inflation objective in terms of a range makes it more difficult for a central bank to anchor inflation expectations, especially in the absence of any explicit emphasis on the midpoint. A related issue is that the boundaries of the range may be seen as "hard edges," that is, inflation outcomes inside the range may be seen as qualitatively different from those outside the range. The nonlinear policy reactions implied by this approach can lead to greater variations in interest rates, exchange rates, and output. The international experience indicates that even when inflation bands with hard edges have been introduced, subsequent changes in the central bank's policy framework and communications have tended to soften the edges of the inflation band. The experience of New Zealand is particularly instructive in this regard. The Reserve Bank Act requires that price stability be defined in a specific and public contract, negotiated between the Minister of Finance and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. Under the act, the Governor of the Reserve Bank is personally accountable for keeping inflation in line with the stated objective. (Indeed, the Governor could be fired for failing to do so.) Since 1990, price stability has been defined in terms of a band for the inflation rate. Over the following decade, the Reserve Bank treated this band as having hard edges, both in its conduct of policy and in its communications with the public; indeed, the boundaries of the inflation band were occasionally referred to as "electric fences" (Sherwin, 1999). However, it became increasingly evident that the Reserve Bank's vigorous attempts to keep inflation within the band tended to generate destabilizing fluctuations in nominal interest rates and undesirable outcomes for the broader macroeconomy. Given the dissatisfaction with that approach, the Reserve Bank's mandate was refined significantly in 1997, namely, in seeking to keep inflation within the band, the Reserve Bank should avoid "unnecessary instability" in output, interest rates, and the exchange rate (Sherwin, 1999). This refinement allowed the Reserve Bank to lengthen the time horizon for achieving the inflation goal, thereby reducing the need to respond to transitory price fluctuations and providing greater flexibility in promoting the goal of macroeconomic stability. And since the edges of the inflation band have been softened, the Reserve Bank has placed greater emphasis on the policy actions needed to bring inflation toward the midpoint of the band over the forecast horizon.15 United KingdomThe desire to anchor inflation expectations more firmly led the United Kingdom to move from a range to a point objective for inflation. Three weeks after the United Kingdom departed from the European Exchange Rate Mechanism in the fall of 1992, the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced an inflation objective of 1 to 4 percent, which was to be achieved by the middle of 1997. The use of a range for the inflation objective was interpreted by many as a way of limiting the extent of discretionary policy and of acknowledging the extent of imperfect control over inflation (Bernanke and others, 1999, p. 154). The initial target range of 1 to 4 percent was often perceived as a range of indifference, which implied that inflation just outside the range would be viewed as qualitatively different from inflation just inside the range. As a consequence, inflation tended to stay near the upper border of the range. Dissatisfaction with that outcome motivated the subsequent decision in mid-1997 to move to a framework with an explicit point objective of 2-1/2 percent, with deviations in either direction treated symmetrically. This modification of the policy framework was well received by financial markets and the general public, and surveys of households and professional forecasters indicated that inflation expectations converged fairly quickly to the Bank of England's point objective.16 The Euro Area and CanadaThe importance of anchoring expectations helps explain why other central banks that initially adopted an inflation objective stated in terms of a range‑‑even a narrow one‑‑increasingly emphasized a single value in their communications or have replaced the range with a point objective. For example, in May 2003 the European Central Bank (ECB) clarified that in implementing its mandate of price stability, monetary policy would be aimed at maintaining inflation "below, but close to, 2 percent in the medium term" (European Central Bank, 2003). That clarification was welcomed by market participants and likely made it easier for the ECB to anchor inflation expectations. As a final example, consider the evolution of the monetary policy framework in Canada. In the late 1990s, this framework was well described as a range with relatively hard edges because statements by Bank of Canada officials had consistently indicated that the boundaries of the target zone (which ranged from 1 to 3 percent) were to be taken more seriously than the midpoint (Bernanke and others, 1999). Over the past decade, however, the conduct of monetary policy has evolved in the direction of placing greater emphasis on the midpoint, while the range has been used mainly as a communication device rather than as an objective in itself. ConclusionI have argued today that the science of monetary policy provides a strong rationale for framing the inflation goal in terms of a specific point objective rather than as a range or comfort zone.17First of all, I've argued inflation should be low but not too low. Second, I've provided a brief review of lessons from economic theory that can inform policymakers in their choice of inflation objectives. Third, I've outlined what we can learn from the practical experiences of other industrial economies; indeed, in recent years, a number of foreign central banks have moved toward emphasizing the midpoint of an inflation range or have provided a specific point objective for inflation. Finally, you may have noticed that I haven't said much about the United States in this speech. Nevertheless, the issues that I've discussed today have potentially important implications for the ongoing process of refining the Federal Reserve's policy framework and of enhancing our communications. Indeed, as Chairman Bernanke has recently indicated, our communication strategy is "a work in progress," and the Federal Reserve "will continue to look for ways to improve the accountability and public understanding of U.S. monetary policymaking" (Bernanke, 2007). And I certainly hope that my remarks will be helpful in contributing to the continuation of that process. Table 1: Major Industrial Economies with Explicit Inflation Objectives Economy Starting date Current objective Australia April 1993 2% to 3% Canada February 1991 2% ± 1% Euro Area January 1999 Below but close to 2% New Zealand March 1990 1% to 3% Norway March 2001 2 1/2% Sweden January 1993 2% ± 1% Switzerland January 2000 Above 0 and below 2% United Kingdom October 1992 2% ReferencesAkerlof, George A., William T. Dickens, and George L. Perry (2000). "Near-Rational Wage and Price Setting and the Long-Run Phillips Curve,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2000 (no. 1), pp. 1-60. Bailey, Martin J. (1956). "The Welfare Cost of Inflationary Finance,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 64 (April), pp. 93-110. Bernanke, Ben S. (2002). "Deflation: Making Sure ‘It' Doesn't Happen Here," speech delivered at the National Economists Club, Washington, November 21. _________ (2005). "The Economic Outlook," speech delivered at a Finance Committee luncheon of the Executives' Club of Chicago, Chicago, March 8. _________ (2007). "Federal Reserve Communications," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14. Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999).Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Coenen, Günter, Athanasios Orphanides, and Volker Wieland (2004). "Price Stability and Monetary Policy Effectiveness when Nominal Interest Rates are Bounded at Zero,"Advances inMacroeconomics,Berkeley Electronic Press, vol. 4, article 1. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2003 (no. 1), pp. 139-233. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2004). "Policy Options in a Liquidity Trap,"American Economic Review,vol. 94 (May), pp. 76-9. Estevao, Marcello M., and Beth Anne Wilson (1998). "Nominal Wage Rigidity and Real Wage Cyclicality," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 1998-21. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May. European Central Bank (2003).Background Studies for the ECB's Evaluation of its Monetary Policy Strategy(1.82 MB PDF). Frankfurt: European Central Bank. Fehr, Ernst, and Lorenz Goette (2005). "Robustness and Real Consequences of Nominal Wage Rigidity,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 52 (May), pp. 779-804. Feldstein, Martin (1997). "The Costs and Benefits of Going from Low Inflation to Price Stability," in Christina Romer and David Romer, eds.,Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 123-56. _________ (1999). "Capital Income Taxes and the Benefits of Price Stability," in Martin S. Feldstein, ed.,The Costs and Benefits of Price Stability. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 9-40. Fisher, Irving (1933). "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,"Econometrica, vol. 1 (October), pp. 337-57. Friedman, Milton (1969).The Optimum Quantity of Money and Other Essays. Chicago: Aldine. Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert G. King. (1997). "The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role of Monetary Policy," in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 12. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 231-83. Greenspan, Alan (2002). "Chairman's Remarks: Transparency in Monetary Policy (30 KB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Economic Review, vol. 84 (July/August), pp. 5-6. Groshen, Erica L., and Mark E. Schweitzer (1999). "Firms' Wage Adjustments: A Break from the Past (811 KB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Economic Review, vol. 81 (May/June, Labor Markets and Macroeconomics: Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual Economic Policy Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis), pp. 93-112. Kim, Jinill, and Francisco J. Ruge-Murcia (2007). "How Much Inflation is Necessary to Grease the Wheels?" mimeo, September. Kuroda, Sachiko, and Isamu Yamamoto (2003). "Are Japanese Nominal Wages Downwardly Rigid? (Part I): Examinations of Nominal Wage Change Distributions,"Monetary and Economics Studies, Bank of Japan, vol. 21 (August). Kuroda, Sachiko, and Isamu Yamamoto (2003). "Are Japanese Nominal Wages Downwardly Rigid? (Part II): Examinations Using a Friction Model,"Monetary and Economics Studies, Bank of Japan, vol. 21 (August). Lebow, David E., Raven E. Saks, and Beth Anne Wilson (2003). "Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity: Evidence from the Employment Cost Index,"Advances in Macroeconomics, Berkeley Electronic Press, vol. 3, article 2. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2000). "Inflation Targeting in Emerging-Market Countries,"American Economic Review, vol. 90 (May), pp. 105-9. _________ (2007a). "Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate," speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10. _________ (2007b). "Will Monetary Policy Become More of a Science?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series2007-44. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. _________ (2007c). "The Federal Reserve's Enhanced Communication Strategy and the Science of Monetary Policy," speech delivered to the Undergraduate Economics Association, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., November 29. _________ (2008). "Does Stabilizing Inflation Contribute to Stabilizing Economic Activity?" speech delivered at East Carolina University's Beta Gamma Sigma Distinguished Lecture Series, Greenville, N.C., February 25. Mishkin, Frederic S., and Niklas J. Westelius (2006). "Inflation Band Targeting and Optimal Inflation Contracts," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 12384. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July. Forthcoming inJournal of Money, Credit and Banking.Orphanides, Athanasios, and Volker Wieland (2000). "Inflation Zone Targeting,"European Economic Review, vol. 44 (June), pp. 1351-87.Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 34 (November, Part 2: Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Environment), pp. 936-66.Sherwin, Murray (1999). "Strategic Choices in Inflation Targeting: The New Zealand Experience," Reserve Bank of New Zealand,Reserve Bank Bulletin, vol. 62 (June), pp.73-88.Stevenson, Richard W. (2002). "The Fed's Evolving Comfort Zone,"The New York Times, August 4.Wolman, Alexander L. (2005). "Real Implications of the Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 37 (April), pp. 273-96.Woodford, Michael (2003).Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.Yellen, Janet L. (2006). "Enhancing Fed Credibility," speech delivered at the Annual Washington Policy Conference, sponsored by the National Association for Business Economics, Washington, March 13.Footnotes1.I'd like to thankEtienne Gagnon,Steven Kamin,Linda Kole,Andrew Levin, andDavid Lopez-Salidofor helpful comments and assistance with this speech.Return to text2.Indeed, this specification of monetary policy objectives is exactly what is suggested by the dual mandate that the Congress has given to the Federal Reserve to promote both price stability and maximum employment (Mishkin, 2007a, 2008).Return to text3.For example, former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan (2002) stated that "price stability is best thought of as an environment in which inflation is so low and stable over time that it does not materially enter into the decisions of households and firms."Return to text4.Over the past couple of decades, an extensive literature has analyzed the benefits of low average inflation in a so-called New Keynesian framework. These studies generally start from a neoclassical model and incorporate two key features: monopolistic competition and costly price adjustment. Refer, for instance, to Goodfriend and King (1997) and Woodford (2003).Return to text5.Interestingly, the larger the burden coming from the interaction of inflation and the capital income tax, the more government tax revenues will fall when inflation is reduced. Feldstein (1997, 1999) provides a quantitative assessment of the benefits of price stability based on the interaction of inflation and the tax system, showing that a lower average inflation rate stimulates investment by reducing the effective tax on capital income.Return to text6.Because real money balances bear no interest, the opportunity cost of holding them is the nominal rate of interest. Higher inflation then leads to higher nominal interest rates, and hence lowers real balances, which causes a welfare loss because the social cost of producing real balances has remained substantially unaffected. In the absence of other frictions in the economy, inflation is viewed in this class of models as a tax on real balances (Bailey, 1956; Friedman 1969). However, the costs from higher holdings of real money balances has arguably become much less relevant as our economy has become more financially sophisticated. Households hold only modest amounts of cash, so these "shoe leather" costs are likely to be fairly trivial.Return to text7.Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry (2000). The main idea can be described as follows: During periods of low productivity growth and no inflation, firms that need to cut their relative wages can do so only by cutting money wages. In the presence of downward nominal wage rigidities, firms will keep relative wages too high and employment too low. Hence, very low rates of inflation might prevent real wages from adjusting downward in response to declining labor demand in certain industries or regions, thereby leading to increased unemployment and hindering the re-allocation of labor from declining sectors to expanding sectors. Research by staff at the Federal Reserve Board has found evidence that downward nominal wage rigidities exist in the United States (Estevao and Wilson, 1998; Lebow, Saks, and Wilson, 2003). However, the evidence for the mechanism through which low inflation raises the natural rate of unemployment is not at all clear cut. Inflation not only can "grease" the labor market and thus allow downward shifts in real wages in response to a decline in demand along, but it can also put friction in the system ("sand") by increasing the noise in relative real wages (Groshen and Schweitzer, 1999). The noise reduces the information content of nominal wages and hence the efficiency of the process by which workers are allocated across occupations and industries.Return to text8.See Kuroda and Yamamoto (2003) for analysis of the Japanese experience, Fehr and Goette (2005) for analysis of the Swiss experience, and Kim and Ruge-Murcia (2007) for macroeconometric analysis of the implications of downward nominal wage rigidity for the United States.Return to text9.The fact that the deflation is anticipated does not completely rule out a negative effect on balance sheets: If the debt is sufficiently long-lived, there still is some redistribution from debtors to creditors.Return to text10.Although these considerations are important for the design of monetary policy, a central bank can make use of other policy tools if the policy rate does become constrained by the zero lower bound (Bernanke, 2002).Return to text11.See Reifschneider and Williams (2000), Eggertsson and Woodford (2003, 2004), Coenen, Orphanides, and Wieland (2004), Wolman (2005), and the citations therein.Return to text12.The term "comfort zone" appeared in the headline of a September 2002New York Timesinterview with former Federal Reserve Governor Laurence Meyer (Stevenson, 2002) and has subsequently been used by Federal Reserve officials on numerous occasions, including prominent speeches by Bernanke (2005) and Yellen (2006).Return to text13.This section focuses on the major industrial economies. Mishkin (2000) considers the experiences of a number of emerging market economies that have adopted explicit inflation objectives.Return to text14.Bernanke and others (1999) countered this line of reasoning by noting that "missing an entire range may be perceived by the public as more serious failure of policy than missing a point, or even a narrow band, (which happens almost inevitably), leading to a possible loss of credibility."Return to text15.Since the early 1990s, the Reserve Bank of Australia's objective has been to keep the average inflation rate within a range of 2 percent to 3 percent; thus, when the edges of New Zealand's official inflation band were softened, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand described the move as a transition in the direction of an Australian-style "thick point" (Sherwin, 1999).Return to text16.From 1992 through 2003, the Bank of England's inflation objective was defined in terms of the retail price index excluding mortgage interest (RPIX). In October 2003, the U.K. government announced that the official inflation objective would henceforth be defined in terms of the consumer price index (CPI) and that the target would be set at 2 percent, a choice reflecting the fact that the recent average for CPI inflation had been about 1/2 percentage point lower than that of RPIX inflation.Return to text17.Further discussion regarding the scientific approach to monetary policy is in Mishkin (2007b).Return to text Mishkin, Frederic S., and Niklas J. Westelius (2006). "Inflation Band Targeting and Optimal Inflation Contracts," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 12384. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July. Forthcoming inJournal of Money, Credit and Banking. Orphanides, Athanasios, and Volker Wieland (2000). "Inflation Zone Targeting,"European Economic Review, vol. 44 (June), pp. 1351-87. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 34 (November, Part 2: Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Environment), pp. 936-66. Sherwin, Murray (1999). "Strategic Choices in Inflation Targeting: The New Zealand Experience," Reserve Bank of New Zealand,Reserve Bank Bulletin, vol. 62 (June), pp.73-88. Stevenson, Richard W. (2002). "The Fed's Evolving Comfort Zone,"The New York Times, August 4. Wolman, Alexander L. (2005). "Real Implications of the Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 37 (April), pp. 273-96. Woodford, Michael (2003).Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Yellen, Janet L. (2006). "Enhancing Fed Credibility," speech delivered at the Annual Washington Policy Conference, sponsored by the National Association for Business Economics, Washington, March 13. Footnotes 1.I'd like to thankEtienne Gagnon,Steven Kamin,Linda Kole,Andrew Levin, andDavid Lopez-Salidofor helpful comments and assistance with this speech.Return to text 2.Indeed, this specification of monetary policy objectives is exactly what is suggested by the dual mandate that the Congress has given to the Federal Reserve to promote both price stability and maximum employment (Mishkin, 2007a, 2008).Return to text 3.For example, former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan (2002) stated that "price stability is best thought of as an environment in which inflation is so low and stable over time that it does not materially enter into the decisions of households and firms."Return to text 4.Over the past couple of decades, an extensive literature has analyzed the benefits of low average inflation in a so-called New Keynesian framework. These studies generally start from a neoclassical model and incorporate two key features: monopolistic competition and costly price adjustment. Refer, for instance, to Goodfriend and King (1997) and Woodford (2003).Return to text 5.Interestingly, the larger the burden coming from the interaction of inflation and the capital income tax, the more government tax revenues will fall when inflation is reduced. Feldstein (1997, 1999) provides a quantitative assessment of the benefits of price stability based on the interaction of inflation and the tax system, showing that a lower average inflation rate stimulates investment by reducing the effective tax on capital income.Return to text 6.Because real money balances bear no interest, the opportunity cost of holding them is the nominal rate of interest. Higher inflation then leads to higher nominal interest rates, and hence lowers real balances, which causes a welfare loss because the social cost of producing real balances has remained substantially unaffected. In the absence of other frictions in the economy, inflation is viewed in this class of models as a tax on real balances (Bailey, 1956; Friedman 1969). However, the costs from higher holdings of real money balances has arguably become much less relevant as our economy has become more financially sophisticated. Households hold only modest amounts of cash, so these "shoe leather" costs are likely to be fairly trivial.Return to text 7.Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry (2000). The main idea can be described as follows: During periods of low productivity growth and no inflation, firms that need to cut their relative wages can do so only by cutting money wages. In the presence of downward nominal wage rigidities, firms will keep relative wages too high and employment too low. Hence, very low rates of inflation might prevent real wages from adjusting downward in response to declining labor demand in certain industries or regions, thereby leading to increased unemployment and hindering the re-allocation of labor from declining sectors to expanding sectors. Research by staff at the Federal Reserve Board has found evidence that downward nominal wage rigidities exist in the United States (Estevao and Wilson, 1998; Lebow, Saks, and Wilson, 2003). However, the evidence for the mechanism through which low inflation raises the natural rate of unemployment is not at all clear cut. Inflation not only can "grease" the labor market and thus allow downward shifts in real wages in response to a decline in demand along, but it can also put friction in the system ("sand") by increasing the noise in relative real wages (Groshen and Schweitzer, 1999). The noise reduces the information content of nominal wages and hence the efficiency of the process by which workers are allocated across occupations and industries.Return to text 8.See Kuroda and Yamamoto (2003) for analysis of the Japanese experience, Fehr and Goette (2005) for analysis of the Swiss experience, and Kim and Ruge-Murcia (2007) for macroeconometric analysis of the implications of downward nominal wage rigidity for the United States.Return to text 9.The fact that the deflation is anticipated does not completely rule out a negative effect on balance sheets: If the debt is sufficiently long-lived, there still is some redistribution from debtors to creditors.Return to text 10.Although these considerations are important for the design of monetary policy, a central bank can make use of other policy tools if the policy rate does become constrained by the zero lower bound (Bernanke, 2002).Return to text 11.See Reifschneider and Williams (2000), Eggertsson and Woodford (2003, 2004), Coenen, Orphanides, and Wieland (2004), Wolman (2005), and the citations therein.Return to text 12.The term "comfort zone" appeared in the headline of a September 2002New York Timesinterview with former Federal Reserve Governor Laurence Meyer (Stevenson, 2002) and has subsequently been used by Federal Reserve officials on numerous occasions, including prominent speeches by Bernanke (2005) and Yellen (2006).Return to text 13.This section focuses on the major industrial economies. Mishkin (2000) considers the experiences of a number of emerging market economies that have adopted explicit inflation objectives.Return to text 14.Bernanke and others (1999) countered this line of reasoning by noting that "missing an entire range may be perceived by the public as more serious failure of policy than missing a point, or even a narrow band, (which happens almost inevitably), leading to a possible loss of credibility."Return to text 15.Since the early 1990s, the Reserve Bank of Australia's objective has been to keep the average inflation rate within a range of 2 percent to 3 percent; thus, when the edges of New Zealand's official inflation band were softened, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand described the move as a transition in the direction of an Australian-style "thick point" (Sherwin, 1999).Return to text 16.From 1992 through 2003, the Bank of England's inflation objective was defined in terms of the retail price index excluding mortgage interest (RPIX). In October 2003, the U.K. government announced that the official inflation objective would henceforth be defined in terms of the consumer price index (CPI) and that the target would be set at 2 percent, a choice reflecting the fact that the recent average for CPI inflation had been about 1/2 percentage point lower than that of RPIX inflation.Return to text 17.Further discussion regarding the scientific approach to monetary policy is in Mishkin (2007b).Return to text
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Chairman Dodd, Ranking Member Shelby and members of the Committee, it is my pleasure to appear today to discuss the condition of the U.S. banking system. In my remarks, I will summarize briefly the role of the Federal Reserve in banking supervision, provide an overall view of the health of the U.S. banking system, and then discuss some key areas of supervisory focus. The U.S. banking system is facing some challenges, but remains in sound overall condition, having entered the period of recent financial turmoil with solid capital and strong earnings. The problems in the mortgage and housing markets have been highly unusual and clearly some banking organizations have failed to manage their exposures well and have suffered losses as a result. But in general these losses should not threaten their viability. We, along with the other banking agencies, have been working with banking organizations to identify and rectify those shortcomings in risk management and to ensure that the banking system continues to be safe and sound. Role of the Federal Reserve in Banking SupervisionThe Federal Reserve has supervisory and regulatory authority over a wide range of financial institutions and activities. It works with other federal and state supervisory authorities to ensure the safety and soundness of the banking industry, the stability of the financial system, and fair and equitable treatment of consumers in their financial transactions. While the Federal Reserve is not the primary federal supervisor for the majority of commercial bank assets, it plays an important role as the "umbrella supervisor" of bank holding companies. The bank holding companies supervised by the Federal Reserve number approximately 5,000 and have consolidated assets of about $14.2 trillion. The Federal Reserve conducts inspections of all large, regional, and complex bank holding companies and maintains inspection teams on-site at the largest bank holding companies. For smaller less complex organizations, supervision is conducted through a combination of off-site monitoring and on-site inspections. These inspections, which are conducted using established procedures, manuals, and techniques, allow the Federal Reserve to review the organization's systems for identifying and managing risk across the organization and its various legal entities and to evaluate the overall financial strength of the organization. The primary purpose of these inspections is to ensure that the holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries do not pose a threat to the soundness of the company's depository institutions. In fulfilling this role, the Federal Reserve relies to the fullest extent possible on information and analysis provided by the appropriate supervisory authority of the company's bank, securities, or insurance subsidiaries. The Federal Reserve is also the primary federal supervisor of state-member banks, sharing supervisory responsibilities with state supervisory agencies. In this role, Federal Reserve supervisory staff regularly conduct on-site examinations and off-site monitoring to ensure the soundness of supervised state member banks. There are over 870 state member banks whose assets total more than $1.5 trillion, representing about 12 percent of all commercial banks by number and about 14 percent of all commercial bank assets. Consumer protection within the financial services industry is another important responsibility of the Federal Reserve. Among the Federal Reserve's responsibilities in this area are: writing and interpreting regulations to carry out many of the major consumer protection laws; reviewing bank compliance with regulations; investigating complaints from the public about compliance with consumer protection laws; and conducting community development activities. Recent Performance of the U.S. Banking SystemI would now like to address the condition of banking organizations supervised by the Federal Reserve. I will start by discussing bank holding companies, providing a brief overview of their recent performance, condition, and outlook. I will then do the same for state member banks. Bank holding companiesOver the second half of 2007, bank holding companies (BHCs) experienced a substantial deterioration in asset quality and earnings, largely attributable to the effects of the slowing residential housing market on the quality of mortgage and construction loans. The sharp rise in subprime delinquencies, moreover, adversely affected the securitization market and placed strains on the liquidity and capital of some of the largest BHCs as these institutions brought off-balance sheet exposures onto their books. Many of these institutions also recognized significant valuation write-downs on assets affected by this market volatility. The combination of sizable write-downs and substantially higher provisions for loan losses in response to deteriorating loan quality resulted in weaker profitability at BHCs in the third quarter of 2007 and overall losses of more than $8 billion in the fourth quarter based on preliminary regulatory report data. Nonperforming assets also increased notably as the quality of mortgages, home equity lines of credit, and loans to real estate developers weakened. However, despite these adverse developments, bank holding companies still reported total net income exceeding $90 billion for the full year of 2007. In addition, the overall nonperforming assets ratio remained below levels reached earlier in this decade. The earnings performance of the fifty largest U.S. based bank holding companies as a group, which together represent more than three-fourths of all assets at bank holding companies, has clearly been subpar over the past two quarters and accounts for the industry's overall weak performance. In aggregate, these companies generated overall losses of over $9 billion for the fourth quarter, incorporating asset write-downs of more than $31 billion and loan loss provisions that exceeded loan charge-offs by $14 billion. Nonperforming assets also swelled at these companies during 2007, doubling from $33 to $67 billion, and raising the nonperforming assets ratio from a historically low 0.70 percent at December 31, 2006, to 1.25 percent at the end of 2007. Liquidity has also been under pressure at some of the fifty largest bank holding companies. In many cases, these pressures reflect difficulties securitizing some assets and the need to bring on balance sheet some assets that had previously been securitized. As a result, banking companies have experienced a moderate overall decline in liquid assets as a portion of total assets, and strains have emerged in term interbank funding markets. Bank holding companies are actively responding to these pressures and some have sought to increase more stable sources of funding to bolster their liquidity positions. In addition, as noted in last week'sMonetary Policy Report, the Federal Reserve has taken a number of steps to address the difficulties in term funding markets. Asset write-downs and unplanned increases in assets have placed pressure on capital ratios and caused some banking organizations to take a more cautious approach to extending credit. However, large bank holding companies in aggregate and individually continued to maintain regulatory capital ratios in excess of minimum regulatory requirements. As of December 31, 2007, the fifty largest bank holding companies reported aggregate tier 1 leverage, tier 1 risk-based, and total risk-based capital ratios of 5.3, 7.5, and 11.1 percent, respectively. In part, these capital ratios reflect steps taken by several large BHCs to replenish depleted equity positions by curtailing share repurchases, reducing dividends, and raising additional capital in order to maintain desired capital levels relative to regulatory norms. Indeed, in recent months, large bank holding companies have raised more than $50 billion in capital. Looking ahead, bank holding companies will continue to face challenging market conditions and persistent pressure on earnings. More asset write-downs are likely as the market continues to adjust risk premiums and valuations change. Adverse trends in loan quality will almost certainly continue and will require close monitoring by banking institutions and supervisory agencies alike. Liquidity positions will need to continue to be actively managed and banking organizations will need to implement risk management improvements to remedy the deficiencies that have been noted by companies and supervisors over the past year. State member banksMost state member banks entered the recent financial disturbance in sound condition, reporting strong earnings through the first half of 2007 and maintaining high capital ratios. As of December 31, 2007, more than 99 percent of these banks reported risk-based capital ratios consistent with a "well-capitalized" designation under Prompt Corrective Action standards. However, profitability suffered in the second half of 2007 as state member banks increased loan loss provisions, reducing the aggregate return on average assets from 1.4 percent for the full year 2006 to 1.1 percent for 2007. In addition, although still below the most recent peak in 2002, the nonperforming assets ratio moved up sharply over the past year. In large part, this increase reflected deterioration in residential mortgages and loans to builders and has contributed to an increase in the portion of state member banks with less-than-satisfactory supervisory ratings from 4.5 percent at year-end 2006 to 6.3 percent at the end of 2007. Indeed, half of the state member banks that were downgraded to less-than-satisfactory CAMELS ratings since mid-2007 have evidenced significant financial or risk management weaknesses related to commercial real estate lending activities. State member banks entered 2007 relatively well-positioned to confront and withstand more adverse conditions. However, like bank holding companies, these banks face deteriorating credit conditions in 2008 and we anticipate further increases in their loan delinquencies and charge-offs. We also foresee more difficult liquidity conditions for some of these banks, and we expect to see the number with less than satisfactory CAMELS ratings of 3, 4, or 5 grow from the low level that has prevailed over the last several years. Key Areas of Supervisory FocusAs the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve is acutely aware of conditions in the economy and financial markets and the challenges those conditions pose to the safety and soundness of banking organizations. Accordingly, we have been focusing supervisory efforts on those institutions most exposed to residential and commercial real estate or other sectors that have come under pressure. We are also attentive to those institutions that would suffer most from a prolonged period of deterioration in economic conditions. We continue to focus our examinations on the financial condition of banking organizations--including the adequacy of their liquidity, capital, and loan loss reserves and their consequent ability to recognize additional losses. We are also evaluating risk management practices very closely, including scrutinizing governance and controls, given some of the risk management lapses in those areas revealed by recent events. At this point, I would like to provide a summary of the key areas of supervisory focus, including residential mortgage lending, consumer protection, bank liquidity and capital positions, consumer (nonmortgage) lending, commercial real estate, and commercial lending. Residential mortgagesAmong the challenges currently facing the U.S. banking system, residential mortgage lending has presented the largest problems so far. In addition to the economic and social distress created for many homeowners and communities, the sharp increases in subprime mortgage loan delinquencies and foreclosures over the past year have affected the banking industry significantly. Delinquency rates on subprime adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) began to increase in 2006, and by December 2007, more than one-fifth of these loans were seriously delinquent (that is, ninety days or more delinquent or in foreclosure). For subprime mortgages with fixed interest rates, delinquency rates have moved up significantly in recent months, to the upper end of their historical range. For prime and near-prime mortgages, performance weakened somewhat in 2007, but generally remained fairly solid. The continued erosion in the quality of mortgage credit has led to an increase in initial foreclosure filings, with foreclosures rising the most in areas where home prices have fallen after an earlier period of rapid increase. Some banking organizations in particular have been adversely affected by problems with residential mortgages. A number of large organizations have suffered substantial write-downs on subprime mortgages. The effect of the problems in subprime mortgages, however, extends beyond the mortgage accounts themselves. Securities backed in part or full by subprime assets have also declined in value as investors factored in estimates of potential losses. Where the securities had been heavily structured or leveraged, these losses have in some cases been severe. Further, many banks financed nonbank firms that originated these assets through "mortgage warehouse" lines of credit or through repurchase agreements. As the banks saw the values of the financed mortgages falling last year, their margin calls put a number of originators out of business. Most recently, home equity lending has emerged as a more challenging area. As banking organizations report increased delinquencies and losses in home equity lines of credit (HELOCs), especially in light of falling housing prices in some markets, we continue to monitor current and potential exposures, and are reviewing the industry's collateral valuation methods. Federal Reserve supervisors have focused very intensely on problems with residential mortgages and are taking appropriate action. In reaction to the immediate problems facing homeowners struggling to meet payment obligations, the Federal Reserve and other banking agencies have encouraged mortgage lenders and mortgage servicers to pursue prudent loan workouts through such measures as modification of loans, deferral of payments, extension of loan maturities, capitalization of delinquent amounts, and conversion of ARMs into fixed-rate mortgages or fully indexed, fully amortizing ARMs. The Federal Reserve has also collaborated with community groups to help homeowners avoid foreclosure. In addition, the Federal Reserve has taken steps aimed at avoiding future problems in subprime mortgage markets while still preserving responsible subprime lending and sustainable homeownership. Through examinations and other supervisory activities, we are taking our knowledge of the root causes of bank-related mortgage lending problems and using it to work with institutions to improve risk management practices in this area. Some of this work builds on the guidance on subprime mortgages issued last summer by the U.S. banking agencies. The guidance is designed to help ensure that borrowers obtain adjustable-rate mortgages that they can afford to repay and can refinance without prepayment penalty for a reasonable period before the first interest rate reset. The Federal Reserve, along with the other banking agencies, issued similar guidance on nontraditional mortgages in 2006. Given significant growth in banks' HELOC portfolios over the past several years, the agencies have been concerned for some time that banks' HELOC underwriting placed insufficient emphasis on the creditworthiness of borrowers and placed too much weight on the value of the collateral during a booming housing market. In 2005, the agencies issued joint guidance that outlined these concerns and set forth supervisory expectations for risk management of home equity lending activities. The guidance emphasized the importance of active portfolio management, particularly for those institutions pursuing significant growth in HELOC balances and underwriting HELOCs with high loan-to-value limits and limited documentation on borrowers' asset and income. Consumer protectionAs the Committee is aware, problems associated with residential mortgages stem in part from lax lending standards. In some cases, improper practices vis-à-vis consumers contributed to the defaults we have seen in the subprime mortgage market. To address these practices, under the authority given to it by the Congress, the Federal Reserve has taken action to protect consumers in their mortgage transactions. In December, the Board issued for public comment a comprehensive set of new regulations to prohibit unfair or deceptive practices in the mortgage market, under the authority granted us by the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act of 1994 (HOEPA). The proposed rules would apply to all mortgage lenders and would establish lending standards to help ensure that consumers who seek mortgage credit receive loans whose terms are clearly disclosed and that can reasonably be expected to be repaid. Accordingly, the rules would prohibit lenders from engaging in a pattern or practice of making higher-priced mortgage loans without due regard to consumers' ability to make the scheduled payments. In addition, for all mortgage loans, our proposal addresses misleading and deceptive advertising practices, requires borrowers and brokers to agree in advance on the maximum fee that the broker may receive, bans certain practices by loan servicers that harm borrowers, and prohibits coercion of appraisers by lenders. We expect substantial public comment on our proposal, and we will carefully consider all information and viewpoints while moving expeditiously to adopt final rules. The effectiveness of the new regulations, however, will depend critically on strong enforcement. To that end, in conjunction with other federal and state agencies, we are conducting compliance reviews of a range of mortgage lenders, including nondepository lenders. The agencies will collaborate in determining the lessons learned and in seeking ways to better cooperate in ensuring effective and consistent examinations and improved enforcement of all categories of mortgage lenders. We are also working toward finalizing rules under the Truth in Lending Act that will require new, more informative, and consumer-tested disclosures by credit card issuers. Separately, we are actively reviewing potentially unfair and deceptive practices by issuers of credit cards. Using the Board's authority under the Federal Trade Commission Act, we expect to issue proposed rules regarding these practices this spring. Liquidity and capital issuesAs noted earlier, liquidity disruptions in certain financial markets have created challenges for banking organizations. During times of systemwide stress, such as the one we are currently experiencing, significant liquidity demands can emanate from both the asset and the liability side of a bank's balance sheet. For example, we have recently seen how unanticipated draws on liquidity facilities by structured investment vehicles, commercial paper conduits, and others can lead to significant growth in bank assets. Moreover, some organizations have also encountered difficulty in selling whole loans or securitizing assets as planned. There were also cases in which reputational concerns have prompted banks or their affiliates to provide liquidity support to a vehicle or to incorporate some of the vehicle's assets onto the bank's balance sheet, even when the bank had no legal obligation to do so. In a few cases, these unexpected increases in the balance sheet created some pressures on capital ratios, even when capital levels remained unchanged. Further instances of unplanned asset expansion could continue. Reduced liquidity in the markets for certain structured credit products continue to create valuation challenges and concerns about these products have spread to other sectors. Illiquidity in some credit markets may make it difficult for some market participants, including banking organizations, to hedge positions effectively. From a supervisory perspective, it has become clear that some bankers did not adequately explore scenarios in which market liquidity could be disrupted, or in which there could be sudden demands for the institution's own liquidity. We are working very closely with banking organizations to ensure that they improve liquidity risk management practices, including contingency funding plans and improved information systems, and ensure that these practices are integrated with other aspects of risk management. Banking organizations must employ more comprehensive stress testing and scenario analysis--exercises that capture both bank-specific problems and broader market disruptions--to assess the impact that problems in market liquidity, as well as funding liquidity, can have on capital adequacy. Credit cards and other consumer lendingOf course the Federal Reserve is focused on the possibility that troubles in the residential mortgage sector could adversely affect other types of consumer lending, such as credit cards or auto loans. Banking organizations' consumer loans excluding mortgages--which include credit cards and auto loans--grew somewhat faster in 2007 than in 2006, suggesting some substitution of nonmortgage credit for mortgage credit. The pickup in consumer debt was mostly attributable to faster growth in revolving credit, a pattern consistent with the results of the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey. Banks, on net, reported easing lending standards on credit cards over the first half of 2007 and reported little change in those standards on net over the second half of the year. In contrast, significant portions of respondents in the second half of 2007 reported that they had tightened standards and terms on other consumer loans, a change that may have contributed to a slowing in the growth of nonrevolving loans over the final months of 2007. Thus far, the quality of other consumer loans has remained satisfactory. However, the delinquency rates on credit cards and consumer installment loans at banking organizations increased over the second half of the year. Moreover, although household bankruptcy filings remained below the levels seen before the changes in bankruptcy law implemented in late 2005, the bankruptcy rate rose modestly over the first nine months of 2007 and could be a harbinger of increasing delinquency rates on other consumer loans. In view of this risk, Federal Reserve supervisors are monitoring these consumer loan segments for signs of spillover from residential mortgage problems, particularly in regions showing homeowner distress, and are paying particular attention to the securitization market for credit card loans. Commercial real estateCommercial real estate is another area that requires close supervisory attention. The delinquency rate on commercial mortgages held by banking organizations almost doubled over the course of 2007 to over two percent. The loan performance problems were the most striking for construction and land development loans--especially for those that finance residential development--but some increase in delinquency rates was also apparent for loans backed by nonfarm, nonresidential properties and multifamily properties. In the most recent Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, a number of banking organizations reported having tightened standards and terms on commercial real estate (CRE) loans. Among the most common reasons cited by those that tightened credit conditions were a less favorable or more uncertain economic outlook, a worsening of CRE market conditions in the areas where the banks operate, and a reduced tolerance for risk. Notably, a number of small and medium-sized institutions continue to have sizable exposure to CRE, with some having CRE concentrations equal to several multiples of their capital. Despite the generally satisfactory performance of commercial mortgages in securitized pools, spreads of yields on BBB-rated commercial mortgage-backed securities over comparable-maturity swap rates soared, and spreads on AAA-rated tranches of those securities have risen to unprecedented levels. The widening of spreads reportedly reflected heightened concerns regarding the underwriting standards for commercial mortgages over the past few years, but it also may be the result of increased investor wariness regarding structured finance products. CRE borrowers that require refinancing in 2008, particularly those with short-term mezzanine loans, will face difficulty in locating new financing under tighter underwriting standards and reduced demand for CRE securitizations. In those geographic regions exhibiting particular signs of weakness in real estate markets, for several years we have been focusing our reviews of state member banks and bank holding companies on evaluating growing concentrations in CRE. Building on this experience, we took a leadership role in the development of interagency guidance addressing CRE concentrations, which was issued in 2006. More recently, because weaker housing markets have clearly started to adversely affect the quality of CRE loans at the banking organizations that we supervise, we have heightened our supervisory efforts in this segment even more. These efforts include monitoring carefully the impact that lower valuations could have on CRE exposures, as well as evaluating the implementation of the interagency guidance on concentrations in CRE, particularly at those institutions with exceptionally high CRE concentrations or with riskier portfolios. Recently, we surveyed our examiners about their assessments of real estate lending practices at a group of state member banks with high concentrations in CRE lending. We had two main objectives for this effort. First, we wanted to evaluate the Federal Reserve's implementation of the interagency CRE lending guidance and to determine whether there were any areas in which additional clarification of the guidance would be helpful to our examiners. Second, we wanted to assess the degree to which banks were complying with the guidance and gain further information on the degree of deterioration in real estate lending conditions. Through this effort, we confirmed that many banks have taken prudent steps to manage their CRE concentrations, such as considering their exposures in their capital planning efforts and conducting stress tests of their portfolios. Others, however, have not been as effective in their efforts and we have uncovered cases in which interest reserves and extensions of maturities were used to mask problem credits, appraisals had not been updated despite substantial recent changes in local real estate values, and analysis of guarantor support for real estate transactions was inadequate. Based on these findings, we are currently planning a further series of targeted reviews to identify those banks most at risk to further weakening in real estate market conditions and to promptly require remedial actions. We have also developed and started to deliver targeted examiner training so that our supervisory staff is equipped to deal with more serious CRE problems at banking organizations as they arise. Commercial and industrial loansWhile there are some pockets of poor performance in commercial and industrial lending, for the most part the sector continues to perform fairly well. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans surged in 2007 because of extremely rapid growth in the second half of the year resulting, in part, from large banks' inability to syndicate leveraged loans that they had underwritten. Finally, after the issuance of an unprecedented amount of leveraged syndicated loans over the first half of 2007, issuance declined considerably in the second half of the year, when demand by nonbank investors for those loans diminished. In the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey of October 2007 and January 2008, many banks reported charging wider spreads on C&I loans--the loan rate less the bank's cost of funds--representing the first such tightening in several years. A large proportion of banks also indicated that they had tightened lending standards. Most of the banks that tightened terms and standards indicated that they had done so in response to a less favorable or more uncertain economic outlook and a reduced tolerance for risk. However, about one-fourth of the banks cited concerns about their own liquidity or capital position as reasons for tightening. The delinquency rate on C&I loans at commercial banks trended higher throughout 2007, but remained near the bottom of its historical range at the end of the year. Charge-offs on C&I loans at commercial banks also increased in 2007, particularly in the fourth quarter when the charge-off rate moved up from 0.48 to 0.85 percent of average C&I loans. In addition, examiners continue to note early signs of credit deterioration at some banks where delinquencies have not yet increased significantly. Here, too, supervisors are responding to ensure that banks' commercial and industrial (C&I) lending activities remain safe and sound. Examiners are focusing on underwriting standards, evaluating both the methodology and results of banks' stress tests of credit portfolios and the impact of potential shocks on credit and asset quality. Credit administration--that is, banks' activities to monitor their loans and maintain their credit operations--are also being watched carefully. Examiners are looking for signs of imprudent renewals, excessive waivers of terms without compensation, or other activities which might mask recognition of poorly performing credits. We are emphasizing that banks employ appropriate internal controls that will ensure that borrowers meet their obligations under credit agreements--not only obligations for payments, but also obligations to furnish up-to-date information such as financial statements--which allow the bank to properly assess credit risk. We also continue to regularly review internal bank reports and meet with bank management to discuss underwriting and credit performance in order to identify problem areas early and while they are still manageable. Supervisory Strategies for Going ForwardThe U.S. banking industry is facing serious challenges; the Federal Reserve, working with the other U.S. banking agencies has acted--and will continue to act--to ensure that the banking system continues to be safe and sound and able to meet the credit needs of a growing economy. Our initial assessment of the weaknesses at individual firms indicates that risk management systems and senior management oversight at some institutions were not sufficiently robust. As supervisors, we must redouble our efforts to ensure risk management practices and controls keep pace with changes in financial markets and business models, providing both positive incentives and clear consequences. Supervisors have emphasized for several years the concept of enterprise-wide risk management. However, problems stemming from recent events indicate that bank management in many cases was not fully aware of the latent risks contained in various structures and financial instruments, and how those risks could manifest themselves. Supervisors, therefore, will be enhancing their focus on the capacity of a firm as a whole to manage risk and to integrate risk assessments into the overall decision-making by senior management. Additional emphasis on enhancing stress-testing is also appropriate to focus more bank attention on risks that have a low probability of occurrence but unacceptably high potential costs. As part of an international effort, we have also been developing a set of preliminary "lessons learned" from banking organizations' experiences with recent market events, containing examples of both stronger and weaker practices, to share with the banking industry as well as our own examination staff. Finally, as part of a responsible and proactive supervisory approach, and as we have done in the past, we are conducting critical assessments of our own supervisory programs, policies, and practices. This is a prudent step and is consistent with long-standing Federal Reserve practice. In the same vein as the "lessons learned" analysis for banking institutions mentioned above, our intent is to identify opportunities for improving our own supervisory processes both within the current environment and as preparation for future supervisory challenges. These assessments will be specific to our supervisory programs as well as their execution over the past several years, will be conducted across a broad portfolio of institutions and supervisory programs, and should help to further strengthen our supervisory objectives and procedures. It will take some time for the banking industry to work through this current set of challenges and for financial markets to recover from recent strains. The Federal Reserve will continue to work with other U.S. banking agencies and the Congress to help ensure that bank safety and soundness is maintained.
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the Norges Bank Conference on Monetary Policy, Oslo, Norway Since 2002, the U.S. dollar has depreciated over 40 percent against a basket of major currencies, weighted by their countries' trade with the United States. Over the past two years, the trade-weighted dollar has fallen by 15 percent. The decline in the value of the U.S. dollar, particularly if it continues, has raised concerns that it might lead to higher inflation. After all, a lower value of the dollar is likely to raise the cost of imports, which can feed into higher consumer prices. But how much of a risk to inflation is posed by a depreciation of the domestic currency? This depends on how much of the falling value of the currency is passed through to import prices and then on to overall consumer prices. In my remarks today, I will discuss what recent economic research tells us about exchange rate pass-through and what this suggests for the control of inflation and monetary policy. I will first focus on exchange rate pass-through from a macroeconomic perspective and then examine the microeconomic evidence. In light of this evidence, I will then discuss the implications of exchange rate movements on the conduct of monetary policy.1 Traditional Monetary Explanations of Currency DepreciationThere is a long history behind the belief, often expressed in the popular press, that nominal exchange rate depreciation is closely linked to price inflation. Even prior to the U.S. Constitutional Convention of 1787, policymakers recognized that monetary systems without a nominal anchor--that is, systems which relied on paper money not backed by gold or other commodities--were prone to large currency devaluations and high inflation. The lack of a nominal anchor is one of the reasons the U.S. Constitution restricted the states from issuing their own currencies (Michener and Wright, 2005). Traditional monetary theory regards excessive money creation as a common source of instability in both the exchange rate and price level. In the presence of large monetary shocks, price inflation and exchange rate depreciation should, therefore, be closely linked. The large exchange rate depreciation and coincident inflation that occurred following many episodes of wartime suspension of the gold standard--including those in Britain during the Napoleonic Wars and after World War I--were often cited in support of the traditional monetary interpretation (Frenkel, 1976). Drawing on more recent experience, countries with relatively rapid rates of currency depreciation following the breakup of the Bretton Woods System had relatively high rates of inflation. For example, Sweden's currency depreciated by an average of 5 percent per year between 1973 and 1985 against the deutsche mark, and its annual inflation rate was on the order of 4 percentage points higher than German inflation over the same period. In addition, until the past decade, many countries in Latin America were plagued by a combination of chronically high inflation and exchange rate depreciation. For example, the Mexican peso depreciated by an average of 31 percent per year against the dollar between 1977 and 1995, while the Mexican inflation rate averaged about 30 percent per year higher than the U.S. inflation rate. Recent Macro Evidence: Pass-Through to Consumer PricesThe correlation between consumer price inflation and the rate of nominal exchange rate depreciation can indeed be high in an unstable monetary environment in which nominal shocks fuel both high inflation and exchange rate depreciation. But a salient feature of the data is that this correlation has been very low over the past two decades for a broad group of countries that have pursued stable and predictable monetary policies. Moreover, the evidence suggests that even countries in which inflation and exchange rate depreciation appear to have been fairly closely linked historically have experienced a sizeable decline in pass-through following the adoption of improved monetary policies. Some of the most striking macro evidence of a weak correlation between exchange rate depreciation and inflation comes from case studies of episodes in which even highly open economies experienced little upward pressure on inflation following large depreciations of their currencies (Lafleche, 1996/1997; Cunningham and Haldane, 2000; Goldfajn and Werlang 2000; Gagnon, 2004; Burnstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2007). For example, after Sweden and the United Kingdom's withdrawal from the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System in September 1992, both countries experienced low inflation: Swedish price inflation was contained to only 3 percent per year on average in 1993 and 1994 despite a cumulative nominal depreciation of the krona of 9 percent, while the United Kingdom's inflation rate averaged only 2 percent per year in 1993 and 1994 even though the pound fell by 15 percent.2 The case study evidence has been confirmed by time series analysis. Gagnon and Ihrig (2004), for example, estimated pass-through to consumer prices for a broad set of industrial countries using data over the 1971-2002 period. Over their entire sample, the authors estimated pass-through to be roughly 0.2, indicating that a 10 percent nominal depreciation caused the consumer price level to rise by 2 percent in the long run, with most of it occurring quickly. However, when they split their sample using country-specific break points--typically during the early 1980s--to control for the effect of switching to a more stable monetary policy regime, they found a marked decline in pass-through. Specifically, they estimated pass-through to be 0.05 for the later period in their sample of twenty countries, implying that 10 percent depreciation would cause prices to rise only 0.5 percent. McCarthy (1999) reached similar conclusions, finding a decline in exchange rate pass-through for all nine of the industrial countries that he examined in the period from 1983 to 1998 relative to the earlier period from 1976 to 1982.3 Explanation of the Macro ResultsIndeed, the correlation between consumer price inflation and exchange rate changes is now very low in most industrial countries. So, how does one explain these results? In a previous speech (Mishkin, 2007), I observed that many of the basic facts of the recent behavior of inflation dynamics--less persistence of inflation, a flatter Phillips curve, less responsiveness of inflation to shocks to energy prices and the exchange rate--can all be explained by recognizing that, in recent years, expectations of inflation have become much more solidly anchored. Traditional monetary theorists were correct in emphasizing that exchange rate depreciation and inflation were likely to be closely linked under an unstable monetary policy environment without a nominal anchor. But in the context of a stable and predictable monetary policy environment, nominal shocks play a vastly reduced role in driving fluctuations in consumer prices and the exchange rate, so that there is no reason a priori to expect much association between these variables. Thus, a stable monetary policy--supported by an institutional framework that allows the central bank to pursue a policy independent of fiscal considerations and political pressures--effectively removes an important potential source of high pass-through of exchange rate changes to consumer prices. Moreover, with expectations of inflation anchored, real shocks arising from various channels--whether from aggregate demand, energy prices, or the foreign exchange rate--will also have a smaller effect on expected inflation and hence on trend inflation. The presence of a strong commitment to a nominal anchor in many countries--that is, the use of monetary policy actions and statements to maintain low and stable inflation--helps explain why even sizeable depreciations of the nominal exchange rate have exerted small effects on consumer prices in many recent historical episodes and can be expected usually to exert small effects in future episodes. John Taylor (2002) made this exact point in a well-known paper where he argued that the establishment of a strong nominal anchor in many countries in recent years has led to the very low pass-through of exchange rate depreciation to inflation that we find in the data. Of course, an important corollary is that low exchange rate pass-through will persist only so long as the monetary authorities continue to ratify the public's expectations that they will continue to respond aggressively to shocks that have potentially persistent adverse effects on inflation. An important caveat to the conclusion that exchange rate pass-through to consumer price inflation is now very low is that the empirical evidence on which it rests is mainly unconditional in nature. In other words, it reflects the average outcome across a range of different episodes but does not tell us how the relationship may vary depending on which shocks hit the economy. However, certain specific shocks and the responses to them may be associated with considerably higher pass-through than indicated by these average relationships. For example, as I will illustrate later, a shock to desired portfolio holdings that causes the dollar to depreciate could, in principle, push up inflation for a sustained period, even if it had little influence on longer-term inflation expectations. Because such risks to the inflation outlook are clearly a concern of monetary policy, a strong rationale exists for attempting to identify the transmission channels through whichspecificshocks affect inflation, real activity, and the exchange rate. To identify those channels, we must keep in mind that the transmission from exchange rates to consumer prices depends importantly on the economic channels that influence pass-through from exchange rates to import prices. Accordingly, I will next review that burgeoning literature and its implications for the transmission process. More Micro Evidence on Pass-Through to Import PricesAlthough the price measures upon which monetary policy makers focus the most attention are broad measures of consumer prices, most of the vast literature examining the effects of exchange rates on prices focuses on import prices at either an aggregate, sectoral, or industry level.4 Turning first to studies using broad indexes of import prices, considerable evidence suggests that pass-through to U.S. import prices is quite low and has declined markedly in recent years. For example, one study by Marazzi and Sheets (2007) found that the average cumulative response of the U.S. import price index to an exchange rate change declined from around 0.5 in the 1970s and 1980s to around 0.2 in the past decade.5The decline in responsiveness is especially apparent in finished goods, including consumer goods, capital goods excluding computers and semi-conductors, and automotive products (Gust, Leduc, and Vigfusson, 2006). Evidence also suggests that pass-through to import prices in many major U.S. trading partners is well below unity, even if typically somewhat higher than in the United States. For example, Campa and Goldberg (2008) reported that the estimated pass-through to import prices for the United States ranked sixth-lowest among the twenty countries that they examined. Pass-through to import prices also appears to have declined significantly in many major foreign countries (Ihrig, Marazzi, and Rothenberg, 2006; Otani, Shiratsuka, and Shirota, 2006). The evidence from aggregate import price indexes is corroborated by industry studies that indicate that the response of prices to changes in foreign costs--including the exchange rate component--is quite low. For example, Goldberg and Hellerstein (2007) found that the pass-through of changes in foreign costs to the retail price of imported beer was only 7 percent, so that a 10 percent rise in dollar-denominated costs would push up the price of beer by only 0.7 percent.6 Explanations of the Micro ResultsIn interpreting this evidence, it is useful to begin with the observation that low pass-through to import prices is not a prerequisite for low pass-through to consumer prices. Even if import prices react strongly to exchange rates, a monetary policy stance that is sufficiently reactive to inflation can insulate consumer price inflation from the effects of a shock that causes the exchange rate to depreciate. For example, although the United Kingdom experienced a very large increase in import prices of about 13 percent in the half-year following the ERM crisis--which was nearly as large as the depreciation of its multilateral nominal exchange rate-- consumer price inflation remained subdued. There are, however, at least two reasons why evidence of low pass-through to import prices is relevant for understanding and assessing pass-through to consumer prices. First, evidence of low pass-through to import prices provides strong corroboration of the empirical evidence discussed earlier indicating low pass-through to consumer prices as well as of my interpretation of the role of a strong nominal anchor in achieving the latter result. If commitment to a nominal anchor was weak, and, as a result the economy was buffeted by nominal shocks--due perhaps to shifts in the central bank's target for trend inflation--pass-through to import prices should be both rapid and complete, and hence easier to identify empirically than using broader price indexes. But the fact that exchange rate pass-through to import prices is far below unity, and appears to have declined as countries have pursued more stable and predictable monetary policies, provides a strong rebuttal to the argument that exchange rate depreciation is necessarily attributable to an unstable monetary policy. The second reason that evidence of low pass-through to import prices is important is that it provides useful clues about the economic channels through which exchange rate changes affect activity and prices. Notably, the empirical evidence contrasts starkly with the implications of a large class of open economy models that either embed the assumption of purchasing power parity or at least imply that producers have a constant desired markup over marginal cost. The empirical shortcomings of this class of models have spawned an enormous and innovative literature that has attempted to explain incomplete pass-through to import prices. As I will discuss, the new models that researchers have developed in this effort have substantially different implications for the transmission of shocks to exchange rates, consumer prices, and real output than their predecessors, and, in particular, imply that exchange rate changes tend to have much smaller expenditure-switching effects on real activity. But before proceeding to that discussion, it is worth highlighting several prominent theoretical explanations that have been offered to account for low exchange rate pass-through. The fact that exporters frequently appear to "price to market" provides one key explanation for incomplete pass-through to import prices (originally proposed by Krugman, 1987; and Dornbusch, 1987).7In monopolistically competitive markets, optimizing firms vary their desired markup over marginal cost across different markets depending on the elasticity of demand that they face in each market. These demand elasticities depend on the firm's market share, which in turn is affected by exchange rates. For example, the new version of the SIGMA model--a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model used at the Federal Reserve Board for policy simulations--adopts a framework in which the desired markup of producers varies directly with market share; because high-cost producers have a low market share, they desire to set a relatively low markup. This specification implies that a firm exporting to the United States whose currency appreciated against the dollar would want to lower its markup to mitigate its loss in market share and is thus consistent with less-than-complete pass-through of exchange rate changes to import prices.8 Second, the combination of local currency pricing--meaning that an exporting firm sets the price of its good in the currency of the country to which it exports--together with nominal price rigidities implies that exchange rate fluctuations will have less impact on import prices, at least in the short run (Devereux and Engel, 2002; Bacchetta and van Wincoop, 2005; Campa and Goldberg, 2005; Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon, 2007; Gopinath and Rigobon, forthcoming). Pricing in local currency seems to be even more prevalent for exports to the United States, which has such a large market. This may account for why correlations between exchange rates and import prices appear to be lower for the United States than for most other countries. Third, several studies have pointed out that distribution costs make up an important component of the retail price of imported goods (Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo, 2003; Campa and Goldberg, 2005; Berger and others, 2007). Because distribution costs are probably fairly insensitive to shocks driving the exchange rate or foreign costs, they help insulate the retail price of imported goods from the effects of exchange rate fluctuations.9 Finally, cross-border production can lead to lower pass-through. If production occurs in several stages in a number of different countries, then the final good embodies costs in various currencies that may not all move together, resulting in lower pass-through (Bodnar, Dumas, and Marston, 2002; Hegji, 2003). Implications for Monetary PolicyAs I have discussed, an important limitation of the empirical evidence that indicates there is only a small increase, on average, in consumer price inflation when the exchange rate depreciates is that it is unconditional in nature: It does not tell how the relationship may vary depending on which shocks hit the economy. One reason that structural models are useful is that they allow us to assess the relationship between exchange rate depreciation and consumer price inflation for a wide array of specific shocks, some of which may be regarded as potential risks to the outlook for inflation and real activity. Structural models--especially modern DSGE models--are also helpful from a heuristic standpoint insofar as they highlight the economic channels through which shocks affect the economy, which is important in assessing the transmission from exchange rates to inflation and real activity. The implications of a structural model for exchange rate pass-through clearly are sensitive to underlying features of the modeling environment. In formulating the SIGMA model, it was regarded as crucial that the model account for the empirical regularity of low pass-through of exchange rate changes to import prices. As I will illustrate, modeling assumptions that affect pass-through to import prices can have a major influence on the implied link between consumer price inflation and the exchange rate for any given shock. Most open-economy DSGE models in the literature--including the first generation of the Federal Reserve Board's SIGMA model described in Erceg, Guerrieri, and Gust (2006)--have embedded Dixit-Stiglitz preferences, implying that the desired markup of price over marginal cost is a constant. In such a framework, there is complete pass-through of exchange rate changes to import prices, at least after short-lived nominal price rigidities wear off. Because import prices respond one-to-one to the exchange rate after a few quarters, shocks that cause the exchange rate to depreciate can put substantial upward pressure on consumer prices through the imported price component as well as through stimulating real activity by encouraging higher real net exports. It is instructive to contrast the implications of this "full pass-through" (to import prices) setting with the one that is embedded in the new version of SIGMA, which allows for variable desired markups. As noted previously, this feature tends to markedly damp pass-through from exchange rates to consumer prices in line with the empirical evidence I have discussed--both directly, because import prices respond by less to the exchange rate, and indirectly, because exchange rate changes tend to have smaller effects on domestic production. In the terms of the literature, this specification forces a substantial "disconnect" between changes in exchange rates, inflation, and real activity.10 To illustrate how features affecting pass-through to import prices affect pass-through to consumer prices and output, let's consider some simulations of the SIGMA model, as shown in the figure, for the case of a shock to portfolio preferences that causes the dollar to depreciate immediately by 10 percent. Specifically, this risk premium shock to the dollar raises the expected return that investors demand on assets denominated in dollars relative to assets denominated in foreign currencies. The solid line denotes our preferred specification, which entails low pass-through to import prices both at home and abroad, while the dotted line shows the specification with constant desired markups, which implies complete pass-through to both U.S. and foreign import prices. Under either specification of pass-through, it is assumed that monetary policy follows a standard Taylor rule. It is worth noting that the Taylor rule reacts only to the four-quarter change in core consumer price inflation and the output gap (actual minus potential gross domestic product); monetary policy does not respond directly to the exchange rate. As illustrated byFigure 1, the risk premium shock has broadly similar effects on the United States under either specification of pass-through. In particular, the shock raises real net exports, because the induced depreciation of the dollar raises the relative price of imported goods and reduces the price of U.S. exports in foreign markets. This strengthening of real net exports, in turn, boosts U.S. output. Moreover, consumer price inflation rises due both to higher import prices and because the stimulus to activity raises the marginal costs of domestic producers. However, there are several important differences between the results under each specification. First, import prices rise much less under the low pass-through scenario, implying less "direct" upward pressure on consumer prices. Second, because the relative price of imports rises by less and the price of U.S. exports in foreign markets also falls by less under the low pass-through specification, there are somewhat smaller effects on net exports and, hence, on real output. Third, there is a smaller degree of "indirect" pressure on domestic inflation because of the smaller output response.11 The model simulation results are useful in two respects. First, they suggest that under an empirically reasonable specification that seems consistent with the low pass-through to import prices seen in U.S. data, the effects of even a relatively large and sharp 10 percent decline in the dollar on output and inflation are fairly modest. In particular, the output gap peaks at less than 1/2 percentage point above baseline, and the inflation rate peaks at only about 1/4 percentage point above baseline. Thus, there seems to be a substantial disconnect between the exchange rate depreciation and nominal demand. Second, a comparison across specifications highlights the importance of adequately modeling the structural features that determine the transmission from exchange rates to import prices. Under the specification implying full pass-through, the comparatively large jump in import prices and strong stimulus to activity results in a sizeable surge in inflation, even though long-term inflation expectations remain anchored and agents are assumed to be fully cognizant of the monetary rule. ConclusionNow let me summarize the lessons from the empirical evidence on exchange rate pass-through. Sizeable depreciations of the nominal exchange rate exert fairly small effects on consumer prices across a wide set of industrial countries, and these effects have declined over the past two decades. Exchange rate depreciations are thus likely to have less adverse effects on inflation than they have had in the past. The empirical evidence also indicates that pass-through from exchange rates to import prices is low and has declined markedly over the past two decades. This evidence suggests that there may be a weaker relationship between exchange rate fluctuations and nominal demand than prevailed in the past, which may make it easier for monetary policy to stabilize inflation and real activity. Nevertheless, exchange rate fluctuations can still have an effect on inflation and economic activity; hence, monetary policy must continue to take these fluctuations into account to ensure that inflation expectations remain well anchored and that fluctuations in economic activity are minimized. ReferencesAtkeson, Andrew, and Ariel Burstein (2005). "Trade Costs, Pricing-to-Market, and International Relative Prices," unpublished paper, University of California at Los Angeles. Bacchetta, Phillipe, and Eric van Wincoop (2005). "A Theory of the Currency Denomination of International Trade,"Journal of International Economics, vol. 67 (December), pp. 295-319. Bailliu, Jeannine, and Eiji Fujii (2004). "Exchange Rate Pass-Through and the Inflation Environment in Industrialized Countries: An Empirical Investigation," Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2004-21. Ottawa: Bank of Canada, June. Berger, David, Jon Faust, John H. Rogers, and Kai Steverson (2007). "Border Prices and Retail Prices," unpublished paper. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999).Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Betts, Caroline, and Michael B. Devereux (1996). "The Exchange Rate in a Model of Pricing-to-Market,"European Economic Review,vol. 40 (April, Papers and Proceedings of the Tenth Annual Congress of the European Economic Association), pp. 1007-21. Bodnar, Gordon M., Bernard Dumas, and Richard C. Marston (2002). "Pass-through and Exposure,"Journal of Finance, vol. 57 (February), pp. 199-231. Burstein, Ariel T., João C. Neves, and Sergio Rebelo (2003). "Distribution Costs and Real Exchange Rate Dynamics During Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilizations,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (September), pp. 1189-214. Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2007). "Modeling Exchange Rate Passthrough after Large Devaluations,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 54 (March), pp. 346-68. Campa, José Manuel, and Linda S. Goldberg (2005). "Exchange Rate Pass-through into Import Prices,"Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 87 (November), pp. 679-90. Campa, Jose, and Linda Goldberg (2008). "The Insensitivity of the CPI to Exchange Rates: Distribution Margins, Imported Inputs, and Trade Exposure," unpublished paper. Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Luca Dedola (2005). "A Macroeconomic Model of International Price Discrimination,"Journal of International Economics, vol. 67 (September), pp. 129-55. Cunningham, Alastair, and Andrew W. Haldane (2000). "The Monetary Transmission Mechanism in the United Kingdom: Pass-Through and Policy Rules," Central Bank of Chile Working Paper No. 83. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile. Devereux, Michael B., and Charles Engel (2002). "Exchange Rate Pass-Through, Exchange Rate Volatility, and Exchange Rate Disconnect,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 49 (July), pp. 913-40. Dornbusch, Rudiger (1987). "Exchange Rates and Prices,"American Economic Review, vol. 77 (March), pp. 93-106. Erceg, Christopher J., Luca Guerrieri, and Christopher Gust (2006). "SIGMA: A New Open Economy Model for Policy Analysis,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol.2 (March), pp. 1-50. Frenkel, Jacob A. (1976). "A Monetary Approach to the Exchange Rate: Doctrinal Aspects and Empirical Evidence,"The Scandinavian Journal of Economics,78 (June, Proceedings of a Conference on Flexible Exchange Rates and Stabilization Policy), pp. 200-24. Froot, Kenneth A., and Paul D. Klemperer (1989). "Exchange Rate Pass-Through When Market Share Matters,"American Economic Review, vol. 79 (September), pp. 637-54. Gagnon, Joseph E. (2004). "The Effect of Exchange Rates on Prices, Wages, and Profits: A Case Study of the United Kingdom in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Papers 772. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October. Gagnon, Joseph E., and Jane Ihrig (2004). "Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Pass-Through,"International Journal of Finance and Economics, vol. 9 (October), pp. 315-38. Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, and Michael M. Knetter (1997). "Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What Have We Learned?"Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 35 (September), pp. 1243-72. Goldberg, Pinelopi, and Rebecca Hellerstein (2007). "A Framework for Identifying the Sources of Local-Currency Price Stability with an Empirical Application," unpublished paper. Goldfajn, Ilan, and Sergio Ribeiro da Costa Werlang (2000). "The Pass-Through From Depreciation to Inflation: A Panel Study," Banco Central do Brasil Working Paper Series No. 5. Brasilia: Banco Central do Brasil, July. Gopinath, Gita, and Roberto Rigobon (forthcoming). "Sticky Borders,"Quarterly Journal of Economics. Gopinath, Gita, Oleg Itskhoki, and Roberto Rigobon (2007). "Currency Choice and Exchange Rate Pass-through," unpublished paper. Gust, Christopher, Sylvain Leduc, and Robert J. Vigfusson (2006). "Trade Integration, Competition, and the Decline in Exchange-Rate Pass-Through," International Finance Discussion Papers 864. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Hegji, Charles E. (2003). "A Note on Transfer Prices and Exchange Rate Pass-Through,"Journal of Economics and Finance, vol. 27 (Fall), pp. 396-403. Hooper, Peter, and Catherine L. Mann (1989). "Exchange Rate Pass-Through in the 1980s: The Case of U.S. Imports of Manufactures,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 1989 (no. 1), pp. 297-329. Ihrig, Jane E., Mario Marazzi, and Alexander D. Rothenberg (2006). "Exchange Rate Pass-through in the G-7 Countries," International Finance Discussion Papers 851. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Ihrig, Jane E., Steven B. Kamin, Deborah Lindner, and Jaime Marquez (2007). "Some Simple Tests of the Globalization and Inflation Hypothesis," International Finance Discussion Papers 891. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April. Kasa, Kenneth (1992). "Adjustment Costs and Pricing-to-Market Theory and Evidence,"Journal of International Economics, vol. 32 (February), pp. 1-30. Krugman, Paul (1987). "Pricing to Market When the Exchange Rate Changes," in Sven W. Arndt and J. David Richardson, eds.,Real Financial Linkages Among Open Economies. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 49-70. Laflèche, Thérèse (1996/1997). "The Impact of Exchange Rate Movements on Consumer Prices",Bank ofCanadaReview(Winter), pp. 21-32. Marazzi, Mario, and Nathan Sheets ( 2007). "Declining Exchange Rate Pass-through to U.S. Import Prices: The Potential Role of Global Factors,"Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 26 (October), pp. 924-47. Marston, Richard C. (1991). "Pricing to Market in Japanese Manufacturing," NBER Working Paper No. 2905. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. McCarthy, Jonathan (1999). "Pass-Through of Exchange Rates and Import Prices to Domestic Inflation in Some Industrialised Economies," BIS Working Paper No. 79. Basel: Bank for International Settlements, November. Michener, Ronald W., and Robert E. Wright (2005). "State 'Currencies' and the Transition to the U.S. Dollar: Clarifying Some Confusions,"American Economic Review, vol. 95 (June), pp. 682-703. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007). "Inflation Dynamics," speech delivered at Annual Macro Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 23; published in (2008)International Finance, vol. 10 (Winter), pp. 317-34. Nakamura, Emi (2007). "Accounting for Incomplete Pass-Through," unpublished paper, Columbia University, New York. Otani, Akira, Shigenori Shiratsuka, and Toyoichiro Shirota (2006). "Revisiting the Decline in the Exchange Rate Pass-Through: Further Evidence from Japan's Import Prices," Bank of Japan,Monetary and Economic Studies, vol. 24 (March), pp. 61-75. Sekine, Toshitaka (2006). "Time-Varying Exchange Rate Pass-Through: Experiences of Some Industrial Countries," BIS Working Paper No. 202. Basel: Bank for International Settlements, March. Taylor, John B. (2000). "Low Inflation, Pass-Through, and the Pricing Power of Firms,"European Economic Review, vol. 44 (June), pp. 1389-408. Vigfusson, Robert, Nathan Sheets, and Joseph Gagnon (forthcoming). "Exchange Rate Pass-through to Export Prices: Assessing Some Cross-Country Evidence,"Review of International Economics. Footnotes 1.I would like to thank Board staff members for assistance and helpful comments, includingChris Erceg,Chris Gust,John Rogers, andRob Vigfusson. My remarks reflect only my own views and are not intended to reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2.As argued in my book with Chairman Bernanke, Thomas Laubach, and Adam Posen (Bernanke and others, 1999), both Sweden and the United Kingdom’s adoption of an inflation targeting regime helped forestall a potentially larger rise in inflation.Return to text 3.Other research corroborates that pass-through from exchange rate changes to consumer prices has been extremely low over the past two decades for a large group of countries that have pursued stable monetary policies, including Ihrig, Marazzi, and Rothenberg (2006), Bailliu and Fujii (2004), and Sekine (2006). In closely related work, Ihrig and others (2007) found a small role for import prices in influencing overall consumer price inflation.Return to text 4.A paper by Vigfusson, Sheets, and Gagnon (forthcoming) is an exception, because it focuses on exchange rate pass-through to export prices.Return to text 5.The import price index measure used is for goods excluding oil, computers, and semi-conductors.Return to text 6.In related work, Nakamura (2007) found that pass-through of a cost shock (an increase in the price of green coffee beans) to the retail price of imported coffee was around 25 percent.Return to text 7.Other important early papers on pricing to market includes Froot and Klemperer (1989), Hooper and Mann (1989), Marston (1991), and Kasa (1992).Return to text 8.For a more complete description of theoretical frameworks in which it is optimal for exporters to lower their markups in response to an appreciation of their currency, refer to Atkeson and Burstein (2005), Bodnar, Dumas, and Marston (2002), Corsetti and Dedola (2005), and Gust, Leduc, and Vigfusson (2006).Return to text 9.Moreover, Corsetti and Dedola (2005) argue that distribution costs may affect the elasticity of demand faced by exporting firms and hence affect import prices “at the dock” as well as at the retail level.Return to text 10.Refer to Betts and Devereaux (1996) and Devereaux and Engel (2002) for an examination of how pricing-to-market behavior tends to insulate nominal demand from the effects of exchange rate fluctuations.Return to text 11.It is useful to note that the responses of both inflation and the output gap under either pass-through specification would be much smaller under an “optimal” monetary policy rule derived by minimizing a loss function whose arguments depend on the variability of inflation and the output gap subject to the model’s behavioral equations.Return to text Figure 1Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced that public meetings will be held next month in Los Angeles, California, and Chicago, Illinois, on the notice by Bank of America Corporation to acquire Countrywide Financial Corporation.The purpose of these meetings is to collect information relating to factors the Board is required to consider under the Bank Holding Company Act. These factors are whether the acquiring bank holding company's performance of the activities can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public (such as greater convenience, increased competition, and gains in efficiency) that outweigh possible adverse effects (such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, and unsound banking practices). Consideration of these factors includes an evaluation of the financial and managerial resources of the acquiring bank holding company. In addition, in acting on a notice to acquire a savings association, the Board also reviews the records of performance of the relevant insured depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act.The specific dates, times, and locations of the meetings are Chicago--Tuesday, April 22, 2008, beginning at 8:30 a.m. CDT, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 230 South LaSalle Street, Chicago, Illinois.
On March 10, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $50 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 15.88% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on March 13, 2008, and will mature on April 10, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by noon EDT on March 11, 2008. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on March 11, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On March 24, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $50 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Stop-out rate:2.615 percentTotal propositions submitted:$88.869 billionTotal propositions accepted:$50.000 billionBid/cover ratio:1.78Number of bidders:88 Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 98.87% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on March 27, 2008, and will mature on April 24, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by noon EDT on March 25, 2008. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on March 25, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
The Federal Reserve on Sunday announced two initiatives designed to bolster market liquidity and promote orderly market functioning. Liquid, well-functioning markets are essential for the promotion of economic growth. First, the Federal Reserve Board voted unanimously to authorize the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to create a lending facility to improve the ability of primary dealers to provide financing to participants in securitization markets. This facility will be available for business on Monday, March 17. It will be in place for at least six months and may be extended as conditions warrant. Credit extended to primary dealers under this facility may be collateralized by a broad range of investment-grade debt securities. The interest rate charged on such credit will be the same as the primary credit rate, or discount rate, at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Second, the Federal Reserve Board unanimously approved a request by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to decrease the primary credit rate from 3-1/2 percent to 3‑1/4 percent, effective immediately. This step lowers the spread of the primary credit rate over the Federal Open Market Committee’s target federal funds rate to 1/4 percentage point. The Board also approved an increase in the maximum maturity of primary credit loans to 90 days from 30 days. The Board also approved the financing arrangement announced by JPMorgan Chase & Co. and The Bear Stearns Companies Inc. Primary Dealer Credit FacilityTerms and conditionsFrequently asked questions
The Federal Reserve on Friday announced two initiatives to address heightened liquidity pressures in term funding markets. First, the amounts outstanding in the Term Auction Facility (TAF) will be increased to $100 billion. The auctions on March 10 and March 24 each will be increased to $50 billion--an increase of $20 billion from the amounts that were announced for these auctions on February 29. The Federal Reserve will increase these auction sizes further if conditions warrant. To provide increased certainty to market participants, the Federal Reserve will continue to conduct TAF auctions for at least the next six months unless evolving market conditions clearly indicate that such auctions are no longer necessary. Second, beginning today, the Federal Reserve will initiate a series of term repurchase transactions that are expected to cumulate to $100 billion. These transactions will be conducted as 28-day term repurchase (RP) agreements in which primary dealers may elect to deliver as collateral any of the types of securities--Treasury, agency debt, or agency mortgage-backed securities--that are eligible as collateral in conventional open market operations. As with the TAF auction sizes, the Federal Reserve will increase the sizes of these term repo operations if conditions warrant.
No content found
Financial Services Policy Committee David FettigFSPC Spokesman(612) 204-5274[email protected] Minneapolis, Minn.--The Federal Reserve Banks today announced modifications to the schedule for previously announced check processing infrastructure changes as consumers and businesses continue the shift from using paper checks toward electronic payments and as financial institutions rapidly adopt electronic check processing. In June 2007, the Federal Reserve Banks selected Philadelphia, Cleveland, Atlanta, and Dallas as regional check processing sites that are expected to provide a full range of paper check processing services and receive processing volume from other sites in a phased transition. Other remaining sites will have their operations scaled back. These scaled-back sites will all print substitute checks, but some will also capture paper check images for processing. The revised schedule will take effect immediately, with seven sites transitioning in 2008 as opposed to the five that were originally scheduled. Also, the overall transition schedule has been shortened and is set to conclude in early 2010 instead of early 2011. The Reserve Banks will continue to review their check infrastructure annually to respond to further change within the nation's payments system and to meet statutory requirements for long-term cost recovery. "The transition in consumer and business preferences from paper checks to electronic payments is moving at a very brisk pace. The revised schedule announced today enables the Reserve Banks to continue to provide high-quality check processing services to depository institutions throughout the country. Today's announcement also supports our business strategy to use the authority provided by Check 21 to collect more checks electronically, reducing the reliance on the physical transportation of checks," said Gary Stern, chairman of the Reserve Banks' Financial Services Policy Committee and president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Today's announcement marks the Reserve Banks' sixth annual review of their check infrastructure. Since 2003, the Reserve Banks have reduced the locations where they process checks from 45 to 18. The accelerated schedule for 2008 includes five sites converting to print-only locations (Kansas City, Mo.; Memphis, Tenn.; Cincinnati; Windsor Locks, Conn.; and Jacksonville, Fla.), one site (Seattle) converting to a capture and print site, and one site that just closed (Utica, N.Y.). The table below describes the revised schedule for each Reserve Bank location. The Reserve Banks earned revenues the last three years that exceeded the actual and imputed costs of providing check services to depository institutions as well as their targeted level of profitability. But check volumes have continued to decline, and further decline is anticipated in the coming years. The most recent Federal Reserve study of the nation's payment system revealed that about 30 billion checks were paid in the United States in 2006--down from 37 billion in 2003 and 42 billion in 2001--as electronic payments, including those made by credit cards, debit cards, and automated clearinghouse transactions, increased considerably. The Federal Reserve Banks' long-term check processing strategy is to reduce costs and restructure their check processing operations in line with declining check volumes while encouraging the greater use of electronics in the collection of checks. This strategy will allow the Reserve Banks to meet the expectations of the 1980 Monetary Control Act. That act requires the Federal Reserve to set prices to recover, over the long run, its total operating costs of providing payment services to depository institutions, as well as the imputed costs it would have incurred and the profits it would have expected to earn had the services been provided by a private business firm.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday encouraged the institutions it supervises to report on their loan modification efforts in a consistent way and to consider using the HOPE NOW alliance’s loan modification reporting standards for their serviced loans.“We strongly support efforts to improve the collection of data on loan-modification activities. We encourage the institutions we supervise that service subprime mortgage loans to report on their progress in a consistent way. This will make it easier for regulators, the mortgage industry, lawmakers, and homeowners to assess the effectiveness of these efforts,” said Federal Reserve Board Governor Randall S. Kroszner.Consistent loan modification reporting will foster transparency in the securitization market and provide standardized data across the mortgage industry, the Board said in aletterMonday to the institutions it supervises.The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision, and the National Credit Union Administration are sending similar letters to the institutions they supervise.
Federal Reserve Consumer Help, a resource center for consumers experiencing problems with a bank or other financial institution, now offers aSpanish-language versionof its website. This new feature, which is part of a continuing effort to better meet the needs of Spanish-speaking consumers, will provide answers to questions and assistance with a wide range of issues relating to financial products and services and consumer protection laws. The Federal Reserve System has a long-standing commitment to safeguarding consumer rights in financial services and has assisted more than 150,000 individuals over the past 30 years. The launch of Federal Reserve Consumer Help (FRCH) in November 2007 consolidated the intake of consumer complaints and inquiries, providing greater access and visibility, and has enabled the Federal Reserve to respond efficiently to a growing volume of requests. Thousands of consumers have turned to the Federal Reserve Consumer Help website for information for help with a specific problem. "The success of FRCH since its launch late last year has been tremendous," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Randall S. Kroszner. "We have seen a dramatic increase in the number of consumers contacting us through our new call center and website, and now we have the capability to reach even greater numbers by providing information and assistance to Spanish-speaking consumers." The website,FederalReserveConsumerHelp.gov, allows consumers to submit a complaint or inquiry electronically. It also provides answers to commonly asked banking questions and links to consumer protection materials and resources--many of which are in Spanish as well as in English. Consumers can contact Federal Reserve Consumer Help through a variety of methods: Consumers do not have to know which regulator supervises the bank that they are concerned about in order to file a complaint or seek information. FRCH forwards any complaints or inquiries about institutions not under the Federal Reserve’s purview to the appropriate regulatory agency for response. The Federal Reserve is responsible for ensuring that the financial institutions it supervises comply with consumer protection and fair lending laws, such as those governing checking and savings accounts, credit cards, and consumer loans including mortgages. It is also responsible for ensuring that consumers have a mechanism for identifying banking acts or practices that may require further investigation or possible regulatory action. La Ayuda al consumidor de la Reserva Federal actualmente ofrece una versión de su página web en español
Financial Services Policy Committee David FettigFSPC Spokesman(612) 204-5274[email protected] Minneapolis, Minn.--The Federal Reserve’s 2007 study of the composition of the check market released today shows that nearly 50 percent of checks written are consumer-to-business checks. TheCheck Sample Studyreports on the composition of the check market based on responses from nine large financial institutions that together account for about one quarter of total U.S. paid check volume. The study, which categorizes the use of checks by payer, payee, and purpose, is the third component of the2007 Federal Reserve Payments Study. Results of the first two components of the study were released December 10, 2007. The highest percentage of check payers (writers) were consumers at 58 percent, while the highest percentage of check payees (receivers) were businesses at 72 percent. The check purpose with the highest percentage was remittance payments (payments to business and government payees that do not occur at the point of sale) at 49 percent. The summary report of the2007 Federal Reserve Payments Studyrevealed that 2.6 billion consumer checks were converted and cleared as automated clearinghouse (ACH) payments rather than check payments in 2006, an eight-fold increase over 2003. TheCheck Sample Studyfound that 42 percent of checks sampled were ineligible for ACH conversion under the current National Automated Clearinghouse Association (NACHA) rules. Ineligible checks include checks such as those with missing or no signature, checks greater than $25,000, and checks from businesses and the government. The2007 Federal Reserve Payments Studyconsisted of three research efforts commissioned to estimate the annual number, dollar value, and composition of noncash retail payments in the United States. TheDepository Institutions Payments Studyincluded responses from approximately 1,400 financial institutions (commercial banks, savings institutions, and credit unions). TheElectronic Payments Study, included responses from 65 of the largest payment networks and card issuers. TheCheck Sample Study, while not nationally representative, included responses from nine large financial institutions that together held approximately 26 percent of the deposit liabilities and accounted for approximately 25 percent of all checks paid in the United States in 2006. “The findings of the Fed’sCheck Sample Studyare intended to help the Federal Reserve, the industry, and the public better understand how checks are being used and inform future payments investment decisions,” said Richard Oliver, executive vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and the Federal Reserve Banks’ product manager for retail payments. “In 2007, the fact that much of the data needed for theCheck Sample Studywere available within one industry source, the Viewpointe archive, allowed for a consistent and systematic sampling methodology and the effort required of participant banks was greatly reduced from what it was when a similar study was conducted in 2001. We appreciate the contributions of all the institutions that provided the information needed to conduct these studies.” A summary report of the 2007 Federal Reserve Payments Study and detail reports on the three individual studies are available athttp://www.frbservices.org/communications/payment_system_research.html.
The Federal Reserve will conduct two auctions of 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility (TAF) in April. It will offer $50 billion in an auction to be held on Monday, April 7 and $50 billion in an auction to be held on Monday, April 21.
On March 10, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $50 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction ParametersOffering Amount:$50 billionTerm:28-day loanBid Submission Date:March 10, 2008Opening Time:11 a.m. EDTClosing Time:1 p.m. EDTNotification Date:March 11, 2008Settlement Date:March 13, 2008Maturity Date:April 10, 2008Minimum Bid Amount (per bid):$5 millionBid Increment:$100,000Maximum Bid Amount (per institution):$5 billion (10% of Offering Amount)Minimum Bid Rate:2.39 percentIncremental Bid Rate:0.001 percentMinimum Award:$10,000Maximum Award:$5 billion (10% of Offering Amount) Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
On March 24, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $50 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction ParametersOffering Amount:$50 billionTerm:28-day loanBid Submission Date:March 24, 2008Opening Time:11 a.m. EDTClosing Time:1 p.m. EDTNotification Date:March 25, 2008Settlement Date:March 27, 2008Maturity Date:April 24, 2008Minimum Bid Amount (per bid):$5 millionBid Increment:$100,000Maximum Bid Amount(per institution):$5 billion (10% of Offering Amount)Minimum Bid Rate:2.19 percentIncremental Bid Rate:0.001 percentMinimum Award:$10,000Maximum Award:$5 billion (10% of Offering Amount) Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
Since the coordinated actions taken in December 2007, the G-10 central banks have continued to work together closely and to consult regularly on liquidity pressures in funding markets. Pressures in some of these markets have recently increased again. We all continue to work together and will take appropriate steps to address those liquidity pressures.To that end, today the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank are announcing specific measures.Federal Reserve ActionsThe Federal Reserve announced today an expansion of its securities lending program. Under this new Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF), the Federal Reserve will lend up to $200 billion of Treasury securities to primary dealers secured for a term of 28 days (rather than overnight, as in the existing program) by a pledge of other securities, including federal agency debt, federal agency residential-mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and non-agency AAA/Aaa-rated private-label residential MBS. The TSLF is intended to promote liquidity in the financing markets for Treasury and other collateral and thus to foster the functioning of financial markets more generally. As is the case with the current securities lending program, securities will be made available through an auction process. Auctions will be held on a weekly basis, beginning on March 27, 2008. The Federal Reserve will consult with primary dealers on technical design features of the TSLF.In addition, the Federal Open Market Committee has authorized increases in its existing temporary reciprocal currency arrangements (swap lines) with the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Swiss National Bank (SNB). These arrangements will now provide dollars in amounts of up to $30 billion and $6 billion to the ECB and the SNB, respectively, representing increases of $10 billion and $2 billion. The FOMC extended the term of these swap lines through September 30, 2008.The actions announced today supplement the measures announced by the Federal Reserve on Friday to boost the size of the Term Auction Facility to $100 billion and to undertake a series of term repurchase transactions that will cumulate to $100 billion.Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central BanksInformation on the actions that will be taken by other central banks is available at the following websites:Bank of CanadaBank of EnglandEuropean Central BankSwiss National Bank (61 KB PDF)Statements by Other Central BanksBank of JapanSveriges RiksbankTerm Securities Lending FacilityTerms and conditionsFrequently asked questions Since the coordinated actions taken in December 2007, the G-10 central banks have continued to work together closely and to consult regularly on liquidity pressures in funding markets. Pressures in some of these markets have recently increased again. We all continue to work together and will take appropriate steps to address those liquidity pressures. To that end, today the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank are announcing specific measures. Federal Reserve ActionsThe Federal Reserve announced today an expansion of its securities lending program. Under this new Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF), the Federal Reserve will lend up to $200 billion of Treasury securities to primary dealers secured for a term of 28 days (rather than overnight, as in the existing program) by a pledge of other securities, including federal agency debt, federal agency residential-mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and non-agency AAA/Aaa-rated private-label residential MBS. The TSLF is intended to promote liquidity in the financing markets for Treasury and other collateral and thus to foster the functioning of financial markets more generally. As is the case with the current securities lending program, securities will be made available through an auction process. Auctions will be held on a weekly basis, beginning on March 27, 2008. The Federal Reserve will consult with primary dealers on technical design features of the TSLF.In addition, the Federal Open Market Committee has authorized increases in its existing temporary reciprocal currency arrangements (swap lines) with the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Swiss National Bank (SNB). These arrangements will now provide dollars in amounts of up to $30 billion and $6 billion to the ECB and the SNB, respectively, representing increases of $10 billion and $2 billion. The FOMC extended the term of these swap lines through September 30, 2008.The actions announced today supplement the measures announced by the Federal Reserve on Friday to boost the size of the Term Auction Facility to $100 billion and to undertake a series of term repurchase transactions that will cumulate to $100 billion.Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central BanksInformation on the actions that will be taken by other central banks is available at the following websites:Bank of CanadaBank of EnglandEuropean Central BankSwiss National Bank (61 KB PDF)Statements by Other Central BanksBank of JapanSveriges RiksbankTerm Securities Lending FacilityTerms and conditionsFrequently asked questions Federal Reserve ActionsThe Federal Reserve announced today an expansion of its securities lending program. Under this new Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF), the Federal Reserve will lend up to $200 billion of Treasury securities to primary dealers secured for a term of 28 days (rather than overnight, as in the existing program) by a pledge of other securities, including federal agency debt, federal agency residential-mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and non-agency AAA/Aaa-rated private-label residential MBS. The TSLF is intended to promote liquidity in the financing markets for Treasury and other collateral and thus to foster the functioning of financial markets more generally. As is the case with the current securities lending program, securities will be made available through an auction process. Auctions will be held on a weekly basis, beginning on March 27, 2008. The Federal Reserve will consult with primary dealers on technical design features of the TSLF. In addition, the Federal Open Market Committee has authorized increases in its existing temporary reciprocal currency arrangements (swap lines) with the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Swiss National Bank (SNB). These arrangements will now provide dollars in amounts of up to $30 billion and $6 billion to the ECB and the SNB, respectively, representing increases of $10 billion and $2 billion. The FOMC extended the term of these swap lines through September 30, 2008.The actions announced today supplement the measures announced by the Federal Reserve on Friday to boost the size of the Term Auction Facility to $100 billion and to undertake a series of term repurchase transactions that will cumulate to $100 billion.Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central BanksInformation on the actions that will be taken by other central banks is available at the following websites:Bank of CanadaBank of EnglandEuropean Central BankSwiss National Bank (61 KB PDF)Statements by Other Central BanksBank of JapanSveriges RiksbankTerm Securities Lending FacilityTerms and conditionsFrequently asked questions In addition, the Federal Open Market Committee has authorized increases in its existing temporary reciprocal currency arrangements (swap lines) with the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Swiss National Bank (SNB). These arrangements will now provide dollars in amounts of up to $30 billion and $6 billion to the ECB and the SNB, respectively, representing increases of $10 billion and $2 billion. The FOMC extended the term of these swap lines through September 30, 2008. The actions announced today supplement the measures announced by the Federal Reserve on Friday to boost the size of the Term Auction Facility to $100 billion and to undertake a series of term repurchase transactions that will cumulate to $100 billion. Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central BanksInformation on the actions that will be taken by other central banks is available at the following websites:Bank of CanadaBank of EnglandEuropean Central BankSwiss National Bank (61 KB PDF)Statements by Other Central BanksBank of JapanSveriges RiksbankTerm Securities Lending FacilityTerms and conditionsFrequently asked questions Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central BanksInformation on the actions that will be taken by other central banks is available at the following websites: Bank of CanadaBank of EnglandEuropean Central BankSwiss National Bank (61 KB PDF) Statements by Other Central BanksBank of JapanSveriges Riksbank Term Securities Lending FacilityTerms and conditionsFrequently asked questions
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate 75 basis points to 2-1/4 percent. Recent information indicates that the outlook for economic activity has weakened further. Growth in consumer spending has slowed and labor markets have softened. Financial markets remain under considerable stress, and the tightening of credit conditions and the deepening of the housing contraction are likely to weigh on economic growth over the next few quarters. Inflation has been elevated, and some indicators of inflation expectations have risen. The Committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters, reflecting a projected leveling-out of energy and other commodity prices and an easing of pressures on resource utilization. Still, uncertainty about the inflation outlook has increased. It will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully. Today’s policy action, combined with those taken earlier, including measures to foster market liquidity, should help to promote moderate growth over time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity. However, downside risks to growth remain. The Committee will act in a timely manner as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Frederic S. Mishkin; Sandra Pianalto; Gary H. Stern; and Kevin M. Warsh. Voting against were Richard W. Fisher and Charles I. Plosser, who preferred less aggressive action at this meeting. In a related action, the Board of Governors unanimously approved a 75-basis-point decrease in the discount rate to 2-1/2 percent. In taking this action, the Board approved the requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, and San Francisco.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the National Community Reinvestment Coalition Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C. This audience, the National Community Reinvestment Coalition, is certainly aware that mortgage delinquency and foreclosure rates have increased substantially over the past year and a half. This increase reflects significantly, though not exclusively, a sharp deterioration in the performance of subprime mortgages, particularly those with adjustable-rate features. At the end of last year, more than one in five of the roughly 3.6 million outstanding subprime adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) were seriously delinquent, meaning they were either in foreclosure or ninety days or more past due.1That rate is about four times higher than it was in mid-2005. Lenders initiated roughly 1-1/2 million foreclosures last year, up from an average of 950,000 in the preceding two years. More than one-half of the foreclosure starts in 2007 were on subprime mortgages. Behind these disturbing statistics are families facing personal and financial hardship and neighborhoods that may be destabilized by clusters of foreclosures. These realities challenge us to find ways to prevent unnecessary foreclosures. And, looking toward the future, they challenge us to ensure a regulatory environment that promotes responsible lending and sustainable homeownership. I would like to briefly discuss how we arrived at where we are today. Then I would like to share with you what the Federal Reserve is doing to reduce foreclosures, to protect aspiring homeowners from unfair and deceptive practices, and to equip them to choose wisely from among the often confusing array of mortgage options. In particular, I would like to highlight the new regulations we have proposed under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA). Origins of the Subprime Mortgage TurmoilOver the past quarter century, advances in information technology, the development of credit-scoring techniques, and the emergence of a large secondary market, among other factors, have significantly increased access to mortgage credit. From 1994 to 2006, subprime lending increased from an estimated $35 billion, or 4.5 percent of all one-to-four family mortgage originations, to $600 billion, or 20 percent of originations (Inside Mortgage Finance, 2007). Responsible subprime lending expanded credit to borrowers with imperfect or limited credit histories. More renters became homeowners than would have otherwise. Though few subprime mortgages are being written today, I believe responsible subprime lending has been helpful, and at some point will be again, in fostering sustainable homeownership. However, far too much of the lending in recent years was neither responsible nor prudent. The terms of some subprime mortgages permitted homebuyers and investors to purchase properties beyond their means, often with little or no equity. In addition, abusive, unfair, or deceptive lending practices led some borrowers into mortgages that they would not have chosen knowingly. The current crisis has many roots. The drop in home prices in many once-hot markets is among the most significant. In a recent survey, nearly 30 percent of homeowners reported that their houses decreased in value over the past year.2The decline in home equity makes it more difficult for struggling homeowners to refinance and reduces the financial incentive of stressed borrowers to remain in their homes. Mortgage performance data show a strong correlation between adverse house price changes and subsequent increases in mortgage delinquency and foreclosure (Avery, Brevoort, and Canner, 2007; Gerardi, Shapiro, and Willen, 2007). Investors who purchased homes in the hope of price appreciation seem particularly likely to walk away from "underwater" mortgages. Indeed, the role of investors in the housing market has increased markedly over time. According to data collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), lending to non-owner-occupants has risen from about 5 percent of the home-purchase loans in the mid-1990s to about 17 percent of all purchases in 2005 and 2006 (Avery, Brevoort, and Canner, 2007). Mortgage delinquencies are also tied to local economic conditions; notably, several midwestern states struggling with job losses and slow income growth have seen increased delinquencies. The deterioration in underwriting standards that appears to have begun in late 2005 is another important factor underlying the current crisis. A large share of subprime loans that were originated during this time featured high combined loan-to-value ratios and, in some cases, layers of additional risk factors, such as a lack of full documentation or the acceptance of very high debt-to-income ratios. In 2006, for example, the HMDA data suggest that nearly 40 percent of higher-priced home-purchase loans involved a piggy-back loan or second mortgage.3Indeed, many defaults are occurring within the first few months of origination, well before payment resets occur on subprime ARM products. Much of the weakening in underwriting standards appears to have happened outside of institutions regulated by the federal banking agencies. The HMDA data for 2006 show that more than 45 percent of high-cost first mortgages were originated by independent mortgage companies, which are institutions that are not regulated by the federal banking agencies and that sell almost all of the mortgages they originate. In this instance, this originate-to-distribute model appears to have contributed to the breakdown in underwriting standards, as lenders often found themselves able to pass on the credit risk without much resistance from the ultimate investors. For a number of years, rapid increases in house prices effectively insulated lenders and investors from the effects of weaker underwriting, providing false comfort. Another concern is the substantial number of borrowers with subprime ARMs whose interest rates are scheduled to reset upward--about 1.5 million in 2008.4The problem posed by resets is serious, but it may be mitigated somewhat by lower short-term interest rates and by the efforts of servicers, including those working with the Hope Now Alliance, to find solutions for borrowers facing resets, including interest-rate freezes (Hope Now Alliance Servicers, 2008). In addition, the FHASecure plan, which the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) announced late last summer, offers qualified borrowers who are delinquent because of an interest rate reset and who have some equity in the home the opportunity to refinance into an FHA-insured mortgage. Recently, the Congress and Administration temporarily increased the maximum loan value eligible for FHA insurance, which will allow more borrowers access to this program. The current high rate of delinquencies and foreclosures is not confined to the subprime market. In 2007, about 45 percent of foreclosures were on prime, near-prime, or government-backed mortgages. Across market segments, delinquencies are rising fastest on the more-complex loans originated over the past few years. In part, that trend seems to be due to the fact that such loans were made to borrowers in weaker financial condition. In some cases, borrowers may not have fully understood the details of their loans, including the potential for large payment increases. Federal Reserve ResponsesEffective responses need to build on an informed understanding of this complex picture. Thus, as these problems in housing emerged and deepened, the Federal Reserve System engaged with a wide array of market participants--including lenders, community groups, servicers, consumer advocates, public officials, and other regulators--to properly diagnose the problems and work toward sustainable solutions. The Federal Reserve System alone, of course, cannot resolve all of the problems in the marketplace, but we have responded thus far through our regulatory, supervisory, research, and community affairs functions. Regulation and SupervisionAs part of a periodic review of our regulations under HOEPA, the Federal Reserve Board in 2006 began a systematic look at changes in the mortgage industry. Four public hearings held around the country confirmed evidence that we were gathering from other sources that the mortgage market was undergoing the significant changes with which we are all now familiar. Our concerns led us in 2006 and 2007 to issue, along with other federal and state regulators, a series of guidances to the institutions we supervise that covered nontraditional mortgage loans, subprime lending, and servicing practices. Those were good steps, but we also recognized that many of the problems we were beginning to see were a result of actions by companies and individuals not subject to our supervisory oversight. Thus, we conducted an additional HOEPA hearing, focusing on four specific areas: assessment of repayment ability; low- and no-documentation lending; escrowing for taxes and insurance; and prepayment penalties. As a result of a careful review of available data and information, we proposed new rules under our HOEPA authority in December, banning practices that we found to be unfair or deceptive. Significantly, bans on such unfair or deceptive acts and practices would apply to the entire mortgage industry, not just to institutions directly regulated by the Board. Our goal was to produce clear and comprehensive rules to protect consumers from unfair practices while maintaining the viability of a market for responsible mortgage lending. The rules would apply stricter regulations to higher-priced mortgage loans, which we have defined broadly so as to cover substantially all of the subprime market.5The regulations would be enforceable by state and federal supervisory and enforcement agencies as well as by consumers themselves, who could recover statutory damages for violations above and beyond actual damages. The proposed rules cover a range of practices. First, the rules would prohibit a lender from engaging in a pattern or practice of making higher-priced loans that the borrower cannot reasonably be expected to repay from income or from assets other than the house. Of course, appropriate attention to the borrower's ability to repay is a fundamental feature of good underwriting. Second, we found that the prevalence of "stated-income" lending led to many borrowers receiving mortgages that they could not afford. Consequently, we would require lenders to verify the income or assets they rely on to make credit decisions for higher-priced loans--standard industry practice, in fact, for most lending until quite recently. Third, our proposal would require higher-priced loans to have an escrow account for real-estate taxes and hazard insurance. This rule would help ensure that borrowers can afford their payments and avoid the cases in which borrowers, especially first-time borrowers, did not understand that the monthly principal and interest payment was not the only financial obligation associated with homeownership. Escrowing has become standard practice in the prime market, and our proposal would make it standard practice for this part of the market, as well. Fourth, the proposed rules would ban prepayment penalties in situations in which the borrower may be especially vulnerable. For example, prepayment penalties would be prohibited where the borrower's debt-to-income ratio exceeds 50 percent and, when permitted, would be required to expire at least sixty days before a scheduled increase in the loan payment. The rule would also ban prepayment penalties that could enable a "loan flipping" scheme, in which a lender or its affiliate refinances the lender's own loan at adverse terms for the borrower. In seeking information and opinion about these four issues, the Board determined that additional problems needed to be addressed as well, and for all loans, not just higher-priced loans. Among the practices addressed by our proposal is the use of yield spread premiums (YSPs).6Many consumers use mortgage brokers to guide them through a complex process and shop for the best deal. Unfortunately, consumers may believe that the broker has a responsibility to get them that best deal, which is not necessarily the case. In fact, the design of YSPs may provide the broker a financial incentive to offer a loan with a higher rate. Consumers who do not understand this point may not shop to their best advantage. Therefore, we would prohibit a lender, for both prime and subprime loans, from paying a broker an amount greater than the consumer agrees to in advance. Brokers would also have to disclose their potential conflict of interest. The combination of stricter regulation and better disclosure will not solve all the problems. We do believe, however, that this proposal will give consumers much better information and raise their awareness of brokers' potential conflict of interest while reducing a broker's incentive to steer a consumer to a higher rate. To protect consumers and promote competition, our proposal would also ban seven specific advertising practices deemed unfair or deceptive. Under our rules, for example, mortgage originators would not be allowed to advertise a mortgage as having a "fixed" rate unless the advertisement also states clearly how long the rate or payment is fixed, and they could not advertise loans in one language but have important consumer disclosures in another. The proposal would also require that consumers receive loan-specific Truth in Lending Act disclosures early in the application process, when they can use the information to shop more effectively. The proposal also addresses certain practices in loan servicing that can cause problems for consumers, such as delays in posting payments to a consumer's account, and it acts to prohibit coercion of appraisers by lenders or brokers. We believe these proposed rules will help protect mortgage borrowers from unfair and deceptive practices. At the same time, we did not want to create rules that were so open-ended or costly to administer that responsible lenders would pull out of the subprime market. So, our proposal is designed to protect consumers without shutting off access to responsible credit. We anticipate vigorous discussion through the public comment process that ends on April 8, and we will, as always, carefully consider this input before issuing final rules. In addition to regulations, strong uniform oversight of different types of mortgage lenders is critical to avoiding future problems. Regulatory oversight of mortgage lending has become more challenging as the breadth and depth of this market has grown over the past decade. Other changes, such as the increased role of nonbank mortgage lenders, have added complexity. To achieve more uniformly effective supervision, the Federal Reserve, together with other federal and state agencies, launched a pilot program last summer to conduct reviews of selected nondepository lenders with significant subprime mortgage operations. These reviews will evaluate the companies' underwriting standards as well as senior management oversight of compliance with state and federal consumer protection regulations and laws. We will take corrective or enforcement action as warranted. We plan to use this joint project as a vehicle for strengthening cooperation and coordination among federal and state agencies. Research and Community AffairsThe Federal Reserve is addressing the foreclosure crisis in capacities other than that of a regulator, leveraging our strengths in research and data analysis, our regional presence, and the many contacts we have developed with local community groups, lenders, policymakers, and other stakeholders in this issue. Community affairs officers at the Board and the twelve Reserve Banks work with Federal Reserve research economists to anticipate and, where possible, mitigate foreclosure problems. They share detailed reports and information that help community organizations, nonprofits, state regulators, and others identify regions and neighborhoods most vulnerable to foreclosure and respond accordingly. For instance, NeighborWorks America recently used the Board's analyses to help identify geographic areas and neighborhoods in most critical need of $130 million in emergency funds provided by the Congress to increase mortgage counselor capacity. Solid analysis of available information is critical to crafting appropriate policy remedies, and the Federal Reserve has invested considerable resources into such studies. For example, a Federal Reserve Bank of Boston working paper has analyzed the factors that predict foreclosure, finding a particularly important role for declining house prices (Gerardi, Shapiro, and Willen, 2007). The Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia is conducting a five-year study of pre-purchase homeownership counseling. That study will provide important information on the benefits of counseling services in fostering sustainable homeownership and help us understand the long-term effects of financial-management skills on the credit worthiness of low- and moderate-income homebuyers. In addition to this ongoing research, the Federal Reserve is supporting efforts to reach troubled borrowers and to raise awareness in communities about ways to prevent foreclosures. Since July, the community affairs offices across the Federal Reserve System have sponsored or cosponsored more than fifty events related to foreclosures, reaching more than 4,000 attendees including lenders, counselors, community development specialists, and policymakers. There is also work to be done in mitigating the impact of unavoidable foreclosures on consumers and communities. Families who cannot sustain homeownership will need to find new places to live, highlighting the critical need for an adequate supply of affordable rental housing. Consumers going through foreclosure typically will see their credit scores drop, raising longer-term questions about their ability to rebound financially and perhaps pursue a more sustainable home purchase at some later point. High numbers of foreclosed homes in some communities also raise challenges, and perhaps opportunities. Because vacant homes, in particular, impose real costs on neighborhood and communities, forward-looking strategies to keep these homes occupied are important (Apgar and Duda, 2005). Some efforts are underway to prevent vacancies, as well as return vacant properties to active use; some of these efforts may also help preserve the supply of affordable housing in areas that have experienced shortages.7The Federal Reserve has recently undertaken a joint effort with NeighborWorks America to help communities develop strategies for neighborhood stabilization. ConclusionIt is clear that rising home foreclosures and delinquencies significantly challenge many consumers and communities, and I hope I have conveyed today that the Federal Reserve is strongly committed to fully employing our authority, expertise, and resources to help alleviate their distress. We will continue to collaborate at the national, regional, and local levels with other stakeholders in the public, private, and nonprofit sectors to help to avoid preventable foreclosures and to address the consequences of the foreclosures that occur. In the longer term, through our regulations and oversight, we seek to promote responsible and sustainable lending that will allow more Americans to achieve their goal of homeownership. References Apgar, William C., and Mark Duda (2005). "Collateral Damage: The Municipal Impact of Today's Mortgage Foreclosure Boom (246 KB PDF)." Minneapolis: Homeownership Preservation Foundation, May. Avery, Robert B., Kenneth P. Brevoort, and Glenn B. Canner (2007). "The 2006 HMDA Data,"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 93, December, pp. A73-A109. Gerardi, Kristopher, Adam Hale Shapiro, and Paul S. Willen (2007). "Subprime Outcomes: Risky Mortgages, Homeownership Experiences, and Foreclosures," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper 07-15. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, December. Hope Now Alliance Servicers (2008). "Prime and Subprime Residential Mortgages: 2007 Loss Mitigation Activity (7.8 MB PDF)." Washington: Financial Services Roundtable, February. Inside Mortgage Finance (2007).Mortgage Market Statistical Annual. Bethesda, Md.: Inside Mortgage Finance Publications. Footnotes 1.Based on servicer data from First American LoanPerformance.Return to text 2.Analysis based on Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers data provided to the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 3.The Federal Reserve Board staff estimates are based on 2006 HMDA data. Additional information is available on theFederal Financial Institutions Examination Councilwebsite or in theDecember 2007Federal Reserve Bulletin.Return to text 4.The Federal Reserve Board's staff calculations are based on data from First American LoanPerformance and the Mortgage Bankers Association.Return to text 5.Under the proposal, a "higher-priced mortgage loan" would have an annual percentage rate that exceeds the yield on comparable Treasury securities by 3 percentage points or more for first-lien loans or 5 percentage points or more for subordinate-lien loans.Return to text 6.A YSP is the present dollar value of the difference between the lowest interest rate the wholesale lenders would have accepted on a particular transaction and the interest rate the broker actually obtained for the lender. This dollar amount is usually paid to the mortgage broker. It may also be applied to other loan-related costs, but the Board's proposal concerns only the amount paid to the broker.Return to text 7.Some promising examples of programs to address vacancies already exist. For example, the Neighborhood Housing Services Redevelopment Corporation in Chicago has acquired hundreds of abandoned properties from such sources as the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the City of Chicago, bank foreclosures (that is, real estate owned), and private owners. The properties are then rehabilitated and sold to owner-occupants. In highly depressed housing markets, the worst-quality units are often demolished to mitigate safety hazards and reduce supply. For example, in Flint, Michigan, the Genesee County Land Bank acquires vacant properties through tax liens (see www.thelandbank.org).Return to text
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the International Symposium of the Banque de France, Paris, France Let me begin by saying that I agree with the thrust of John's remarks. He is right that globalization has not fundamentally changed the way central banks should do business. Although production chains and capital markets are more integrated across countries than before, and gross trade flows now account for a larger share of gross domestic product (GDP) in most nations, the dynamics of aggregate output and inflation remain at least qualitatively the same. Accordingly, central banks should continue to conduct monetary policy in the same forward-looking manner as they have for the past twenty years or so, adjusting policy rates in response to current and expected future movements in output and inflation, taking account of the lags in monetary policy. When exchange rates are free to adjust, this general approach to policymaking has proven effective in fostering macroeconomic stability over time in many countries.1 In my remarks, I will expand on another of John's points--namely, that monetary policy making has been complicated by globalization, particularly by rising trade volumes and increased capital market integration. That is true in several ways. For one thing, globalization has likely made the domestic economy more sensitive to foreign shocks, so central banks must now pay more attention to events around the globe. And, the integration of China and other countries into the world market economy has expanded the scale and complexity of the foreign developments that central banks must monitor. Finally, globalization has probably made the link between policy actions and economic outcomes more uncertain by, among other things, strengthening the role of the exchange rate in the monetary policy transmission mechanism. Recent increases in prices for oil and other commodities illustrate some of the complications that globalization creates for policymaking. Those price increases have raised inflation worldwide while accentuating already weakening growth prospects in some countries in recent months. Commodity prices depend on a wide range of demand and supply factors, and sorting out their various contributions can be difficult. In recent years, potential constraints on the expansion of supply, especially of petroleum, have played a role. But in addition, the emergence of China, India, and other industrializing Asian economies as major consumers of oil and other raw materials has complicated the analysis, partly because these countries exert such a strong influence on global markets and partly because the structure of their economies is changing so rapidly. Disentangling the various global forces influencing commodity prices can be useful in assessing the implications of those prices for domestic output and inflation, and hence monetary policy. For example, it matters whether a rise in oil prices results from demand factors, such as stronger global real activity, or supply factors, such as a hurricane that shuts down production. For an oil-importing country, a demand-driven price increase would have less negative implications for domestic real activity than a supply-driven increase because an expanding world economy would help boost demand for the country's exports. For the United States, however, a rise in oil prices driven by stronger real Chinese activity would not necessarily lead U.S. export volumes to rise substantially, given the low propensity of China to import from the United States. Policymakers focus on the inflation outlook, and so we need to consider what global forces imply for the future when assessing the inflation consequences of rising commodity prices. Will prices for crude oil and other commodities continue to rise rapidly in the face of robust growth in China and other newly industrializing economies? Or do current prices on the spot and futures markets already fully incorporate the likelihood of continued growth in those economies, in which case prices would remain near their current level? In the first scenario, climbing energy prices, for example, would continue to boost headline inflation directly and would indirectly boost non-energy prices through higher costs of production; moreover, a continuing rise in oil prices might potentially threaten the stability of long-run inflation expectations and nominal wage demands. In contrast, a flattening out of oil prices would restrain overall inflation, directly by stabilizing a key component of energy prices and indirectly by ceasing to put upward pressure on inflation through pass-through and expectational effects. Because monetary policy has a limited ability to counter short-term price surprises, the distinction between transitory and persistent influences on inflation from oil and other factors is critical. If we were to project a continued significant rise in energy prices over the medium run, we would need to factor that expectation into the outlook for overall inflation. Doing so could have important implications for the stance of monetary policy--all the more so if we expected rising energy costs to lead to higher inflation expectations and elevated wage gains. Still, a leveling out in oil prices seems the more likely scenario. Surprised as we have been by the rapid, extended run-up in energy costs over the past few years, one would think that the price of a storable commodity such as oil should already embody expectations of continued rapid growth in the developing economies. However, the large run-up in spot and futures prices in recent weeks indicates that market participants are still revising their views of long-term demand-supply conditions. In these circumstances, policymakers must be mindful of the uncertainties surrounding the outlook for commodity prices and the risk that past or future increases in these goods could yet embed themselves in higher long-run inflation expectations and a persistently faster rate of overall price increases. Besides these complications, globalization has made the workings of the monetary policy transmission mechanism more unpredictable. For one, the determination of asset prices is now more dependent on conditions in financial markets worldwide, making the link between domestic policy actions and movements in the prices of bonds or equities more uncertain. For example, the correlation of quarterly changes in the federal funds rate with the variation in U.S. Treasury yields has fallen from 0.6 before 1990 to 0.3 since then. To be sure, the falling correlation probably reflects a variety of factors, possibly including more systematic and predictable monetary policies. But global financial markets also seem to have played a role; as Chairman Bernanke has pointed out, savings from abroad, especially Asia, appear to have held down intermediate and longer-term U.S. interest rates from 2004 to 2006 even as monetary policy was tightened. As we have seen in recent months, the increased integration of financial markets has also facilitated the transmission and amplification across borders of many shocks, such as changes in the perceived riskiness of certain assets and the compensation required to hold them. The role of the exchange rate is another complication that has only grown with globalization. Of course, flexible exchange rates make it possible for central banks to achieve their domestic economic objectives. But the exchange rate is a notoriously difficult asset price to predict, and its response to any particular policy action is highly uncertain, as we found, for example, in 2001, when aggressive rate cutting in the United States was accompanied by a strengthening in the dollar. Even with an apparent decline in the pass-through of exchange rates into import prices, the increase in trade volumes arising from globalization has presumably boosted the relative importance of the exchange rate in the economy, thereby strengthening an unpredictable factor in the monetary policy transmission mechanism. Despite the increased openness of the domestic economy to foreign shocks and greater uncertainty about the monetary policy transmission mechanism, economic volatility in the United States and other advanced economies has declined. That stability may be attributable, in part, to the increasing ability of global product and capital markets to buffer the domestic economy against internal shocks. Because of globalization, net exports likely absorb a greater proportion of downshifts in domestic spending, foreign competition helps discipline domestic price increases, and--as a consequence of greater cross-border holdings of assets--gains and losses on domestic assets are realized in part by foreign investors. Together with the implementation of better monetary policies in many countries, these particular aspects of globalization likely contributed to the "Great Moderation." John addresses the question of whether greater economic integration has increased the gains to be had from policy cooperation and coordination. We have seen an example recently in which policy cooperation of a particular type seemed to pay dividends. In December, simultaneous and in some cases coordinated actions by a number of central banks to supply liquidity to banks apparently helped relieve stresses in interbank funding markets. Coordination and cooperation were called for because banks today operate in many markets simultaneously, and pressures in one market can readily spill over to others, especially when the normal channels for arbitrage have been disrupted by financial turmoil. The Federal Reserve and other central banks are examining the implications of this episode for their methods of supplying liquidity and for responding to future interruptions in the flow of liquidity across markets. Successful coordination in the provision of liquidity raises the question of whether appreciable gains might be had from coordination of monetary policies more generally. John is skeptical, and so am I. Gains from formal policy coordination never seemed large, and it is not clear that globalization has increased them appreciably. Policies agreed to under one set of circumstances may no longer be appropriate when circumstances change, as they inevitably will. Monetary policy should be able to adjust quickly to such changes; agreements that must be renegotiated can tie policymakers' hands. That does not mean that no circumstances exist in which coordinated monetary policy actions would be beneficial, but such circumstances are probably quite rare. Ultimately, global stability depends on good performance in individual countries, and the record of recent decades suggests that, in general, good performance is most readily achieved when central banks focus on their own mandates for domestic price stability and growth. Footnotes 1.David ReifschneiderandSteven Kamin, of the Board’s staff, contributed to these remarks. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily represent those of other members of the Board on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text
Dr. James B. Bullard has been appointed president and chief executive officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis by the bank's board of directors. Board Chairman Irl F. Engelhardt said the appointment occurred yesterday after an extensive search by the board and was approved by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Dr. Bullard will assume his new position on Tuesday, April 1, 2008, and succeeds William Poole, who will retire as president on March 31 after serving in the position for ten years.Dr. Bullard, 47, has held increasingly responsible roles in the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Research Division for over 18 years, has published extensively on economic policy issues, and is an adjunct faculty member and Ph.D. advisor at Washington University in St. Louis.Dr. Bullard joined the Research Division in the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank in 1990, rising to become vice president and deputy director of research for monetary analysis. He holds a B.S. in quantitative methods and information systems and economics from St. Cloud State University and a Ph.D. in economics from Indiana University in Bloomington. He is a co-editor of theJournal of Economic Dynamics and Controland a peer reviewer for over two dozen periodicals or institutions. In addition to participating in approximately 150 conferences, symposia, or lectures sponsored by foreign central banks, academic institutions, and monetary policy groups around the world, Dr. Bullard also has been involved in numerous conferences sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and nearly every Federal Reserve Bank. In addition, Dr. Bullard has played a key role in pre-FOMC briefings with President Poole. (For more information on Dr. Bullard, go tohttp://research.stlouisfed.org/econ/)."We believe Jim Bullard will make significant and constructive contributions during the economic policy deliberations of the Federal Reserve System and will lead the St. Louis Bank to higher levels of visibility within the Eighth District," said Engelhardt. "As we conducted interviews and made contacts within the field of economics, we saw first-hand how widely respected Dr. Bullard is as a macroeconomist. Dr. Bullard’s in-depth knowledge of monetary policy along with his leadership, interpersonal, and communication skills will help him become an important leader. His very strong publishing record and deep knowledge of the Federal Reserve System will likewise serve him well as he assumes this important role for the Eighth District. Our extensive search showed that Dr. Bullard is exactly the right person to lead this Bank. Having spent several months as a member of the search committee, I would also like to recognize the tremendous interest and talents of the many candidates that were considered.""I am very excited by the opportunity to serve in this important role," Bullard said. "I'm proud to have been part of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis over the past 18 years and have seen the tremendous work done by our entire team. As the Eighth District charts its course for the future, I plan to focus on a few key areas by building upon the St. Louis Bank's strong economic research tradition; continuing to provide world-class, relevant economic information and education; enhancing the Bank's outreach to industry and university economics programs; and gathering and disseminating information used for economic policy decisions. We also will focus upon operational excellence as the St. Louis Bank conducts activities to meet the needs of the financial institutions we supervise, the Federal Reserve System, and the U.S. Treasury. I believe these key activities will help us to continue to play an important role in the economic health of this region and in serving the people of the Eighth District."Dr. Bullard is a native of Forest Lake, Minnesota, and is married to Jane Callahan. Jane holds an M.A. in public administration from Indiana University and works at Parents as Teachers National Center. The couple has two daughters and resides in the St. Louis area.With branches in Little Rock, Louisville, and Memphis, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis serves the Eighth Federal Reserve District, which includes all of Arkansas, eastern Missouri, southern Indiana, southern Illinois, western Kentucky, western Tennessee, and northern Mississippi. The St. Louis Fed is one of 12 regional Reserve Banks that, along with the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., comprise the Federal Reserve System. As the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve System formulates U.S. monetary policy, regulates state-chartered member banks and bank holding companies, and provides payment services to financial institutions and the U.S. government. Please visithttp://www.stlouisfed.org/for additional information.
Para diseminación inmediata La Ayuda al consumidor de la Reserva Federal, centro de recursos para consumidores enfrentando problemas con un banco u otra institución financiera, actualmente ofrece una versión de su página web en español. Esta nueva herramienta, la cual es parte del esfuerzo continuo de satisfacer las necesidades de consumidores de habla hispana, proveerá respuestas y asistencia a una gran variedad de asuntos relacionados a productos y servicios financieros y las leyes de protección del consumidor. El Sistema de la Reserva Federal está arduamente comprometido a salvaguardar los derechos del consumidor de servicios financieros y ha asistido a más de 150,000 individuos por los últimos 30 años. El lanzamiento de la Ayuda al consumidor de la Reserva Federal (FRCH como es conocido por sus siglas en inglés) en noviembre de 2007 consolidó el influjo de quejas y preguntas de los consumidores, proveyendo mayor acceso y visibilidad, y ha permitido que la Reserva Federal responda eficientemente al volumen creciente de peticiones. Miles de consumidores han utilizado el sitio web de la Ayuda al consumidor de la Reserva Federal para obtener ayuda con un problema específico. "El éxito de FRCH desde su lanzamiento a finales del año pasado ha sido tremendo," expresó Randall S. Kroszner, gobernador de la Junta de la Reserva Federal. "Nosotros hemos visto el incremento dramático en el número de consumidores que nos contactan a través de nuestro nuevo centro de llamadas y página web, y ahora hemos obtenido la habilidad de alcanzar aún más al proveer información y asistencia a consumidores de habla hispana." El sitio web,FederalReserveConsumerHelp.gov, permite que los consumidores sometan una queja o pregunta electrónicamente. Este también provee respuestas a preguntas bancarias comunes y vínculos a un sin número de materiales y recursos - muchos de ellos en español así como en inglés. Los consumidores pueden contactar la Ayuda al consumidor de la Reserva Federal a través de métodos variados: Los consumidores no tienen que saber qué regulador supervisa el banco con el que se relaciona su queja para someterla o para buscar información. FRCH remite quejas o preguntas sobre instituciones no supervisadas por la Reserva Federal a la agencia reglamentaria correspondiente. La Reserva Federal es responsable de asegurar que las instituciones financieras que supervisa cumplan con las leyes de protección del consumidor, así como las leyes que regulan las cuentas de cheques y ahorros, tarjetas de crédito, y préstamos de consumo incluyendo préstamos hipotecarios. La Reserva Federal también es responsable de asegurar que los consumidores tengan un mecanismo para identificar actos o prácticas bancarias que requieren investigación o posible acción reglamentaria.
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the Institute of International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington, D.C. I am delighted to be addressing the IIB today. The organizers gave my talk the title "Major Challenges and Opportunities Facing the U.S. and Global Economy and Financial Markets" but then gave me only a half hour to discuss it! To keep within the time frame, I will focus on one particular aspect of this topic, namely, the key role of banks as liquidity providers in the financial system and, hence, the crucial role of sound liquidity-risk management and regulation. Almost exactly one year ago I participated in a forum focused on liquidity.1At that time, I did a quick search of LexisNexis that turned up 2,795 separate articles in the preceding six months that had mentioned the word "liquidity" in the context of its abundance in financial markets. Times have certainly changed, but the focus on liquidity has not. A similar search for the most recent six-month period turned up about 2,000 articles mentioning the word "liquidity"--but now in the context of itslackof abundance. Given how rapidly liquidity conditions in markets can change and how long it can take markets to recover from of a deterioration of liquidity conditions, it behooves both bankers and regulators to look carefully at liquidity-risk management. I should note that my thoughts on recent events are preliminary. Since risk-management challenges have affected a number of global institutions, we are working very closely with our supervisory counterparts in other countries to learn from recent events and to coordinate with financial institutions in determining what additional steps may need to be taken. As part of this important international effort, we should seek to align market participants' incentives with our own objectives; otherwise, behavior will not be altered appropriately and the proposed remedies will not prove durable. Role of Banks as Liquidity ProvidersAs global money markets have grown in size and importance and as financial instruments that decouple debt funding from credit risk have become increasingly sophisticated, it is tempting to think of traditional banks that make a business of taking deposits and making loans as anachronisms, and, indeed, much as been written about the "disintermediation" of banks. For all the discussion of disintermediation, however, recent events suggest that depository institutions still play a crucial role in the global economy, particularly during times of turbulence. Economists identify two related but distinct basic functions of banks in the economy. First, banks help direct capital to productive investments by identifying and monitoring suitable borrowers. Second, banks provide liquidity to both borrowers and depositors. Without minimizing the importance of the first function, I would like to focus on banks' role in creating liquidity. What is liquidity? The term means different things to different people, and it wouldn't surprise me to find about 2,000 different definitions among the Lexis/Nexis citations I mentioned earlier. Today, I'll use a definition put forward by the Bank for International Settlements in 2000: "liquidity is the ability to fund increases in assets and meet obligations as they come due." As I will discuss in a moment, banks' role as liquidity providers is particularly crucial when markets are under stress. By pooling the assets of many depositors and offering term loans and credit lines to borrowers, banks effectively provide insurance against the uncertain liquidity requirements of households and firms.2While the liquidity needs of an individual household or firm may be difficult to foresee, in normal circumstances some individuals' and firms' high demands for liquidity will typically be offset by others' low demands; hence, on average in normal times, the liquidity needs of large groups of households or firms are reasonably predictable. So when the savings of many investors are pooled together, a significant share of deposits can be used to make productive long-term loans, while a smaller share are held back as reserves to meet depositors' liquidity needs. Loan commitments and lines of credit serve a similar function by allowing borrowers with uncertain future liquidity requirements to take on bank debt as needed. Banks have been managing expected liquidity demands since the beginning of banking itself. This is accomplished today by, for example, holding some liquid assets such as Treasury bills and possibly by funding a share of assets with long-term debt. A mismatch in the duration of a bank's assets and liabilities exposes it to interest-rate risk, since an increase in prevailing rates will cause short-term funding costs to increase without a concomitant increase in interest income from long-dated, fixed-rate loans. Under normal conditions, this risk can also be managed relatively easily, for example by hedging interest-rate changes using derivative instruments. Unanticipated systemwide shocks to the demand for liquidity, however, are far more difficult to deal with. During times of systemwide stress, such as the one we are now in, significant liquidity demands can come from both the asset and the liability side of a bank's balance sheet. On the liability side, banks can face challenges in refinancing short-term debt in the money markets. On the asset side, off-balance-sheet exposures can unexpectedly come onto a bank's balance sheet. For example, we have recently seen how draws on liquidity commitments to structured investment vehicles, commercial paper conduits, and others can lead to significant growth in bank assets. Banks can also encounter problems dealing with unplanned growth in on-balance-sheet assets when market liquidity dries up. For example, they may have difficulty selling whole loans, syndicating leveraged loans that they have previously committed to make, or securitizing assets, such as non-conforming mortgages, as planned. During times of severe stress different types of liquidity shocks may become correlated. Therefore, when there is a marketwide scramble for liquidity, a bank must be prepared to manage funding challenges and unplanned asset expansions simultaneously. Banks should be prepared to deal with unanticipated and correlated liquidity shocks, both for their own sakes and for the sake of the broader financial system. In other words, it is critical to have funding sources in place if such liquidity shocks occur. In some cases, an increase in deposits can provide a partial funding source. In the face of significant economic uncertainty, historical data suggest that many savers may prefer to shift their assets to relatively safe bank deposits at the same time that cash-strapped businesses and a variety of investment vehicles need to draw down credit lines. Thus, because banks can both create demand deposits and provide lines of credit, they act as shock absorbers during times of turbulence, providing safety to risk-weary investors and liquidity to borrowers who might not be able to obtain it elsewhere.3 Liquidity-Risk Challenges During Recent Market EventsEffective liquidity-risk management is especially important--and especially challenging--during periods of financial stress, when many markets can become less liquid and when some entities may find it more difficult to fund themselves. In recent months, some of the well-known challenges associated with liquidity-risk management were again revealed, to the surprise of some market participants. As you know, this was not limited just to markets in the United States. Indeed, some of the recent challenges in liquidity-risk management are related to the increased interconnectedness of global markets and the speed with which market prices can change. Recent events have demonstrated the important role that banks play as liquidity providers and the potential for broader market turbulence when banks have difficulty performing this role. The experience of banks with structured investment vehicles (SIVs) provides one such example. Let me explain. As we are all aware, over the past decade there has been a proliferation of financial vehicles, such as SIVs and asset-backed commercial paper conduits. These vehicles were established for a number of reasons. In an effort to secure higher credit ratings for these vehicles, or to make them generally more attractive to investors, the arrangers would sometimes secure a backup liquidity line from a bank. Certainly, as I said earlier, this is not a new role for banks. Banks have been providing letters of credit and backup lines on commercial paper programs and their ancestors for many years. In other cases, there may not have been an explicit contractual relationship between the bank and the vehicle, but some investors may have assumed that there was. Given the bank's role in helping establish the vehicle in the first place, the bank's reputation was tied to the performance of the vehicle, which gave the bank a powerful incentive to act beyond its contractual obligations. If we look at the lead-up to recent disruptions, two important aspects of banks' interaction with these vehicles over the past several years stand out. The first relates to challenges that banks faced in fully evaluating the risks associated with these vehicles. Although SIVs or similar vehicles have existed for many years, the underlying credit risks, legal structures, and operations of many recent vehicles were much more complex. This complexity--and the lack of information about where the underlying credit, legal, and operational risks resided--made these products more difficult and costly to value than many originally thought. Stress testing and scenario analysis can provide valuable information about the potential risks of complex investment products, but in many cases application of such tools to structured investment vehicles appears to have been inadequate. For example, some bankers did not necessarily explore scenarios in which these vehicles' credit ratings could be downgraded. They did not necessarily consider that their assets could fall sharply in value or that investors might not want to continue financing these vehicles--and what impact each of those possibilities might have on the bank. Notably, most of these vehicles mirrored the liquidity mismatch that exists at most banks in that they contained longer-term assets funded by shorter-term liabilities, but it is not clear that banks fully considered the potential funding-liquidity problems that these vehicles could face if there were sudden market moves or if perceptions of credit risk changed. And they may not have fully explored scenarios in which problems with these vehicles could have ramifications for the bank, such as the need to provide liquidity support to the vehicle or to incorporate some of the vehicle's assets onto the bank's balance sheet. As I mentioned earlier, during times of systemwide stress, liquidity shocks can become correlated so that the same factors that led to liquidity problems for the SIVs could also lead to high liquidity demands in other parts of the financial market, and might also put pressure on banks' own liquidity. Some banks may not have been fully prepared for the possibility that SIVs would require more liquidity from banks at the same time that the banks themselves would be facing increased liquidity demands elsewhere. The second major factor contributing to recent disturbances stemming from investment vehicles relates to the activities of investors and the role of market discipline. As I mentioned in a speech to your institute last year,4some investors may not have conducted sufficient due diligence with regard to complex structured products. Prior to the recent market disruptions, many investors appear not to have demanded sufficient information about complex investment vehicles, or perhaps did not carefully evaluate that information that was available. Instead, they simply accepted investment-grade ratings as a substitute for their own risk analysis. Market participants may also have assumed that these vehicles had sufficient funding liquidity, or would receive bank liquidity support if funding became an issue. In observing these cases of insufficient due diligence, I am reminded of the old adage "Trust but verify." Unfortunately, in this case there seems to have been a lot of trusting but not much verifying. If certain market participants had done more verification, they might not have invested in these vehicles, or might have demanded higher returns in line with the actual risks. Linkage between Liquidity Risk and CapitalIt is worthwhile to examine the linkages between liquidity and capital, since their relationship is not necessarily straightforward. As you are well aware, several large global banks ended up having to deal with so-called unplanned asset expansions arising from a variety of liquidity stresses related to the asset side of the balance sheet noted earlier. In a few cases, these unexpected increases in the balance sheet created some pressures on capital ratios, even if the level of capital remained stable. Although bank liquidity management and capital management may be conceptually distinct, recent events illustrate in practice how liquidity management and capital management are intimately related, particularly in times of financial stress. In a nutshell: liquidity problems always have the potential to affect bank balance sheets and, in doing so, bank capital adequacy. When liquidity shocks become correlated during times of turbulence, an institution may experience pressures in a number of areas of its balance sheet simultaneously, thus underscoring the importance of an enterprise-wide assessment of a bank's risk profile when considering liquidity risk management and capital adequacy.5 Ideally, assessment of potential liquidity risks should be fully integrated into a bank's capital analysis. In some cases, banks may not necessarily generate specific capital attributions for liquidity risk; that is, they may not internally quantify liquidity risk in capital terms the same way they do for market or credit risk. For instance, to capture market-liquidity risk in capital adequacy assessments, banks may decide to make adjustments in other risk areas, such as by embedding market-liquidity premia or applying market-liquidity haircuts in pricing models and valuations, or by adjusting assumed holding periods--all of which would increase capital attributions in market or credit risk. As for funding-liquidity risk, it is not clear that banks have been able to establish a clear link between funding-liquidity parameters and robust capital attributions; however, through testing and scenario analysis--exercises that capture both bank-specific problems and broader market disruptions--banks should still be able to assess the impact that problems in funding-liquidity risk can have on capital adequacy. International Supervisory ResponseInternational banking regulators are working together on several fronts to respond to recent liquidity challenges, and I would like to summarize these efforts before closing my remarks. First, supervisors are collaborating to understand the causes of the recent turbulence and to identify steps to mitigate future problems. Through the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, supervisors are reviewing liquidity-risk-management practices worldwide. Just last week the committee issued a public report that builds on the Basel sound practices for managing liquidity risk issued in 2000.6Among other things, this report highlighted the need for stress testing to evaluate the risks of marketwide disruptions, as well as the importance of coordination between institutions' treasury functions and business lines to ensure a full appreciation of potential contingent liquidity risks. The committee plans to issue enhanced sound practices for public comment in the summer of 2008. Another example of international collaboration among supervisors is an interim report by the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) Working Group on Market & Institutional Resilience, published last month.7This report gives some broad policy directions for strengthening the resilience of key elements of the financial system, such as encouraging banks to maintain more robust liquidity buffers and develop better contingency funding plans. The group intends to develop specific recommendations in its full report, which is due for publication later this spring. Second, as I noted, there are linkages between liquidity and capital, and supervisors recognize that improvements in one area can benefit the other. I am sure those here today know that supervisors have spent a considerable amount of effort developing the three pillars of the Basel II Capital Accord to better reflect banks' evolving risk profiles and to ensure that banks maintain a strong capital cushion to withstand the kind of liquidity-risk challenges seen in today's markets. Basel II should establish a more coherent relationship between regulatory measures of capital adequacy and the day-to-day risk-focused supervision of banks, enabling examiners to better evaluate whether banks are holding prudent levels of capital given their risk profiles. As has long been the case with our regulatory capital rules, we expect that adjustments or improvements will have to be made from time to time to address market developments. There is already work underway in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to consider the Basel II framework in light of recent events. Under Basel II's second pillar, banks are required to have an internal process for assessing capital adequacy, the ICAAP, to ensure that all risks are adequately captured. A bank's pillar 2 assessment should cover the full range of risks facing an institution, which of course include liquidity risks. This internal process will be subject to rigorous supervisory review. I believe that adequate stress and scenario testing for potential asset expansions arising from liquidity shocks is crucial. The third Basel II pillar, which focuses on market disclosure, is a key mechanism for banks to communicate to market participants about their risk profiles. As a strong believer in the value of information for markets, I believe pillar 3 will help market participants better evaluate banks' risk profiles and will enhance discussions between bankers and market participants about risk-management practices. To enhance these discussions, it will be important to strengthen transparency about exposures to structured credit products and securitized assets. The benefits of enhanced transparency can be even more prominent during financial turbulence, when market participants become fearful of latent risks and "surprise" losses. Confidence in the risk-management practices of individual firms can be valuable in maintaining confidence in the markets in which the firms operate. Finally, I would also like to mention briefly an important initiative involving more-direct central bank efforts to improve liquidity in financial markets. In December, the Federal Reserve announced the creation of a temporary term auction facility (TAF) to provide secured term funding to eligible depository institutions through an auction mechanism. The Federal Reserve also established swap lines with the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank, which provided dollar funds that those central banks could lend in their jurisdictions. At the same time, the Bank of England and the Bank of Canada announced plans to conduct similar term-funding operations in their own currencies. The TAF function, which I believe has had beneficial effects on financial markets to date, is expected to continue as long as necessary to address elevated pressures in short-term funding markets, and the Federal Reserve will continue to work closely and cooperatively with other central banks to address market strains that could hamper the achievement of our broader economic objectives. ConclusionIf recent events have taught us anything, it is that, during times of market turbulence, banks are essential providers of liquidity to others. To ensure that banks are well positioned to play this critical role, banks need to carefully manage their own exposure to liquidity risks. Because liquidity problems can have significant effects on both sides of bank balance sheets, liquidity risks should be evaluated and addressed on an enterprise-wide basis, and should be tightly integrated with capital planning. Footnotes 1.Randall S. Kroszner (2007), "Liquidity and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, Washington, March 9.Return to text 2.Douglas W. Diamond and Philip H. Dybvig (1983), "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 91 (5), pp. 401–19.Return to text 3.Evan Gatev, Til Schuermann, and Philip E. Strahan (2006), "Managing Bank Liquidity Risk: How Deposit-Loan Synergies Vary with Market Conditions," NBER Working Paper 12234. See also Evan Gatev and Philip E. Strahan (2006), "Banks' Advantage in Hedging Liquidity Risks: Theory and Evidence from the Commercial Paper Market,"Journal of Finance, vol. 61(2), pp. 867–892.Return to text 4.Randall S. Kroszner (2007), "Recent Events in Financial Markets," speech delivered at the Institute of International Bankers Annual Breakfast Dialogue, Washington, October 22.Return to text 5.Randall S. Kroszner (2008), "Improving Risk Management in Light of Recent Market Events," speech delivered at the Global Association of Risk Management Professionals Annual Risk Convention, New York, February 25.Return to text 6.Bank for International Settlements (2008), "Liquidity Risk: Management and Supervisory Challenges," February 28.Return to text 7.Financial Stability Forum (2008),Interim Report to the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors, February 5.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the issuance of a Consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Tradition Bank, Bellaire, Texas, a state member bank. Tradition Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board’s Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act.The Order requires Tradition Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $4,000, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund.A copy of the order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the issuance of a Consent Order of Prohibition against Russell K. Henry, a former employee and institution-affiliated party of the former FNB Southeast.Mr. Henry, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order, which was based on his alleged participation in violations of law, unsafe and unsound banking practices, and breaches of fiduciary duty in connection with the making of at least $786,694.89 in unsecured loans to his elderly mother.A copy of the Order is attached.
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the National Association for Business Economics Washington Policy Conference, Washington, D.C. Thank you for the invitation to be here today. I am very pleased to be a part of this conference. The National Association for Business Economics policy conferences always focus on the critical issues facing the economy, and this conference follows in that tradition. In my remarks today I will review the current economic situation and the outlook for real activity and inflation. I will offer some specific observations about the recent deterioration in economic activity, highlight several risks facing the economy, and review recent inflation dynamics. I should note that the views I will express here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1The U.S. economy is facing substantial challenges. The housing sector continues to weaken, production and spending in other parts of the economy have decelerated, the labor market has softened noticeably, and the turmoil in financial markets has led to a reduced availability and a higher cost of credit to many households and businesses. Indeed, real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at an annual rate of only 0.6 percent in the fourth quarter, and the available data suggest that the economy has relatively little momentum going into the first quarter. Moreover, upward pressures on inflation have emerged, emanating in part from the rapid increases in prices of crude oil and some other commodities.The strains in financial markets that emerged last summer were triggered by problems in the markets for subprime mortgages and related securities. As the financial landscape became more uncertain, a broader tightening of credit conditions took hold, with investors becoming less willing to bear risk, more concerned about the valuations of a wide range of complex financial instruments, and more concerned about counterparty credit risk. Reflecting these concerns, the functioning of the short-term credit markets deteriorated dramatically, corporate bond spreads rose, and the market value of leveraged loans and other securities fell. In addition, banks were forced to bring onto their balance sheets a significant volume of loans and other securities, and in the second half of 2007, banks took large write-downs on mortgage-related and other assets. In recent months, short-term credit markets have functioned better than in the summer but have remained strained, risk spreads on corporate bonds have risen markedly further on concerns about the near-term outlook for corporate credit quality, and equity prices have weakened considerably. Moreover, substantial uncertainty remains about the magnitude and distribution of credit losses going forward and the extent to which those losses will lead to tighter credit conditions.To help place these developments into perspective, I would note that the turmoil in financial markets emerged at a time when the economy was otherwise in pretty good shape. Real GDP growth held up reasonably well through the summer--despite the ongoing declines in home building--and balance sheets of nonfinancial corporations remained strong. In addition, the financial system entered last summer with some strengths. Most large financial institutions had strong balance sheets and solid earnings, as delinquencies and charge-off rates on most types of loans were at low levels. At the same time, the financial market infrastructure for clearing and settlement was robust and, subsequently, performed well. Moreover, as I have discussed in earlier speeches, I believe that monetary policy has helped to effectively anchor long-run inflation expectations, which in turn helped to restrain core consumer price inflation in spite of energy and other supply shocks.In an environment of well-anchored inflation expectations, the FOMC had the scope to respond aggressively to the strains in financial markets that emerged late last summer and to the worsening economic outlook. Indeed, since September, the FOMC has cut the federal funds rate five times, for a total of 225 basis points. In addition, the Federal Reserve has taken a number of other steps to ease strains in short-term funding markets. These policy actions, along with the recently enacted fiscal stimulus package, should support economic activity and should improve the odds of avoiding more adverse outcomes.The most recent economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents--released a couple of weeks ago but submitted around the time of the late January FOMC meeting--show sluggish economic growth this year but not a downturn in activity. The data on consumer and business spending released since the last FOMC meeting have been largely consistent with this outlook. Nonetheless, as I will discuss shortly, I see significant downside risks to this outlook. These risks have been brought into particularly sharp relief by recent readings from a number of household and business surveys that have had a distinctly downbeat cast.The Outlook for Real ActivityTurning to some specifics, the ongoing correction in the housing market has been a substantial drag on real GDP growth over the past two years, with declines in real residential investment subtracting about 1 percentage point from the growth of real GDP last year. This weakness intensified in the second half of 2007 with the dramatic decrease in the availability of mortgage credit for nonprime borrowers and with a widening of spreads on jumbo loans. In addition, the Federal Reserve's latest Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices indicates that a large fraction of reporting banks have tightened lending standards on all types of residential mortgages. By January 2008, sales of existing single-family homes had fallen to more than 30 percent below their peak in September 2005, while sales of new homes in January were more than 50 percent below their peak in July 2005.The cutbacks in new home construction that have come in response to the weakening of demand have been substantial, but they have yet to reduce the overhang of inventories of unsold new homes. As of January, the months' supply of new homes for sale--that is, the ratio of unsold inventory to sales--was more than twice its average level from 1997 through the summer of 2005. Given that sizable backlog and the subdued level of demand, cutbacks in housing construction seem likely to continue being a drag on economic activity for some time to come.House prices decelerated appreciably as sales began to fall, and prices are now declining in many areas of the country. Given the continued weakness in housing demand, house prices appear likely to remain under pressure. Moreover, as I will describe in a few minutes, falling house prices may not only reflect declining demand for homes but also can contribute to a further weakening in demand.In the consumer sector, real outlays held up reasonably well for most of 2007. But spending growth slowed noticeably toward the end of the year, and the most recent readings on real consumer purchases point to a soft first quarter. More broadly, consumers are being squeezed from several directions. Very soft house prices and a weak stock market have reduced household wealth. Slowing labor demand and the steep increases in the price of imported oil have damped real income gains. And banks report that they have tightened the terms and standards for consumer loans. In this environment, consumer sentiment has been weak; it began eroding last summer and plummeted in February. Together, these factors are likely to restrain spending growth in the period ahead. This restraint should be offset somewhat beginning in the late spring, when many households will start to receive the tax rebates that are the centerpiece of the recent fiscal stimulus package.Business investment in equipment and software also decelerated toward the end of last year, and a number of factors appear likely to weigh on spending in the near term. Indicators of business sentiment from a variety of national and regional surveys have deteriorated, on balance, in recent months. Moreover, spreads on corporate bonds across a wide range of credit qualities have been moving up, especially for riskier firms, and an increasing number of banks report that they are tightening lending standards for business loans. All told, real spending on equipment and software seems likely to be subdued in the near term. It is anticipated that investment spending should receive some help in the second half of this year from the accelerated depreciation provisions in the fiscal stimulus bill; however, based on experience with a similar tax provision in 2002 and 2003, the magnitude and timing of these effects is very uncertain.Investment in nonresidential structures continued to grow robustly through the end of last year, with most major components contributing to the strong gains. However, prospects for the coming year are less buoyant given the tightening credit conditions as well as the slowdown in economic activity more broadly.Turning now to international trade, export growth has been a bright spot for the U.S. economy, boosted by past declines in the exchange value of the dollar and solid economic growth abroad. Indeed, rising demand for U.S. exports has offset some of the negative effects on producers here in the United States from the deterioration in domestic spending. Although foreign economies also have been affected by financial turmoil, and growth among our trading partners is showing some signs of slowing, expanding exports should continue to help support economic activity in the United States.In the labor market, private payrolls decelerated over the course of 2007 and were reported to have been unchanged in January. The unemployment rate, after remaining near 4-1/2 percent in the first half of last year, has moved up about 1/2 percentage point to nearly 5 percent, its highest level since late 2005. And the labor market appears to have softened further in February. Initial claims for unemployment insurance, which can be a timely indicator of labor market activity, moved up appreciably in February. Moreover, recent surveys of hiring plans have become less favorable, and households' assessments of current job availability and of expected labor market conditions have deteriorated. With the pace of economic activity expected to be sluggish in the near term, I anticipate some further rise in joblessness this year.Risks to the Outlook for Real ActivityFor the reasons cited, I continue to expect a period of economic weakness in the near term that should be offset to a degree in future quarters by the monetary easing already in place and the fiscal stimulus package. Nonetheless, the economy faces significant downside risks that could contribute to a worse outcome. Key among those risks is a worse-than-expected outcome in the housing market as a result of more adverse housing-price dynamics.2IIn particular, declines in housing prices, rather than stimulating demand, could further depress home purchases, at least for a time.An often-expressed idea is that buyers are reluctant to buy into a falling market. This notion can be made more precise by organizing ideas around the standard neoclassical model of capital investment. In this framework, the so-called user cost of capital is an important determinant of the demand for any investment good--including housing. When the user cost of housing rises, the demand for housing will decline, everything else being equal. The user cost will increase when, among other things, the purchase price of housing rises relative to the prices of other goods and services or mortgage interest rates move up.In addition to these factors, Case and Shiller (2003) have emphasized that changes inexpectedhouse prices can play an important role in the demand for housing through the user-cost channel. When relative house prices are expected to increase, the user cost is reduced, stimulating the demand for housing. This factor presumably contributed to the robust demand for housing during the period when house prices were rising rapidly and were expected to continue doing so. Conversely, when relative house prices are expected to decline, the user cost is higher. Indeed, a drop of 1 percentage point in the expected rate of change in real house prices, all else being equal, is equivalent in the user-cost framework to an increase of 100 basis points in the after-tax mortgage interest rate. Consequently, if house prices fall more than expected, and that condition leads to more adverse expectations for future changes in house prices, then housing demand could fall as a result.A second risk to the economy is that larger-than-expected declines in house prices would be expected to lead to a larger-than-expected drag on consumer spending through the usual wealth-effect channel, as a lower path of household net worth restrains consumption. Moreover, during periods of financial distress, the effects of falling house prices on consumer spending could be greater than that suggested by conventional estimates of the wealth effect. Because prospective borrowers typically have more information about their ability to repay the loan than do lenders, homeownership can play a role in reducing the problems of asymmetric information in consumer credit markets by providing collateral that reduces those information problems. Good collateral increases the borrower's incentive to repay the loan and significantly reduces potential losses to the lender upon borrower default. Consequently, a decline in house prices will reduce the value of the collateral backing mortgage loans, thereby increasing the problems of asymmetric information and potentially decreasing the access of households to credit.The same idea is expressed another way in a paper by Ben Bernanke and Mark Gertler (1995), who suggested that a decline in house prices can increase the wedge between the default-free interest rate and the effective interest rate facing the homeowner. That is, in the eyes of the lenders, declining house prices diminish the quality of the borrowers' collateral, which effectively reduces the availability of credit to households that can be used to finance consumer purchases. This effect is another reason to be concerned about the possible consequences of greater-than-expected house price declines. And, to my view, the credit-constraint channel provides a more credible link between house prices and consumer spending than does mortgage-equity withdrawal, a story about which I have previously expressed serious doubts (Mishkin, 2007b).Another significant risk to the outlook is that lending standards could tighten more than expected not only for mortgages but for other types of credit as well. As I have noted, the January 2008 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey highlighted the fact that many banks are tightening lending standards and terms in a number of credit markets. At the same time, capital at some banks has come under pressure, as institutions have been forced to bring some loans and other securities back onto their own balance sheets. Because this process is still unfolding, it poses a risk that credit standards for households and businesses could tighten more than expected and significantly crimp spending.Finally, I would note the possibility of a feedback loop between financial market disruptions and deterioration in the real economy that I have emphasized in previous speeches (Mishkin, 2008a, 2008b). Because economic downturns typically result in even greater uncertainty about asset values, such episodes may trigger an adverse feedback loop whereby financial disruptions cause investment and consumer spending to decline, which, in turn, causes economic activity to contract. Such a contraction then increases uncertainty about the value of assets, and, as a result, the financial disruption worsens. This development then causes economic activity to contract further in a perverse cycle.Inflation and Inflation DynamicsLet me turn now to inflation and inflation dynamics. Over the twelve months ended in January, the price index for total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose 3.7 percent, up from 2.1 percent during the comparable period twelve months earlier. Recently, headline inflation has been pushed higher by sizable increases in food and energy prices; crude oil prices have surged, and food prices have risen significantly, reflecting strong global demand in general as well as hefty demand in particular for corn for use in ethanol production.Even excluding food and energy, recent readings on inflation also have been elevated, although over the past year core PCE prices decelerated a touch from 2.4 percent to 2.2 percent. The recent observations on core inflation suggest that higher energy costs and the lower exchange value of the dollar may have been sources of upward pressure on core inflation. However, the recent bump up in inflation also likely reflected a reversal of unusually low readings earlier last year for apparel, prescription drugs, and so-called nonmarket items in the index, and the contribution of these items to core inflation is likely to wane.In my view, long-run inflation dynamics are influenced importantly both by prospects for the future balance of aggregate supply and demand, as well as by longer-run inflation expectations (Mishkin, 2007a). By a range of measures, longer-run inflation expectations appear to have remained reasonably well contained even as recent readings on headline inflation have been elevated. The median expectation of inflation five to ten years ahead in the Reuters/University of Michigan survey stands in the middle of the range that has been evident over the past couple of years, although the expectation for year-ahead inflation from this same survey has moved up recently, presumably in response to the higher rates of actual inflation. In addition, although the measure of long-run expectations for consumer price index (CPI) inflation from the Survey of Professional Forecasters ticked up in February, this measure remained at essentially the same value that has prevailed since 1998.As for inflation compensation derived from spreads between yields on nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury securities (known as Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, or TIPS), the implied rate of inflation compensation from five years ahead to ten years ahead (the so-called five-to-ten-year-forward rate) has risen somewhat since the beginning of the year. Does this rise in forward inflation compensation indicate that long-run inflation expectations have risen by a similar amount? My best guess is that much of the rise in inflation compensation reflects other factors.To begin, recall that inflation compensation measured by using TIPS yields is not the same thing as inflation expectations. Rather, movements in inflation compensation reflect not only changes in inflation expectations, but also changes in an inflation risk premium and in the relative liquidity of TIPS and similar maturity nominal Treasuries.3To see that these components are distinct, recall that during the period of heightened concerns aboutdeflationin 2003 and 2004, forward inflation compensation rose substantially to an unusuallyhighlevel amid concerns about an unwelcomefallin inflation; that earlier episode, in particular, underscores the fact that we must be careful in using the forward rates of inflation compensation as a gauge of long-run inflation expectations. To see this distinction another way, consider a scenario in which inflation uncertainty increased but inflation expectations did not. In that case, the midpoint of inflation expectations would remain the same, but the range around the midpoint would increase.Turning specifically to the recent experience, consider the sequence of one-year-forward rates of inflation compensation--that is, decompose ten-year inflation compensation into a sequence of one-year-forward rates. The one-year-forward rate ending about five years from now has moved up, but the forward rate ending in ten years has climbed more than twice as much. This pattern suggests an important role for factors other than rising long-run inflation expectations in explaining recent movements in inflation compensation as one might suppose that any tendency toward higher inflation would be expected to show through within five years. And survey measures of long-run inflation expectations--including that from the Survey of Professional Forecasters--have moved relatively little. But respondents to the latest Survey of Professional Forecasters indicated that they were more uncertain about the future trajectory of inflation. Altogether, the evidence points toward the inflation risk premium as the likely cause of much of the rise in five-to-ten-year-ahead inflation compensation. Although a distinctly different concept from inflation expectations, policymakers need to be concerned about any widening of inflation uncertainty. Indeed, an increase in inflation uncertainty would likely complicate decision making by consumers and businesses concerning plans for spending, savings, and investment.What does this mean for the inflation outlook? I expect inflation pressures to wane over the next few years, as product and labor markets soften and the rise in food and energy prices abates. In addition, I continue to believe that long-run inflation expectations remain consistent with increases in PCE prices in the neighborhood of 2 percent per year.4Accordingly, I anticipate that over time core PCE inflation will move back to around 2 percent. The risks around this outlook appear to me to be balanced, although the uncertainty surrounding the outlook may have widened recently, consistent with the apparent rise in the inflation risk premium. The risks associated with higher oil and commodity prices are a concern as is the possibility that past cost shocks may have a more pronounced effect on core inflation than has been apparent to date. Working in the opposite direction, with the risks to the real economy and resource utilization skewed to the downside, there are accompanying risks that inflation may be subject to some additional downward pressure. Regardless of how these risks play out, a commitment to a strong nominal anchor will be crucial to the success of monetary policy. Any tendency for longer-run inflation expectations to become unanchored would pose a significant problem for monetary policy makers, and the FOMC will be closely monitoring inflation and inflation expectations in coming months.To summarize, with the economic outlook having deteriorated significantly and financial markets under considerable stress, the FOMC will face significant challenges. As noted in the statement following the January meeting, the FOMC "will continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act in a timely manner as needed" to address risks facing the economy (FOMC, 2008). The FOMC's critical challenge will be to calibrate monetary policy in a way that best achieves its dual objectives of maximum employment and price stability.Thank you for your time and attention. It has been a pleasure to be with you today.ReferencesBernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler (1995). "Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy Transmission,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 9 (Autumn), pp. 27-48.Case, Karl E., and Robert J. Shiller (2003). "Is There a Bubble in the Housing Market?"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2003 (no. 2), pp. 299-362.Federal Open Market Committee (2008). "FOMC Statement and Board Approval of Discount Rate Requests of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, and San Francisco," press release, January 30.Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright (2008). "The TIPS Yield Curve and Inflation Compensation," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2008-05.Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February.Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007a). "Inflation Dynamics," speech delivered at the Annual Macro Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 23.Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007b). "Housing and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-40. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.Mishkin, Frederic S. (2008a). "Monetary Policy Flexibility, Risk Management, and Financial Disruptions," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, January 11.Mishkin, Frederic S. (2008b). "The Federal Reserve's Tools for Responding to Financial Disruptions," speech delivered at the Tuck Global Capital Markets Conference, Tuck School of Business, Dartmouth College, Hanover, N.H., February 15.Footnotes1.I wish to thankCharles FleischmanandDan Sichelfor their helpful comments and assistance on this speech.Return to text2.This material draws heavily from the paper I delivered at last summer’s Jackson Hole conference (see Mishkin, 2007b).Return to text3.For additional background, see Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2008). They discuss the decomposition of inflation compensation into these distinct components and argue that far-forward rates of inflation compensation are too volatile to be pure measures of long-run inflation expectations.Return to text4.As I described in an earlier speech (Mishkin, 2007a), this figure is sensitive to a variety of assumptions, so one should not overstate its precision. Note that expectations for CPI inflation must be adjusted to convert them from a CPI basis to a PCE basis.Return to text Thank you for the invitation to be here today. I am very pleased to be a part of this conference. The National Association for Business Economics policy conferences always focus on the critical issues facing the economy, and this conference follows in that tradition. In my remarks today I will review the current economic situation and the outlook for real activity and inflation. I will offer some specific observations about the recent deterioration in economic activity, highlight several risks facing the economy, and review recent inflation dynamics. I should note that the views I will express here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1 The U.S. economy is facing substantial challenges. The housing sector continues to weaken, production and spending in other parts of the economy have decelerated, the labor market has softened noticeably, and the turmoil in financial markets has led to a reduced availability and a higher cost of credit to many households and businesses. Indeed, real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at an annual rate of only 0.6 percent in the fourth quarter, and the available data suggest that the economy has relatively little momentum going into the first quarter. Moreover, upward pressures on inflation have emerged, emanating in part from the rapid increases in prices of crude oil and some other commodities. The strains in financial markets that emerged last summer were triggered by problems in the markets for subprime mortgages and related securities. As the financial landscape became more uncertain, a broader tightening of credit conditions took hold, with investors becoming less willing to bear risk, more concerned about the valuations of a wide range of complex financial instruments, and more concerned about counterparty credit risk. Reflecting these concerns, the functioning of the short-term credit markets deteriorated dramatically, corporate bond spreads rose, and the market value of leveraged loans and other securities fell. In addition, banks were forced to bring onto their balance sheets a significant volume of loans and other securities, and in the second half of 2007, banks took large write-downs on mortgage-related and other assets. In recent months, short-term credit markets have functioned better than in the summer but have remained strained, risk spreads on corporate bonds have risen markedly further on concerns about the near-term outlook for corporate credit quality, and equity prices have weakened considerably. Moreover, substantial uncertainty remains about the magnitude and distribution of credit losses going forward and the extent to which those losses will lead to tighter credit conditions. To help place these developments into perspective, I would note that the turmoil in financial markets emerged at a time when the economy was otherwise in pretty good shape. Real GDP growth held up reasonably well through the summer--despite the ongoing declines in home building--and balance sheets of nonfinancial corporations remained strong. In addition, the financial system entered last summer with some strengths. Most large financial institutions had strong balance sheets and solid earnings, as delinquencies and charge-off rates on most types of loans were at low levels. At the same time, the financial market infrastructure for clearing and settlement was robust and, subsequently, performed well. Moreover, as I have discussed in earlier speeches, I believe that monetary policy has helped to effectively anchor long-run inflation expectations, which in turn helped to restrain core consumer price inflation in spite of energy and other supply shocks. In an environment of well-anchored inflation expectations, the FOMC had the scope to respond aggressively to the strains in financial markets that emerged late last summer and to the worsening economic outlook. Indeed, since September, the FOMC has cut the federal funds rate five times, for a total of 225 basis points. In addition, the Federal Reserve has taken a number of other steps to ease strains in short-term funding markets. These policy actions, along with the recently enacted fiscal stimulus package, should support economic activity and should improve the odds of avoiding more adverse outcomes. The most recent economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents--released a couple of weeks ago but submitted around the time of the late January FOMC meeting--show sluggish economic growth this year but not a downturn in activity. The data on consumer and business spending released since the last FOMC meeting have been largely consistent with this outlook. Nonetheless, as I will discuss shortly, I see significant downside risks to this outlook. These risks have been brought into particularly sharp relief by recent readings from a number of household and business surveys that have had a distinctly downbeat cast. The Outlook for Real ActivityTurning to some specifics, the ongoing correction in the housing market has been a substantial drag on real GDP growth over the past two years, with declines in real residential investment subtracting about 1 percentage point from the growth of real GDP last year. This weakness intensified in the second half of 2007 with the dramatic decrease in the availability of mortgage credit for nonprime borrowers and with a widening of spreads on jumbo loans. In addition, the Federal Reserve's latest Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices indicates that a large fraction of reporting banks have tightened lending standards on all types of residential mortgages. By January 2008, sales of existing single-family homes had fallen to more than 30 percent below their peak in September 2005, while sales of new homes in January were more than 50 percent below their peak in July 2005. The cutbacks in new home construction that have come in response to the weakening of demand have been substantial, but they have yet to reduce the overhang of inventories of unsold new homes. As of January, the months' supply of new homes for sale--that is, the ratio of unsold inventory to sales--was more than twice its average level from 1997 through the summer of 2005. Given that sizable backlog and the subdued level of demand, cutbacks in housing construction seem likely to continue being a drag on economic activity for some time to come. House prices decelerated appreciably as sales began to fall, and prices are now declining in many areas of the country. Given the continued weakness in housing demand, house prices appear likely to remain under pressure. Moreover, as I will describe in a few minutes, falling house prices may not only reflect declining demand for homes but also can contribute to a further weakening in demand. In the consumer sector, real outlays held up reasonably well for most of 2007. But spending growth slowed noticeably toward the end of the year, and the most recent readings on real consumer purchases point to a soft first quarter. More broadly, consumers are being squeezed from several directions. Very soft house prices and a weak stock market have reduced household wealth. Slowing labor demand and the steep increases in the price of imported oil have damped real income gains. And banks report that they have tightened the terms and standards for consumer loans. In this environment, consumer sentiment has been weak; it began eroding last summer and plummeted in February. Together, these factors are likely to restrain spending growth in the period ahead. This restraint should be offset somewhat beginning in the late spring, when many households will start to receive the tax rebates that are the centerpiece of the recent fiscal stimulus package. Business investment in equipment and software also decelerated toward the end of last year, and a number of factors appear likely to weigh on spending in the near term. Indicators of business sentiment from a variety of national and regional surveys have deteriorated, on balance, in recent months. Moreover, spreads on corporate bonds across a wide range of credit qualities have been moving up, especially for riskier firms, and an increasing number of banks report that they are tightening lending standards for business loans. All told, real spending on equipment and software seems likely to be subdued in the near term. It is anticipated that investment spending should receive some help in the second half of this year from the accelerated depreciation provisions in the fiscal stimulus bill; however, based on experience with a similar tax provision in 2002 and 2003, the magnitude and timing of these effects is very uncertain. Investment in nonresidential structures continued to grow robustly through the end of last year, with most major components contributing to the strong gains. However, prospects for the coming year are less buoyant given the tightening credit conditions as well as the slowdown in economic activity more broadly. Turning now to international trade, export growth has been a bright spot for the U.S. economy, boosted by past declines in the exchange value of the dollar and solid economic growth abroad. Indeed, rising demand for U.S. exports has offset some of the negative effects on producers here in the United States from the deterioration in domestic spending. Although foreign economies also have been affected by financial turmoil, and growth among our trading partners is showing some signs of slowing, expanding exports should continue to help support economic activity in the United States. In the labor market, private payrolls decelerated over the course of 2007 and were reported to have been unchanged in January. The unemployment rate, after remaining near 4-1/2 percent in the first half of last year, has moved up about 1/2 percentage point to nearly 5 percent, its highest level since late 2005. And the labor market appears to have softened further in February. Initial claims for unemployment insurance, which can be a timely indicator of labor market activity, moved up appreciably in February. Moreover, recent surveys of hiring plans have become less favorable, and households' assessments of current job availability and of expected labor market conditions have deteriorated. With the pace of economic activity expected to be sluggish in the near term, I anticipate some further rise in joblessness this year. Risks to the Outlook for Real ActivityFor the reasons cited, I continue to expect a period of economic weakness in the near term that should be offset to a degree in future quarters by the monetary easing already in place and the fiscal stimulus package. Nonetheless, the economy faces significant downside risks that could contribute to a worse outcome. Key among those risks is a worse-than-expected outcome in the housing market as a result of more adverse housing-price dynamics.2IIn particular, declines in housing prices, rather than stimulating demand, could further depress home purchases, at least for a time. An often-expressed idea is that buyers are reluctant to buy into a falling market. This notion can be made more precise by organizing ideas around the standard neoclassical model of capital investment. In this framework, the so-called user cost of capital is an important determinant of the demand for any investment good--including housing. When the user cost of housing rises, the demand for housing will decline, everything else being equal. The user cost will increase when, among other things, the purchase price of housing rises relative to the prices of other goods and services or mortgage interest rates move up. In addition to these factors, Case and Shiller (2003) have emphasized that changes inexpectedhouse prices can play an important role in the demand for housing through the user-cost channel. When relative house prices are expected to increase, the user cost is reduced, stimulating the demand for housing. This factor presumably contributed to the robust demand for housing during the period when house prices were rising rapidly and were expected to continue doing so. Conversely, when relative house prices are expected to decline, the user cost is higher. Indeed, a drop of 1 percentage point in the expected rate of change in real house prices, all else being equal, is equivalent in the user-cost framework to an increase of 100 basis points in the after-tax mortgage interest rate. Consequently, if house prices fall more than expected, and that condition leads to more adverse expectations for future changes in house prices, then housing demand could fall as a result. A second risk to the economy is that larger-than-expected declines in house prices would be expected to lead to a larger-than-expected drag on consumer spending through the usual wealth-effect channel, as a lower path of household net worth restrains consumption. Moreover, during periods of financial distress, the effects of falling house prices on consumer spending could be greater than that suggested by conventional estimates of the wealth effect. Because prospective borrowers typically have more information about their ability to repay the loan than do lenders, homeownership can play a role in reducing the problems of asymmetric information in consumer credit markets by providing collateral that reduces those information problems. Good collateral increases the borrower's incentive to repay the loan and significantly reduces potential losses to the lender upon borrower default. Consequently, a decline in house prices will reduce the value of the collateral backing mortgage loans, thereby increasing the problems of asymmetric information and potentially decreasing the access of households to credit. The same idea is expressed another way in a paper by Ben Bernanke and Mark Gertler (1995), who suggested that a decline in house prices can increase the wedge between the default-free interest rate and the effective interest rate facing the homeowner. That is, in the eyes of the lenders, declining house prices diminish the quality of the borrowers' collateral, which effectively reduces the availability of credit to households that can be used to finance consumer purchases. This effect is another reason to be concerned about the possible consequences of greater-than-expected house price declines. And, to my view, the credit-constraint channel provides a more credible link between house prices and consumer spending than does mortgage-equity withdrawal, a story about which I have previously expressed serious doubts (Mishkin, 2007b). Another significant risk to the outlook is that lending standards could tighten more than expected not only for mortgages but for other types of credit as well. As I have noted, the January 2008 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey highlighted the fact that many banks are tightening lending standards and terms in a number of credit markets. At the same time, capital at some banks has come under pressure, as institutions have been forced to bring some loans and other securities back onto their own balance sheets. Because this process is still unfolding, it poses a risk that credit standards for households and businesses could tighten more than expected and significantly crimp spending. Finally, I would note the possibility of a feedback loop between financial market disruptions and deterioration in the real economy that I have emphasized in previous speeches (Mishkin, 2008a, 2008b). Because economic downturns typically result in even greater uncertainty about asset values, such episodes may trigger an adverse feedback loop whereby financial disruptions cause investment and consumer spending to decline, which, in turn, causes economic activity to contract. Such a contraction then increases uncertainty about the value of assets, and, as a result, the financial disruption worsens. This development then causes economic activity to contract further in a perverse cycle. Inflation and Inflation DynamicsLet me turn now to inflation and inflation dynamics. Over the twelve months ended in January, the price index for total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose 3.7 percent, up from 2.1 percent during the comparable period twelve months earlier. Recently, headline inflation has been pushed higher by sizable increases in food and energy prices; crude oil prices have surged, and food prices have risen significantly, reflecting strong global demand in general as well as hefty demand in particular for corn for use in ethanol production. Even excluding food and energy, recent readings on inflation also have been elevated, although over the past year core PCE prices decelerated a touch from 2.4 percent to 2.2 percent. The recent observations on core inflation suggest that higher energy costs and the lower exchange value of the dollar may have been sources of upward pressure on core inflation. However, the recent bump up in inflation also likely reflected a reversal of unusually low readings earlier last year for apparel, prescription drugs, and so-called nonmarket items in the index, and the contribution of these items to core inflation is likely to wane. In my view, long-run inflation dynamics are influenced importantly both by prospects for the future balance of aggregate supply and demand, as well as by longer-run inflation expectations (Mishkin, 2007a). By a range of measures, longer-run inflation expectations appear to have remained reasonably well contained even as recent readings on headline inflation have been elevated. The median expectation of inflation five to ten years ahead in the Reuters/University of Michigan survey stands in the middle of the range that has been evident over the past couple of years, although the expectation for year-ahead inflation from this same survey has moved up recently, presumably in response to the higher rates of actual inflation. In addition, although the measure of long-run expectations for consumer price index (CPI) inflation from the Survey of Professional Forecasters ticked up in February, this measure remained at essentially the same value that has prevailed since 1998. As for inflation compensation derived from spreads between yields on nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury securities (known as Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, or TIPS), the implied rate of inflation compensation from five years ahead to ten years ahead (the so-called five-to-ten-year-forward rate) has risen somewhat since the beginning of the year. Does this rise in forward inflation compensation indicate that long-run inflation expectations have risen by a similar amount? My best guess is that much of the rise in inflation compensation reflects other factors. To begin, recall that inflation compensation measured by using TIPS yields is not the same thing as inflation expectations. Rather, movements in inflation compensation reflect not only changes in inflation expectations, but also changes in an inflation risk premium and in the relative liquidity of TIPS and similar maturity nominal Treasuries.3To see that these components are distinct, recall that during the period of heightened concerns aboutdeflationin 2003 and 2004, forward inflation compensation rose substantially to an unusuallyhighlevel amid concerns about an unwelcomefallin inflation; that earlier episode, in particular, underscores the fact that we must be careful in using the forward rates of inflation compensation as a gauge of long-run inflation expectations. To see this distinction another way, consider a scenario in which inflation uncertainty increased but inflation expectations did not. In that case, the midpoint of inflation expectations would remain the same, but the range around the midpoint would increase. Turning specifically to the recent experience, consider the sequence of one-year-forward rates of inflation compensation--that is, decompose ten-year inflation compensation into a sequence of one-year-forward rates. The one-year-forward rate ending about five years from now has moved up, but the forward rate ending in ten years has climbed more than twice as much. This pattern suggests an important role for factors other than rising long-run inflation expectations in explaining recent movements in inflation compensation as one might suppose that any tendency toward higher inflation would be expected to show through within five years. And survey measures of long-run inflation expectations--including that from the Survey of Professional Forecasters--have moved relatively little. But respondents to the latest Survey of Professional Forecasters indicated that they were more uncertain about the future trajectory of inflation. Altogether, the evidence points toward the inflation risk premium as the likely cause of much of the rise in five-to-ten-year-ahead inflation compensation. Although a distinctly different concept from inflation expectations, policymakers need to be concerned about any widening of inflation uncertainty. Indeed, an increase in inflation uncertainty would likely complicate decision making by consumers and businesses concerning plans for spending, savings, and investment. What does this mean for the inflation outlook? I expect inflation pressures to wane over the next few years, as product and labor markets soften and the rise in food and energy prices abates. In addition, I continue to believe that long-run inflation expectations remain consistent with increases in PCE prices in the neighborhood of 2 percent per year.4Accordingly, I anticipate that over time core PCE inflation will move back to around 2 percent. The risks around this outlook appear to me to be balanced, although the uncertainty surrounding the outlook may have widened recently, consistent with the apparent rise in the inflation risk premium. The risks associated with higher oil and commodity prices are a concern as is the possibility that past cost shocks may have a more pronounced effect on core inflation than has been apparent to date. Working in the opposite direction, with the risks to the real economy and resource utilization skewed to the downside, there are accompanying risks that inflation may be subject to some additional downward pressure. Regardless of how these risks play out, a commitment to a strong nominal anchor will be crucial to the success of monetary policy. Any tendency for longer-run inflation expectations to become unanchored would pose a significant problem for monetary policy makers, and the FOMC will be closely monitoring inflation and inflation expectations in coming months. To summarize, with the economic outlook having deteriorated significantly and financial markets under considerable stress, the FOMC will face significant challenges. As noted in the statement following the January meeting, the FOMC "will continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act in a timely manner as needed" to address risks facing the economy (FOMC, 2008). The FOMC's critical challenge will be to calibrate monetary policy in a way that best achieves its dual objectives of maximum employment and price stability. Thank you for your time and attention. It has been a pleasure to be with you today. ReferencesBernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler (1995). "Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy Transmission,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 9 (Autumn), pp. 27-48. Case, Karl E., and Robert J. Shiller (2003). "Is There a Bubble in the Housing Market?"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2003 (no. 2), pp. 299-362. Federal Open Market Committee (2008). "FOMC Statement and Board Approval of Discount Rate Requests of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, and San Francisco," press release, January 30. Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright (2008). "The TIPS Yield Curve and Inflation Compensation," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2008-05.Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007a). "Inflation Dynamics," speech delivered at the Annual Macro Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 23. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007b). "Housing and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-40. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2008a). "Monetary Policy Flexibility, Risk Management, and Financial Disruptions," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, January 11. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2008b). "The Federal Reserve's Tools for Responding to Financial Disruptions," speech delivered at the Tuck Global Capital Markets Conference, Tuck School of Business, Dartmouth College, Hanover, N.H., February 15. Footnotes 1.I wish to thankCharles FleischmanandDan Sichelfor their helpful comments and assistance on this speech.Return to text 2.This material draws heavily from the paper I delivered at last summer’s Jackson Hole conference (see Mishkin, 2007b).Return to text 3.For additional background, see Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2008). They discuss the decomposition of inflation compensation into these distinct components and argue that far-forward rates of inflation compensation are too volatile to be pure measures of long-run inflation expectations.Return to text 4.As I described in an earlier speech (Mishkin, 2007a), this figure is sensitive to a variety of assumptions, so one should not overstate its precision. Note that expectations for CPI inflation must be adjusted to convert them from a CPI basis to a PCE basis.Return to text
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the National Association of Hispanic Real Estate Professionals Legislative Conference 2008, Washington, D.C. The mortgage market has long been a source of strength in the U.S. economy, but it is facing significant challenges, especially in the subprime segment that serves consumers who have shorter or weaker credit records. As of January 2008, the most recent month for which data are available, about 24 percent of subprime adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) were ninety or more days delinquent, twice the level one year earlier.1Roughly 190,000 foreclosures were started on these mortgages in the fourth quarter, up 11 percent from the previous quarter.2The significance of the problems with subprime loan performance is evident in the unusually high rate of defaults within a few months of loan origination, known as early payment defaults. In January 2008, nearly 9 percent of subprime ARMs originated in the previous six months were already ninety or more days delinquent, twice the rate of the year before and nearly four times the rate two years earlier.3 These problems have many causes, but the role of abusive lending practices is of particular concern. Such practices have led many people into homeownership that they cannot sustain, and have had adverse effects on their neighbors and communities as defaults and foreclosures can lead to declines in the values of surrounding properties. Practices that have hurt consumers have also undermined the confidence of investors and contributed to a virtual shutdown of the subprime market with consequences for other segments of the mortgage market. As a result, it is difficult for many borrowers, especially in the subprime space, to obtain home loans. The implications of diminished access to mortgage credit are of particular concern to the audience today, given that the subprime market was the source of home purchase loans extended to many in the Hispanic community. These events have highlighted the shared interest of mortgage borrowers, their communities, lenders, and investors in protecting borrowers from abusive practices and preserving their choices. Abusive loans that strip their equity or cause them to lose their homes must not be tolerated. Protecting borrowers with responsible underwriting standards also protects the integrity and proper functioning of the mortgage market by increasing investor confidence. Effective consumer protection produces a complementary benefit for consumers by making more capital available to meet their needs. Similarly, systematic efforts to keep borrowers who may have trouble meeting their loan obligations in their homes on a sustainable basis, by providing more certainty to the market, can have the complementary benefit of ensuring the flow of capital for potential borrowers. With these principles in mind, I will discuss current initiatives to mitigate foreclosures. Then I will spend most of my time discussing the Board's recent initiative in proposing new regulations that apply to all mortgage lenders, not just federally supervised banks, that are designed to prevent abuse, unfairness, and deception in residential mortgage lending. The expansive scope of this proposal is essential to ensure that consumer protections convey across the mortgage market, regardless of whether a borrower receives a loan from a bank, an independent mortgage company, or through a mortgage broker. Preventing Unnecessary ForeclosuresGiven the high cost of foreclosures to lenders and investors and the disruption and distress that foreclosure can cause to consumers, their families, and their communities, it is in everyone's interest to avoid foreclosures whenever other viable options exist. With large numbers of borrowers facing potential repayment problems, it is in the interest of borrowers and investors alike for the industry to develop prudent loan modification programs and other assistance to help borrowers on a systematic and sustainable basis.As you know, there are various initiatives underway to help borrowers struggling with their mortgages. NeighborWorks America and the Homeownership Preservation Foundation offer financial counseling services through the Homeowners HOPE hotline. The Hope Now Alliance, a broad-based coalition of government sponsored enterprises, industry trade associations, counseling agencies, and mortgage servicers, is making efforts to find ways to help borrowers through loan modification plans. The Federal Housing Administration has established the FHASecure plan to provide qualified borrowers who are delinquent because of an interest rate reset and who have some equity in the home the opportunity to refinance into an FHA-insured mortgage. I have been an active proponent of such streamlined systematic approaches to reduce transactions costs and to help mitigate foreclosure risk, and I strongly encourage market participants to adopt and to implement these fast-track modification proposals as quickly as possible. I applaud these efforts but also recognize that much more must be done. Challenges remain, for example, with respect to ongoing constraints on servicing capacity to expedite work outs. Servicers must undertake the investment to overcome the capacity challenges and provide transparent and timely measures of the results. The Federal Reserve has been working with financial institutions and community groups around the country to address the challenges posed by problem loans. For instance, we have been providing community coalitions, counseling agencies, fellow regulators, and others with detailed analyses identifying neighborhoods at high risk of foreclosures. By understanding those areas with concentrations of subprime mortgages, delinquencies, and foreclosures, community leaders can better target their scarce resources to borrowers in need of counseling and other interventions that may help forestall foreclosure. Communities are also working to find ways to address the challenges that foreclosed homes can present, such as decreased home values and vacant properties that can deteriorate from neglect. Toward this end, the Federal Reserve has recently engaged in a partnership with NeighborWorks America to help identify strategies to help stabilize neighborhoods. It is essential that organizations with access to at-risk homeowners, particularly those who may have additional challenges, such as language barriers, engage in foreclosure prevention initiatives to help keep families in their homes and stabilize communities. The Federal Reserve has worked to support consumers by providing them with the information they need to understand and shop for banking products, as well as to file a complaint against a bank. Many of these consumer education brochures are available in Spanish. Importantly, we have just launched a Spanish-language version of the Federal Reserve Consumer Help Center to help better meet the needs of Spanish-speaking consumers. We have seen a dramatic increase in the number of consumers contacting us since we launched this centralized call center and website in November 2007, and now we have the capability to reach even greater numbers by providing information and assistance to Spanish-speaking consumers at 888-851-1920.4 The Board's ProposalI will now focus on the Board's recent proposal for stricter regulations prohibiting abusive and deceptive practices in the mortgage market under authority of the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA). This proposal is intended to protect consumers and to preserve consumer choice by targeting protections to borrowers who face the most risk. We have also sought to ensure that these standards are clear for lenders to reduce unintended consequences for consumers. Though clear, the standards are intended to be not overly prescriptive, so as to preserve access to responsible credit while amply protecting consumers. Our proposal is also comprehensive, covering most mortgage loans with certain protections and the entire subprime market with certain more specific regulations. While comprehensive, the proposal would focus protections where the risks are greatest and preserve consumers' access to responsible credit. Our effort to produce robust, clear, and comprehensive rules was based on a rigorous analysis of available qualitative and quantitative data. We have put this proposal out for public comment until April 8 and eagerly seek suggestions to be able to craft the best possible final rule. Comprehensive ScopeLet me say more about the comprehensive scope of this proposal. It would apply stricter regulations to higher-priced mortgage loans, which we have defined broadly, and it covers all types of mortgage lenders, unlike guidance that only applies to federally insured banks. We were particularly interested in ensuring that protections remain strong over time as loan products and lending practices change. Our analysis of the data suggested that the troubles in the mortgage market generally arise not from a single practice in isolation, but instead from the complex ways that risk factors and underwriting practices can affect each other, sometimes called "risk layering." Therefore, we have proposed using a loan's annual percentage rate, or APR, to determine whether the loan is covered by stricter regulations.5Because the APR is closely correlated to risk, the proposed protections would cover loans with higher risks rather than single out particular risk factors or underwriting practices. With the APR thresholds we have proposed, we expect that the new protections would cover the entire subprime mortgage market and the riskier end of the "near prime" market, the latter also known as the "alt-A" market. Covering part of the alt-A market would anticipate possible actions by lenders to avoid restrictions on subprime loans priced near the threshold. It would also address real risks to consumers in the alt-A segment. This segment grew very rapidly, and it layered risks, such as undocumented income, on top of other risks, such as nontraditional loan structures allowing borrowers to defer paying principal and interest. However, we have heard from commenters who have expressed concern that in the current market environment, the proposed trigger could cover the market too broadly, and we will carefully consider the issues they raise and other possible approaches to achieve our objective. Our public hearings and our analysis identified problems not just in higher-priced loans, but also in the broader mortgage market. Thus, our proposal addresses unfair or deceptive practices for the vast majority of mortgage loans secured by a consumer's primary home. Areas targeted this broadly include broker steering, appraisal coercion, unwarranted servicing fees, and deceptive advertising. I'll touch on broker steering toward the end of my remarks. Robust Approach to AffordabilityExtending credit that borrowers can afford to repay is a fundamental pillar of responsible lending. Across the whole range of higher-priced mortgage loans, our proposal offers three rules that, working in combination, would help ensure that borrowers can afford their payments. First, is a requirement that a lender maintain responsible underwriting practices that genuinely assess borrowers' ability to repay. This general requirement would be complemented by a specific requirement to verify the income and assets of the borrower that are relied upon in making the loan. A third rule would require lenders to escrow property taxes and homeowners insurance to help borrowers meet these obligations. This robust approach to affordability would help ensure that the subprime market promotes sustainable homeownership. Just as important, it would also help protect consumers from abusive refinancings that strip equity. Clear lending standards have the further advantages of increasing investor confidence in the mortgage market and helping to revive the flow of credit to consumers with shorter or weaker credit records. Assessment of Repayment AbilityNow I want to discuss the major elements of our proposed regulations for higher-priced loans in a little more depth, starting with the requirement to assess repayment ability. The regulations would prohibit a lender from engaging in a pattern or practice of making higher-priced loans based on the value of the borrower's house rather than on the borrower's ability to repay from income, or from assets other than the house. This prohibition is intentionally broad to capture all risks to loan performance and the different ways that these risks can be layered. Moreover, the proposal avoids prescribing quantitative underwriting requirements. For example, the proposal would prohibit a pattern or practice of disregarding the ratio of applicants' income to their debt, but it does not prescribe a maximum ratio because the appropriate number depends heavily on other risk factors, which vary from loan to loan. At the same time, the proposal does offer specifics. For example, it would create a presumption that a lender had violated the regulations if it engaged in a pattern or practice of failing to underwrite at the fully-indexed rate.6 Our proposed regulations would be more robust and comprehensive than the subprime guidance the agencies issued last year. The regulations would apply to all mortgage lenders, including independent mortgage companies. Moreover, the regulations would be legally enforceable by supervisory and enforcement agencies. Just as important, the regulations, unlike the guidance, would be legally enforceable by consumers who could recover statutory and actual damages for violations. The proposed requirement to assess repayment ability is intended to protect consumers from abusive practices while maintaining their access to responsible credit. We recognize that satisfying both objectives at the same time is a challenge. The proposed rule's potential for consumer actions, coupled with its careful avoidance of prescribing quantitative underwriting thresholds, could raise compliance and litigation risk. In turn, this could raise the cost of credit for higher-risk borrowers or limit the availability of responsible credit. That is why we have proposed prohibiting a "pattern or practice" of disregarding repayment ability rather than attaching a risk of legal liability to every individual loan that does not perform. Some commentators have argued that the pattern or practice requirement creates a higher standard of proof that can make it more difficult and costly for consumers to pursue litigation. We have specifically sought comment on this provision and look forward to perspectives offered by the industry and consumer groups. Income VerificationWhen we looked closely at why so many borrowers had mortgages that they struggled to repay so soon after taking out the loan, the prevalence of "stated-income" lending was a clear culprit. Substantial anecdotal evidence indicates that failing to verify income invited fraud. Moreover, when we looked at the loan-level data we saw a clear correlation between "low-doc" or "no-doc" lending and performance problems, particularly early payment defaults. That is why we have proposed to complement a broad requirement to assess repayment ability with a specific requirement to verify the income or assets a lender relies on to make a credit decision. We recognize that stated-income lending may have a proper place when not layered on top of too many other risks. Therefore, we would target the verification requirement to higher-priced loans, including the higher-priced end of the alt-A market, where the risks of stated-income lending could be layered on top of too many other risks. The proposal identifies standard documents that would be acceptable, such as W-2 forms. It also allows, however, any third party documents that provide reasonably reliable evidence of income. Some consumers may have access to only nonstandard documents and others, such as self-employed entrepreneurs, may have some difficulty documenting their income. This rule is meant to preserve consumer choice by allowing the market to identify credible nontraditional documentation of consumer income--for example, check-cashing receipts. To help ensure that the proposal preserves access to credit for the full range of consumers, we have sought public comment on this issue. Escrows for Taxes and InsuranceAnother part of our proposal for higher-priced loans--a requirement to escrow taxes and insurance--would also help ensure that borrowers can afford their payments. Escrowing has become standard practice in the prime market, and the case for making it standard in the subprime market, too, appears compelling. Consumers with shorter or weaker credit histories may be less likely to appreciate the sizable burden that taxes and insurance can add to the cost of homeownership, or more vulnerable to being misled by payment quotes that leave out these amounts. Moreover, when we looked at the data, we saw in the unusually high level of early payment defaults possible evidence that the lack of escrows hurt consumers who did not have experience paying property tax and insurance bills. We have proposed to address the problem with a requirement to escrow taxes and insurance on higher-priced loans, accompanied by a limited allowance for opt-out. We wanted the regulations to prevent irresponsible efforts to encourage borrowers to opt out. So the rule would not permit opt-out at the closing table, but instead would require that twelve months pass before a consumer may opt out. The twelve-month waiting period would also apply if a consumer refinanced into another high-cost loan, reducing the likelihood that consumers would refinance solely to decrease monthly payments by eliminating escrowing of taxes and insurance. In this respect the proposal is intended to preserve consumer choice while protecting consumers from unaffordable mortgage obligations. Prepayment PenaltiesHaving discussed the rules that would promote affordability, I want to say a word about our proposed rule on prepayment penalties. These penalties can take a toll on consumers who have riskier loans, and many consumers may not even be aware their loans have a penalty. Accordingly, we have proposed a ban on prepayment penalties in circumstances of a high degree of risk to the consumer, and we are also addressing transparency concerns. The proposed rule would ban prepayment penalties where they are most likely to prevent a consumer from refinancing a loan that has a particularly burdensome payment. Specifically, a penalty would be prohibited where the borrower's debt-to-income ratio exceeds 50 percent, and a penalty would have to expire before a loan's payment could increase. The rule would also ban prepayment penalties where they are more likely to be part of a "loan flipping" scheme--specifically, where a lender or its affiliate refinances the lender's own loan. Banning penalties altogether could cause all borrowers, including those who do not prepay, to bear the full cost of investors' prepayment risk, which could raise questions of fairness, and it could reduce consumer choice. We recognize there are differing views on this and look forward to gaining those perspectives through the comment process. SteeringI have so far discussed the elements of our proposal that would seek to ensure that underwriting practices and loan terms on higher-priced loans do not present unwarranted risks to consumers. There is another potential source of risk to consumers that I want to address that is related to "steering"--the risk that when they use the services of a mortgage broker, they do not appreciate the extent to which the broker's interests may diverge from the consumer's interests because of "yield spread premiums."7 The growth of the market for brokerage services has no doubt increased competition in the market for mortgage loans, to the benefit of consumers. Moreover, the yield spread premium, a payment from a lender to a broker based on the loan's interest rate, is sometimes the best way for a consumer to fund the cost of a broker's services. However, when a lender pays a broker for a loan that has a higher rate, that payment can create a conflict of interest between the broker and the consumer. This conflict is problematic if the consumer does not know it exists or assumes, incorrectly, that the broker is obligated to put the consumer's interests first. In such cases, the consumer cannot protect his or her own interests, and competition for loans and for brokerage services does not work effectively. Therefore, we have proposed to prohibit a lender, for both prime and subprime loans, from paying a broker any more than the consumer had expressly agreed that the broker would receive. This agreement must be executed up-front, before the consumer has submitted an application and become invested in closing the deal. The combination of stricter regulation and better disclosure that we are proposing should help reduce a broker's incentive to steer a consumer to a higher rate, empower consumers to shop and negotiate among brokers, and preserve consumers' option to use the services of a broker. Better and Earlier Information for ConsumersLastly, to protect consumers and promote competition, our proposed regulation would prohibit misleading mortgage advertising and require that consumers receive loan-specific disclosures early in the application process, when they can use the information to shop more effectively. We recognize, however, that we face a challenge in ensuring that disclosures for mortgage loans remain effective. We have begun a comprehensive program of rigorous consumer testing of potential improvements to current disclosures. ConclusionThere are more elements of our comprehensive proposal that I do not have time today to discuss, such as a prohibition against coercing appraisers and restrictions on unwarranted servicing fees. We anticipate vigorous public comment on this proposal, and once we have carefully considered all the input we receive, we will move expeditiously to a final rule. As I noted at the outset, effective consumer protection can help to restore confidence in the mortgage markets and help to preserve the flow of capital to consumers who wish to purchase a home. It is not too early to emphasize that the effectiveness of the final rule will depend critically on effective enforcement. The Federal Reserve will do its part to ensure compliance among the institutions it supervises. We also have been instrumental in launching a pilot project with other federal and state agencies to conduct consumer compliance reviews of non-depository lenders and other industry participants. I am sure we will be aided in these efforts by a new system for registering and tracking mortgage brokers recently launched by the Conference of State Bank Supervisors. While we work to build effective consumer protections and enforcement regimes for future consumers, we will also continue our efforts, and encourage the initiatives many others are undertaking, to limit unnecessary foreclosures for consumers who are hurting now. Footnotes 1.Board staff calculation based on data from First American LoanPerformance.Return to text 2.Board staff calculation based on data from the Mortgage Bankers Association.Return to text 3.Board staff calculation based on data from First American LoanPerformance.Return to text 4.Federal Reserve Consumer Help can be accessed online atwww.federalreserveconsumerhelp.gov/index_sp.cfm.Return to text 5.Under the proposal, a "higher-priced mortgage loan" would have an APR that exceeds the yield on comparable Treasury securities by three or more percentage points for first-lien loans, or five or more percentage points for subordinate-lien loans.Return to text 6.On an adjustable-rate mortgage, the fully-indexed rate is the sum of the value of the applicable index as of loan origination and the margin specified in the loan agreement. For example, a typical 2/28 mortgage issued in 2006 might have a fully-indexed rate of 11.37. This assumes that the mortgage was linked to the six-month LIBOR, that LIBOR was at its 2006 average value of 5.37 percent, and that the mortgage had a margin of six percentage points.Return to text 7.A "yield spread premium" is the present dollar value of the difference between the lowest interest rate the wholesale lender would have accepted on a particular transaction and the interest rate the broker actually obtained for the lender. This dollar amount is usually paid to the mortgage broker. It may also be applied to other loan-related costs, but the Board’s proposal concerns only the amount paid to the broker.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board announced Thursday that it will publish the annual revision to the G.17 statistical release, Industrial Production and Capacity Utilization, on Friday, March 28, at 2 p.m. EDT.The revision will be made available on the Board’s web site atwww.federalreserve.gov/releases/G17
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Independent Community Bankers of America Annual Convention, Orlando, Florida Over the past year and a half, mortgage delinquencies have increased sharply, especially among riskier loans. This development has triggered a substantial and broad-based reassessment of risk in financial markets, and it has exacerbated the contraction in the housing sector. In my remarks today, I will discuss the causes of the distress in the mortgage sector and then turn to the key question of what can be done in this environment to reduce preventable foreclosures. Although I am aware, as you are, that community banks originated few subprime mortgages, community bankers are keenly interested in these issues; foreclosures not only create personal and financial distress for individual homeowners but also can significantly hurt neighborhoods where foreclosures cluster. Efforts by both government and private-sector entities to reduce unnecessary foreclosures are helping, but more can, and should, be done. Community bankers are well positioned to contribute to these efforts, given the strong relationships you have built with your customers and your communities. The Rise in Mortgage Delinquencies and ForeclosuresMortgage delinquencies began to rise in mid-2005 after several years at remarkably low levels. The worst payment problems have been among subprime adjustable-rate mortgages (subprime ARMs); more than one-fifth of the 3.6 million loans outstanding were seriously delinquent at the end of 2007.1Delinquency rates have also risen for other types of mortgages, reaching 8 percent for subprime fixed-rate loans and 6 percent on adjustable-rate loans securitized in alt-A pools. Lenders were on pace to have initiated roughly 1-1/2 million foreclosure proceedings last year, up from an average of fewer than 1 million foreclosure starts in the preceding two years.2More than one-half of the foreclosure starts in 2007 were on subprime mortgages. The recent surge in delinquencies in subprime ARMs is closely linked to the fact that many of these borrowers have little or no equity in their homes. For example, data collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act suggest that nearly 40 percent of higher-priced home-purchase loans in 2006 involved a second mortgage (or "piggyback") loan. Other data show that more than 40 percent of the subprime loans in the 2006 vintage had combined loan-to-value ratios in excess of 90 percent, a considerably higher share than earlier in the decade.3Often, in recent mortgage vintages, small down payments were combined with other risk factors, such as a lack of documentation of sufficient income to make the required loan payments. This weak underwriting might not have produced widespread payment problems had house prices continued to rise at the rapid pace seen earlier in the decade. Rising prices provided leveraged borrowers with significant increases in home equity and, consequently, with greater financial flexibility. Instead, as you know, house prices are now falling in many parts of the country. The resulting decline in equity reduces both the ability and the financial incentive of stressed borrowers to remain in their homes. Indeed, historically, borrowers with little or no equity have been substantially more likely than others to fall behind in their payments. The large number of outstanding mortgages with negative amortization features may exacerbate this problem. Delinquencies and foreclosures likely will continue to rise for a while longer, for several reasons. First, supply-demand imbalances in many housing markets suggest that some further declines in house prices are likely, implying additional reductions in borrowers' equity. Second, many subprime borrowers are facing imminent resets of the interest rates on their mortgages. In 2008, about 1‑1/2 million loans, representing more than 40 percent of the outstanding stock of subprime ARMs, are scheduled to reset. We estimate that the interest rate on a typical subprime ARM scheduled to reset in the current quarter will increase from just above 8 percent to about 9-1/4 percent, raising the monthly payment by more than 10 percent, to $1,500 on average. Declines in short-term interest rates and initiatives involving rate freezes will reduce the impact somewhat, but interest rate resets will nevertheless impose stress on many households. In the past, subprime borrowers were often able to avoid resets by refinancing, but currently that avenue is largely closed. Borrowers are hampered not only by their lack of equity but also by the tighter credit conditions in mortgage markets. New securitizations of nonprime mortgages have virtually halted, and commercial banks have tightened their standards, especially for riskier mortgages. Indeed, the available evidence suggests that private lenders are originating few nonprime loans at any terms. This situation calls for a vigorous response. Measures to reduce preventable foreclosures could help not only stressed borrowers but also their communities and, indeed, the broader economy. At the level of the individual community, increases in foreclosed-upon and vacant properties tend to reduce house prices in the local area, affecting other homeowners and municipal tax bases. At the national level, the rise in expected foreclosures could add significantly to the inventory of vacant unsold homes--already at more than 2 million units at the end of 2007--putting further pressure on house prices and housing construction.4 Helping Distressed BorrowersPolicymakers and stakeholders have been working to find effective responses to the increases in delinquencies and foreclosures. Steps that have been taken include initiating programs designed to expand refinancing opportunities and efforts to facilitate and increase the pace of loan workouts. Troubled borrowers will always require individual attention, and the most immediate impacts of foreclosures are on local communities. Thus, the support of counselors, lenders, and organizations with local ties is critical. Of course, care must be taken in designing solutions. Measures that lead to a sustainable outcome are to be preferred to temporary palliatives, which may only put off foreclosure and perhaps increase its ultimate costs. Solutions should also be prudent and consistent with the safety and soundness of the lender. Concerns about fairness and the need to minimize moral hazard add to the complexity of the issue; we want to help borrowers in trouble, but we do not want borrowers who have avoided problems through responsible financial management to feel that they are being unfairly penalized. Let me turn now to some recent efforts to help distressed borrowers refinance. The FHASecure plan, which the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) announced late last summer, offers qualified borrowers who are delinquent because of an interest rate reset the opportunity to refinance into an FHA-insured mortgage. Recently, the Congress and Administration temporarily increased the maximum loan value eligible for FHA insurance, which should allow more borrowers, particularly those in communities with higher-priced homes, to qualify for this program and to be eligible for refinancing into FHA-insured loans more generally. These efforts represent a step in the right direction. Not all borrowers are eligible for this program, of course; in particular, some equity is needed to qualify. In addition, second-lien holders must settle or be willing to re-subordinate their claims for an FHA loan, which has sometimes proved difficult to negotiate. Separately, some states have created funds to offer refinancing options, but eligibility criteria tend to be tight and the take-up rates appear to be low thus far. In cases where refinancing is not possible, the next-best solution may often be some type of loss-mitigation arrangement between the lender and the distressed borrower. Indeed, the Federal Reserve and other regulators have issued guidance urging lenders and servicers to pursue such arrangements as an alternative to foreclosure when feasible and prudent.5For the lender or servicer, working out a loan makes economic sense if the net present value (NPV) of the payments under a loss-mitigation strategy exceeds the NPV of payments that would be received in foreclosure.6Loss mitigation is made more attractive by the fact that foreclosure costs are often substantial. Historically, the foreclosure process has usually taken from a few months up to a year and a half, depending on state law and whether the borrower files for bankruptcy. The losses to the lender include the missed mortgage payments during that period, taxes, legal and administrative fees, real estate owned (REO) sales commissions, and maintenance expenses. Additional losses arise from the reduction in value associated with repossessed properties, particularly if they are unoccupied for some period. A recent estimate based on subprime mortgages foreclosed in the fourth quarter of 2007 indicated that total losses exceeded 50 percent of the principal balance, with legal, sales, and maintenance expenses alone amounting to more than 10 percent of principal. With the time period between the last mortgage payment and REO liquidation lengthening in recent months, this loss rate will likely grow even larger. Moreover, as the time to liquidation increases, the uncertainty about the losses increases as well. The low prices offered for subprime-related securities in secondary markets support the impression that the potential for recovery through foreclosure is limited. The magnitude of, and uncertainty about, expected losses in a foreclosure suggest considerable scope for negotiating a mutually beneficial outcome if the borrower wants to stay in the home. Unfortunately, even though workouts may often be the best economic alternative, mortgage securitization and the constraints faced by servicers may make such workouts less likely. For example, trusts vary in the type and scope of modifications that are explicitly permitted, and these differences raise operational compliance costs and litigation risks. Thus, servicers may not pursue workout options that are in the collective interests of investors and borrowers. Some progress has been made (for example, through clarification of accounting rules) in reducing the disincentive for servicers to undertake economically sensible workouts. However, the barriers to, and disincentives for, workouts by servicers remain serious problems that need to be part of current discussions about how to reduce preventable foreclosures. We now have more information about the recent pace of loss-mitigation activity than we did just a few months ago, thanks to surveys of servicers by the Mortgage Bankers Association, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, the Hope Now Alliance, and others. These surveys generally indicate that servicers substantially increased the number of loan workouts in the latter part of last year. The Hope Now Alliance estimates that workouts of subprime mortgages rose from around 250,000 in the third quarter of 2007 to 300,000 in the fourth quarter, while workouts of prime mortgages rose from 150,000 to 175,000 over the same period. The pace of workouts picked up a bit more in January. Despite this progress, delinquency and default rates have risen quickly, and servicers report that they are struggling to keep up with the increased volumes. Of course, not all delinquent subprime loans can be successfully worked out; for example, borrowers who purchased homes as speculative investments may not be interested in retaining the home, and some borrowers may not be able to sustain even a reduced stream of payments. Nevertheless, scope remains to prevent unnecessary foreclosures. Lenders and servicers historically have relied on repayment plans as their preferred loss-mitigation technique. Under these plans, borrowers typically repay the mortgage arrears over a few months in addition to making their regularly scheduled mortgage payments. These plans are most appropriate if the borrower has suffered a potentially reversible setback, such as a job loss or illness. However, anecdotal evidence suggests that even in the best-case scenarios, borrowers given repayment plans re-default at a high rate, especially when the arrears are large. Loan modifications, which involve any permanent change to the terms of the mortgage contract, may be preferred when the borrower cannot cope with the higher payments associated with a repayment plan. In such cases, the monthly payment is reduced through a lower interest rate, an extension of the maturity of the loan, or a write-down of the principal balance. The proposal by the Hope Now Alliance to freeze interest rates at the introductory rate for five years is an example of a modification, in this case applied to a class of eligible borrowers. To date, permanent modifications that have occurred have typically involved a reduction in the interest rate, while reductions of principal balance have been quite rare. The preference by servicers for interest rate reductions could reflect familiarity with that technique, based on past episodes when most borrowers' problems could be solved that way. But the current housing difficulties differ from those in the past, largely because of the pervasiveness of negative equity positions. With low or negative equity, as I have mentioned, a stressed borrower has less ability (because there is no home equity to tap) and less financial incentive to try to remain in the home. In this environment, principal reductions that restore some equity for the homeowner may be a relatively more effective means of avoiding delinquency and foreclosure. Lenders tell us that they are reluctant to write down principal. They say that if they were to write down the principal and house prices were to fall further, they could feel pressured to write down principal again. Moreover, were house prices instead to rise subsequently, the lender would not share in the gains. In an environment of falling house prices, however, whether a reduction in the interest rate is preferable to a principal writedown is not immediately clear. Both types of modification involve a concession of payments, are susceptible to additional pressures to write down again, and result in the same payments to the lender if the mortgage pays to maturity. The fact that most mortgages terminate before maturity either by prepayment or default may favor an interest rate reduction. However, as I have noted, when the mortgage is "under water," a reduction in principal may increase the expected payoff by reducing the risk of default and foreclosure. In my view, we could also reduce preventable foreclosures if investors acting in their own self interests were to permit servicers to write down the mortgage liabilities of borrowers by accepting a short payoff in appropriate circumstances. For example, servicers could accept a principal writedown by an amount at least sufficient to allow the borrower to refinance into a new loan from another source. A writedown that is sufficient to make borrowers eligible for a new loan would remove the downside risk to investors of additional writedowns or a re-default. This arrangement might include a feature that allows the original investors to share in any future appreciation, as recently suggested, for example, by the Office of Thrift Supervision. Servicers could also benefit from greater use of short payoffs, as this approach would simplify the calculation of expected losses and eliminate the future costs and risks of retaining the troubled mortgage in the pool. A potentially important step to facilitate greater use of short payoffs is the modernization of the FHA, which I have supported. Going beyond the current proposals for modernization, permitting the FHA greater latitude to set underwriting standards and risk-based premiums for mortgage refinancing--in a way that does not increase the expected cost to the taxpayer--would allow the FHA to help more troubled borrowers. A concern about such an approach is that servicers might refinance only their riskiest borrowers into the FHA program. A combination of careful underwriting, the use of risk premiums, and other measures (for example, a provision that would allow the FHA to return a mortgage that quickly re-defaults to the servicer) could help mitigate that risk. There are, no doubt, tax-related, accounting, and legal obstacles to expanding the use of principal writedowns. For example, investors in different tranches of mortgage-backed securities may not benefit equally, securitized trusts may not be permitted to acquire new equity warrants, and principal writedowns may require a different accounting treatment than interest rate reductions. But just as market participants, with the help of regulators, obtained greater clarity on the use of interest rate freezes through guidelines issued by the American Securitization Forum, industry and regulator efforts could also help clarify how this alternative type of workout might be effectively applied. Federal Reserve System EffortsI would like to comment briefly on Federal Reserve System efforts to reduce preventable foreclosures and their costs on borrowers and communities. The Federal Reserve can help by leveraging three important strengths: our analytical and data resources; our national presence; and our history of working closely with lenders, community groups, and other local stakeholders. A major thrust of our efforts is sharing relevant and timely data analysis of mortgage delinquencies with community groups and policymakers to efficiently target resources to areas most in need. For example, we recently assisted NeighborWorks America in identifying regions and neighborhoods that are at risk of higher rates of foreclosure and could benefit from increased mortgage counseling capacity. On the basis of this analysis, NeighborWorks recently distributed $130 million in newly granted funds from Congress to thirty-two state housing finance agencies, eighty-two community-based NeighborWorks organizations, and sixteen counseling intermediaries around the country. The Federal Reserve System also is supporting efforts to reach troubled borrowers and to raise awareness in communities about ways to prevent foreclosures. Since July, the community affairs groups across the Federal Reserve System have sponsored or cosponsored more than fifty events related to foreclosures, reaching more than 4,000 attendees including lenders, counselors, community development specialists, and policymakers. We are also concerned about the challenges of neighborhoods that have seen large increases in foreclosures and vacant properties and have begun to work with policymakers, lenders (including community banks) and community groups to address these problems. In particular, we have undertaken a joint effort with NeighborWorks America to help communities develop strategies for neighborhood stabilization. ConclusionReducing the rate of preventable foreclosures would promote economic stability for households, neighborhoods, and the nation as a whole. Although lenders and servicers have scaled up their efforts and adopted a wider variety of loss-mitigation techniques, more can, and should, be done. The fact that many troubled borrowers have little or no equity suggests that greater use of principal writedowns or short payoffs, perhaps with shared appreciation features, would be in the best interest of both borrowers and lenders. This approach would be facilitated by allowing the FHA the flexibility to offer refinancing products to more borrowers. Ultimately, though, real relief for the mortgage market requires stabilization, and then recovery, in the nation's housing sector. Modernization of the FHA would be of help on this front as well. I am sure that the FHA and the Department of Housing and Urban Development, given the appropriate powers by the Congress, will make every effort to expand their operations and to help improve the functioning of the market for home-purchase mortgages. For community bankers, FHA modernization and expansion would provide an important opportunity--of which I urge you to take advantage--to better serve your customers and community. The government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, likewise could do a great deal to address the current problems in housing and the mortgage market. New capital-raising by the GSEs, together with congressional action to strengthen the supervision of these companies, would allow Fannie and Freddie to expand significantly the number of new mortgages that they securitize. With few alternative mortgage channels available today, such action would be highly beneficial to the economy. I urge the Congress and the GSEs to take the steps necessary to allow more potential homebuyers access to mortgage credit at reasonable terms. Footnotes 1.Based on servicer data from First American LoanPerformance. Serious delinquencies include loans ninety days or more past due or in foreclosure.Return to text 2.Historically, more than half of foreclosure starts resulted in sale of the property.Return to text 3.Based on information about loans in securitized pools from First American LoanPerformance.Return to text 4.As already noted, foreclosure starts likely increased by roughly 50 percent to 1-1/2 million last year, and foreclosure starts are on track to rise further this year. Lender reports suggest that well over half of these foreclosure starts could result in property sales.Return to text 5.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007), "Working with Mortgage Borrowers," Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 07-6 (April 17); and "Statement on Loss Mitigation Strategies for Servicers of Residential Mortgages," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 07-16 (September 5).Return to text 6.By comparing these NPVs, servicers can fulfill their obligation to investors under many pooling and servicing agreements, which is to maximize the return from all loans in the trust, including those that are in default or are reasonably likely to default.Return to text
No content found
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Before the Subcommittee on Domestic and International Monetary Policy, Trade, and Technology, and the Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance, and Government Sponsored Enterprises, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairmen Gutierrez and Kanjorski, Ranking Members Paul and Pryce, and members of the Subcommittees, I am pleased to appear today to provide the Subcommittees with information on the standards for review by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System of investments by sovereign wealth funds in banks and bank holding companies in the United States. The Board commends the Subcommittees for holding this hearing and for considering the important public policy implications raised by the recent investments of sovereign wealth funds in U.S. financial services companies. As requested by your staff, I intend to focus my testimony on a narrow issue, the thresholds for review of sovereign wealth fund investments by the federal banking agencies and the current levels of investments by these funds in U.S. banking organizations and in foreign banking organizations with U.S. banking operations. I will begin with some general information about sovereign wealth funds and a summary of currently known investments by sovereign wealth funds in U.S. banks and bank holding companies. Then I will describe the relevant U.S. banking laws applicable to investments by sovereign wealth funds in banks and bank holding companies and the treatment under those laws of these funds by the Federal Reserve. Sovereign Wealth FundsBroadly speaking, a sovereign wealth fund is an investment fund that is owned by a national or state government. Globally, there are about thirty to forty sovereign wealth funds at this time. Many sovereign wealth funds were originally set up to help stabilize revenues from the sale of a commodity, such as oil, natural gas or other commodities. They also provide a way to preserve and grow wealth for future generations. Chile, Botswana and Kiribati have established sovereign wealth funds based on their revenues from the sales of copper, diamonds, and phosphate. Examples of governments that have established funds using oil revenues include those of Norway, Kuwait, Qatar, and the state of Alaska. Some developed nations have established sovereign wealth funds using social security or government pension fund surpluses and contributions from taxes and other government revenues. Such funds invest in a wide range of domestic and foreign assets with the aim of supplementing the future means of financing social security or government pension programs. Countries with this type of fund include France, Australia, and New Zealand. Other sovereign wealth funds have been established to make profitable use of foreign exchange accumulated as the result of trade imbalances or foreign exchange intervention. Countries with this type of fund include Singapore, Korea, and China. To achieve their objective of preserving and growing wealth for future generations or of profiting from often temporary surpluses of foreign exchange, sovereign wealth funds--like any investment fund--seek to earn an appropriate risk-adjusted return on the funds that they invest. Sovereign wealth funds apply many of the same kinds of strategies that other investment funds apply. Some funds, such as Norway's, engage solely in making small portfolio investments--i.e., their equity investments are typically below 10 percent of the voting shares of a firm. Others, such as Singapore's Temasek Holdings (Temasek), take substantial stakes in firms in selected domestic and foreign industries. One of the reasons that sovereign wealth funds have attracted more attention in the past year is their size. The largest funds are very large. For example, Norway's sovereign wealth fund reports total assets of over $350 billion; China's fund and Singapore's two funds each manage assets of at least $100 billion. This places sovereign wealth funds among the largest investment funds worldwide. However, while the estimated two to three trillion dollars sovereign wealth funds manage exceeds the $1.4 trillion managed by hedge funds, it is far less than the over $50 trillion managed by insurance companies, pension funds, and other investment funds combined. Further, it is an even smaller fraction of global debt and equity securities, which exceed $100 trillion. Another factor that has made sovereign wealth funds stand out in recent years has been their rapid growth. Estimates suggest that sovereign wealth funds have been growing at a remarkable pace in recent years, possibly quadrupling in size between 2003 and 2007. This rapid growth arises from the growth in revenues from the sale of oil and other commodities, following significant increases in commodities prices. It also arises from the rapid accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and persistent current account imbalances. A third reason that sovereign wealth funds have attracted attention in the United States recently has been their investments in U.S. financial institutions, which is what I will talk about today. Investments of Sovereign Wealth Funds inU.S.Financial Services CompaniesOver the past several months, sovereign wealth funds have made direct investments totaling more than $24 billion in U.S. financial firms. These investments account for a significant portion of the total additional capital raised by these financial companies in this period. Sovereign wealth funds have been a beneficial source of capital for U.S. financial institutions. The recent wave of sovereign wealth fund investments in U.S. financial institutions consists of noncontrolling investments below 10 percent (and often below 5 percent) of voting equity. For example, Citigroup recently received a capital infusion from the Kuwait Investment Authority (KIA), the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority (ADIA), and the Government of Singapore Investment Corporation (GIC), one of Singapore's two sovereign investment funds. None of these funds acquired more than 10 percent of Citigroup's total equity. Three sovereign wealth funds, the Korea Investment Corporation (KIC), Temasek, and KIA, each made similar noncontrolling investments in convertible preferred stock in Merrill Lynch and Co. These are all passive investments that have not triggered formal review under U.S. banking law, as I will explain in a moment. The press releases from the financial institutions announcing each of these recent investments have generally emphasized that these sovereign investors will not seek to exercise control over the target company and will not have representation on the target company's board of directors or take part in its management. Thresholds for Federal Reserve ReviewAs a general matter, the same statutory and regulatory thresholds for review by the federal banking agencies apply to investments by sovereign wealth funds as apply to investments by other domestic and foreign investors in U.S. banks and bank holding companies. These requirements are established in two federal statutes, the Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act) and the Change in Bank Control Act (CIBC Act).1The BHC Act requires any company to obtain approval from the Federal Reserve before making a direct or indirect investment in a U.S. bank or bank holding company if the investment meets certain thresholds. In particular, the BHC Act requires Board review when a company acquires: (1) ownership or control of 25 percent or more of any class of voting securities of the bank or bank holding company, (2) control of the election of a majority of the board of directors of the bank or bank holding company, or (3) the ability to exercise a controlling influence over the management or policies of the bank or bank holding company. In determining whether an investor may exercise a controlling influence over the management or policies of a U.S. bank or bank holding company for purposes of the BHC Act, the Board considers the size of the investment, the involvement of the investor in the management of the bank or bank holding company, any business relationships between the investor and the bank or bank holding company, and other relevant factors indicating an intent or ability to significantly influence the management or operations of the bank or bank holding company. The BHC Act presumes that an investor that controls less than 5 percent of the voting shares of a U.S. bank or bank holding company does not have a controlling influence over that bank or bank holding company, and the Board generally has not found that a controlling influence exists if the investment represents less than 10 percent of the bank or bank holding company's voting shares. A company that meets any of these thresholds is called a "bank holding company" and, in addition to the prior approval process, is subject by statute to supervision by the Federal Reserve, including examination, reporting, and capital requirements, as well as to the Act's restrictions on the mixing of banking and commerce. Moreover, a company that makes an investment that causes it to be a bank holding company is subject to a prior review requirement at a lower threshold for any investments in additional banks or bank holding companies. If a company already controls one U.S. bank, the company is required by statute to obtain approval from the Federal Reserve prior to acquiring more than 5 percent of the voting shares of another U.S. bank or bank holding company. There is one additional requirement governing the applicability of the BHC Act that is noteworthy. The BHC Act applies only to investments in banks and bank holding companies that are made by "companies." The Act specifically excludes investments made by the U.S. Government or by any state government. On this basis, the Board has long held that the provisions of the BHC Act do not apply to direct investments made by foreign governments. The BHC Act also specifically excludes from its coverage any corporation controlled by the United States or by a state government. Thus, investment funds of the states of Alaska and New Jersey, for example, are specifically excluded from the requirements of the Act. As I will discuss in more detail below, the Board has not extended this exclusion to companies controlled by foreign governments that make investments in U.S. banks and bank holding companies. Foreign governments to date have primarily invested through sovereign wealth funds that are companies controlled by the foreign government. The effect of the Board's long-standing interpretation is that a sovereign wealth fund that seeks to make an investment in a U.S. bank or bank holding company that exceeds the thresholds in the BHC Act would be required to obtain Board approval prior to making the investment and would become subject to the other provisions of the BHC Act, but its parent foreign government would not. Investments by sovereign wealth funds that do not trigger the requirements of the BHC Act may nevertheless require approval from a federal banking agency under the Change in Bank Control Act (CIBC Act). Prior approval from the Federal Reserve under the CIBC Act generally is required for any acquisition of 10 percent or more of any class of voting securities of a state member bank or bank holding company. Unlike the BHC Act, which imposes ongoing restrictions on the nonbanking activities of corporate owners of banks as well as ongoing reporting, examination, capital, and other requirements, the CIBC Act does not impose any activity limitations or any ongoing supervisory requirements on owners of banks. When an investor applies for the prior approval of the Federal Reserve to make an investment in a bank or bank holding company that triggers the review thresholds under the BHC Act or the CIBC Act, the Federal Reserve evaluates the application under the statutory requirements of those Acts. The BHC Act mandates that the Federal Reserve consider a number of factors when acting on BHC Act applications, including competitive, supervisory, and financial and managerial factors (the last including consideration of the competence, experience, and integrity of the officers, directors, and principal shareholders of the company or bank). The CIBC Act also requires the federal banking agency to consider specific factors, including competitive and informational standards as well as whether the transaction would jeopardize the financial stability of the bank, prejudice the interests of the depositors of the bank, or result in an adverse effect on the Deposit Insurance Fund. Most sovereign wealth funds, like many other investors including U.S. investment banking firms, hedge funds, and private equity pools, have structured their investments so as not to trigger the thresholds for review and approval under either the BHC Act or the CIBC Act. Instead, sovereign wealth funds have limited their investments to amounts that represent less than 10 percent of the voting shares of the banking organization and have designed their investments to be passive and without the connections or relationships that might allow the sovereign wealth funds to control the U.S. banking organization. Investments of Sovereign Wealth Funds in Foreign Banking OrganizationsSeveral sovereign wealth funds, including some that have attracted attention with their recent investments in U.S. financial institutions, also have interests in foreign banks with U.S. operations. The levels of ownership range from well below 10 percent to, in some cases, interests that indicate control of the foreign bank. These foreign banks generally conduct their U.S. banking operations through direct offices--branches and agencies; none controlled by a sovereign wealth fund currently controls a U.S. bank subsidiary. U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks do not have all of the powers of U.S. bank branches. Specifically, U.S. branches of foreign banks are not permitted to accept retail deposits (deposits less than $100,000), except for a small number of grandfathered cases. Foreign bank agencies cannot accept deposits from citizens or residents of the United States. Funds with interests in foreign banks that operate U.S. branches and agencies include Temasek, GIC, China Investment Corporation (CIC), Central Huijin Investment Company (Huijin),2KIA, and ADIA. After 1991, the International Banking Act (IBA) provided that any foreign bank seeking to establish a U.S. branch or agency must apply to the Federal Reserve for prior approval. All foreign banks controlled by sovereign wealth funds that have U.S. branches or agencies established those branches or agencies before the IBA was amended in 1991 to require Federal Reserve approval of the establishment by foreign banks of new U.S. branches and agencies.3Any future applications by foreign banks controlled by sovereign wealth funds to establish U.S. branches and agencies would be evaluated by the Federal Reserve pursuant to the standards in the IBA. An important factor the Federal Reserve is required to consider under the IBA is whether the foreign bank is supervised on a comprehensive consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The Federal Reserve also examines how the supervisor monitors relationships and transactions between the foreign bank and any related party, including controlling sovereign wealth funds and other controlling shareholders. A number of additional factors are also considered, including the anti-money laundering regime of the foreign bank and its supervisor, the consent of the appropriate home country authorities, the financial and managerial resources of the foreign bank, and whether the foreign bank and any controlling company (including any controlling sovereign wealth fund) have made adequate assurances concerning provision of information to the Federal Reserve about its operations and activities. The Federal Reserve's Approach to Foreign Government OwnershipAs I noted above, the Federal Reserve has drawn a distinction between foreign governments themselves, which are not treated as "companies" subject to the BHC Act, and government-owned entities such as sovereign wealth funds, which are treated as companies and are subject to the BHC Act. The position that the BHC Act does not apply to foreign governments themselves is long held by the Board.4It noted this view and revisited the reasons for this position in 1982 in connection with an application by an Italian government-owned bank to acquire a controlling interest in a U.S. bank.5At that time, the Board reiterated its view that the BHC Act should not be applied to the Italian Government. At the same time, the Board noted that significant policy issues were raised by foreign government ownership of a U.S. bank, including in particular issues related to the mixing of banking and commerce and to interstate banking in the United States (which was largely prohibited at the time). The Board invited Congress to address the issue and noted that the concept of national treatment could justify applying the BHC Act to foreign government-owned entities.6 In 1988, an Italian bank controlled by the Italian Government again applied to the Federal Reserve to acquire a U.S. bank. The Board carefully considered the applicability of the BHC Act to foreign governments and foreign government-owned entities and reiterated its earlier conclusion that, as a legal matter, foreign governments were not themselves "companies" for purposes of the BHC Act and were therefore not covered by the Act. The Board found, however, that the investment fund controlled by the Italian Government, the Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale (IRI), was structured as a corporate vehicle and was therefore a company under the Act and subject to the Act.7 At the same time, the Board indicated its willingness to grant exemptions from the nonbanking restrictions in the BHC Act to IRI for its commercial investments, citing IRI's status as a nonoperating instrumentality for holding government interests. The Board also expressed its willingness to exempt from the BHC Act the nonbanking investments of other foreign government-owned companies of a character similar to that of IRI, as long as their foreign bank subsidiaries conducted banking in the United States only through branches and agencies and not through U.S. subsidiary banks. This approach limited the extraterritorial effects of U.S. economic regulation on foreign companies, in recognition of the fact that foreign countries may choose to organize their economies differently from the United States. It also kept the United States open to a significant number of foreign banking organizations whose U.S. banking activities might otherwise have been severely curtailed. Notwithstanding the availability of this exemption for government-owned companies (including sovereign wealth funds) that control foreign banks with U.S. banking operations, the foreign banks themselves are subject to the same degree of U.S. regulation and supervision as other foreign banks. Regulation of Bank Holding CompaniesSince a sovereign wealth fund is a company for purposes of the BHC Act, if a fund were to acquire control of a U.S. bank or bank holding company, it would be treated as a bank holding company and would be subject to the U.S. regulatory regime applicable to such companies. This regime is designed in significant part to help ensure the safety and soundness of U.S. bank subsidiaries of bank holding companies. Among the most important tools that U.S. bank regulators have to protect the safety and soundness of U.S. banks are the legal restrictions that limit the ability of a bank to lend to affiliates. Section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act provides that a bank may not lend more than 10 percent of its capital to any one affiliate or more than 20 percent of its capital to all affiliates combined. Of equal importance, any loan to an affiliate must be either fully collateralized by cash or U.S. Treasury securities or overcollateralized by 10 to 30 percent, depending on the type of asset or instrument used to secure the loan. Section 23A also prohibits the purchase of low-quality assets by a U.S. bank from its affiliates. Section 23B of the Federal Reserve Act requires that all transactions between a bank and its affiliates be conducted only on an arms-length basis. These restrictions are designed to limit the ability of an owner of a bank to exploit the bank for the benefit of the rest of the organization. With respect to a U.S. bank or bank holding company that might be owned by a sovereign wealth fund, these same restrictions would apply to transactions by the bank with the sovereign wealth fund itself and other companies controlled by the fund. Moreover, the restrictions would apply to companies controlled by the same government through other sovereign wealth funds of that government. Thus, a U.S. bank controlled by a sovereign wealth fund would not be permitted to fund substantially the operations of other companies controlled by the same sovereign wealth fund or its government owner, could not provide any uncollateralized loans to such companies, and could not purchase low-quality assets from those companies. In this regard, it would be important for any U.S. bank that might come to be controlled by a sovereign wealth fund to have information on which companies are controlled by the fund and by the government that owns the fund. This type of transparency would be necessary to allow the bank to comply with the affiliate transaction restrictions of sections 23A and 23B. ConclusionRecent sovereign wealth fund investments in U.S. banking and financial services organizations have attracted much attention and there is no doubt that sovereign wealth funds are growing in size and number and are making increasingly significant investments in financial services organizations worldwide. But foreign government-owned entities, including sovereign wealth funds, have owned foreign banks with U.S. operations for many years. The Board has long taken the position that while foreign governments themselves are not companies subject to the BHC Act, foreign government-owned corporations such as sovereign wealth funds are companies. Thus any proposed controlling investment in a U.S. bank or bank holding company by a sovereign wealth fund would be subject to Federal Reserve approval. Sovereign wealth funds, like private investment funds, U.S. state investment vehicles, hedge funds, and many other investors, have generally made investments at levels that are not large enough to trigger the thresholds for review and approval by the federal banking agencies under the federal banking laws. If a sovereign wealth fund were to make an investment in a U.S. banking organization that triggers one of these thresholds, the application would be evaluated by the Federal Reserve or other appropriate federal banking agency under the relevant statutes with no preference or handicap relative to other investors. Any sovereign wealth fund controlling a U.S. bank or bank holding company would be required to operate subject to the limitations on affiliate transactions in sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act. I appreciate the opportunity to explain these issues to the Subcommittees. Footnotes 1.A third federal statute, the Savings and Loan Holding Company Act, governs investments in companies that control savings associations. The thresholds and standards for review of investments in savings associations established in that act are administered by the Office of Thrift Supervision and are nearly identical to those established by the BHC Act.Return to text 2.Huijin, a Chinese company with a mandate to improve corporate governance and initiate reforms in the state-owned financial sector, was created to act as a government holding company for Chinese state-owned banks acquired as a result of capital injections by the Chinese government. Huijin is expected to be acquired by CIC in the near future.Return to text 3.Huijin acquired its controlling interest in one foreign bank, Bank of China, after the IBA was amended, but also after the establishment of Bank of China’s U.S. branches. When a company makes a controlling investment in a foreign bank that already has U.S. branches or agencies, under Federal Reserve regulations the foreign bank is required to notify the Federal Reserve within ten days of the investment and report the shareholding in annual filings with the Federal Reserve.Return to text 4.Governor John P. LaWare discussed this position and other issues related to foreign government ownership of foreign banks operating in the United States in testimony before the House Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs in 1992. 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 495 (1992).Return to text 5.Banca Commerciale Italiana, 68 Federal Reserve Bulletin 423 (1982).Return to text 6.Later in 1982, a subcommittee of the House Committee on Government Operations held hearings on foreign government and foreign investor control of U.S. banks.Hearing on Foreign Government and Foreign Investor Control ofU.S.Banks, before the Commerce, Consumer, and Monetary Affairs Subcommittee of the House Committee on Government Operations, 97 Cong. 2 Sess. (Government Printing Office, 1982). No legislation, however, was proposed.Return to text 7.Letter from William W. Wiles, Secretary of the Board, to Patricia S. Skigen (August 19, 1988).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve’s public website,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur.

Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the American Bankers Association Spring Summit Meeting, Washington, D.C It is a pleasure to be addressing the new American Bankers Association, which has arisen from the successful merger of America's Community Bankers and the ABA. Your association truly represents the full range of banks in the United States. The focus of my remarks today--the importance of fundamentals in risk management--should still resonate with all of you, whether you are part of a large global bank or a smaller community bank. Unfortunately, recent market events have shown us that banking institutions still face some risk management challenges, including a need to refocus on some key fundamentals. The good news, however, is that we also have many examples of sound risk management practices during the recent disruptions. Risk Management ChallengesGetting the fundamentals right--and being ever vigilant about their consistent application and execution--forms the basis of any sound risk management system. I am not trying to imply that implementing risk management fundamentals is easy; that is, just because something is fundamental does not mean that it comes naturally. In fact, there are a number of risk management challenges inherent in banking that require careful identification and attention. One of the most basic risk management challenges relates to concentration of risks. From the beginnings of banking, bankers always have had to be cautious to guard against, as the old adage says, "putting all their eggs in one basket." For example, Renaissance bankers learned the lesson--some of them the hard way--that they did better by lending not just to a few merchants active in one trade, but to a range of merchants active in a variety of trades. As risk management techniques grew over the centuries, bankers became more adept at identifying, measuring, and managing risk concentrations, but that does not mean the original problem presented by concentrations--that losses could occur all at the same time--has vanished. Indeed, some bankers occasionally forget that this challenge still exists, usually with unfavorable consequences. It is also important to note that concentrations in banking include not just basic lending, but also holding securities, trading complex instruments, providing liquidity facilities, engaging in off-balance sheet transactions, and conducting other financial activities. As banks have extended their range of activities and involvement in new markets, they must be particularly mindful of potential for concentrations of risk to arise for a number of reasons. First, any new activity will be less familiar and involve less data and experience for evaluating risk compared with long-standing activities or markets. Second, risk concentrations can be hidden during normal times and may only manifest themselves during times of stress when activities or instruments that might in normal times have little or negative correlation suddenly become correlated, such as with a market-wide increase in the demand for liquidity as we have seen recently. In other words, bankers may have far more eggs jostling around in the same basket, and each of those eggs may be more fragile than originally thought. Understanding the linkage between risk concentrations and capital is especially important, since the concentration of risk of a given portfolio markedly affects the amount of capital that should be held against it. Heavy concentrations can produce so-called fat tails in a loss distribution, meaning that considerably higher capital levels are required to support the risk taken. If one underestimates the amount of capital needed to be held against risk concentrations and/or the extent of the concentrations themselves, then a banker would realize that the initial level of capital was not sufficient and that remedial actions would need to be taken. Naturally, both large and small banks can continue to be successful and profitable by having some lending or other types of concentrations, but they need to be aware of the risks involved and have the proper risk management and capital to support those concentrations. Risk Management FundamentalsI would now like to elaborate on three key risk management fundamentals and their relationship to concentrations of risk in banking: Governance and risk control; risk identification and measurement; and liquidity risk management. In doing so, I will highlight some important findings from a report released last week by a group of supervisory agencies from France, Germany, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States, known as the Senior Supervisors Group or SSG.1The report, "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence," provides a summary and analysis of a joint survey and review, initiated last autumn, of risk management practices to understand how different approaches fared during the recent financial stress. Although the analysis covered a group of the largest banking and securities firms, the lessons learned actually have relevance for all financial institutions of all sizes and scope--even those that have thus far not suffered from recent financial turbulence. I will also discuss a few other examples of supervisory activities, such as our recent guidance on commercial real estate concentrations, from which we have learned valuable lessons. Governance and controlsI will start with perhaps one of the most fundamental aspects of risk management at banking organizations--in fact, at any organization: governance and controls. The SSG report highlighted solid senior management oversight and engagement as a key factor that differentiated performance during recent events. Clearly, senior management must take on a very active and involved role in risk management. Although this may seem somewhat obvious, a few recent cases demonstrate, unfortunately, that senior management may not always exercise proper oversight and may not have been as engaged as would have been wise. As supervisors, governance and controls is a key feature we look at in assessing risk management at an institution. Clearly, senior managers also need to ensure that they have proper understanding of the risks assumed by their firm, but this does not always happen. For example, we have seen some evidence that information was kept in silos within firms and not adequately distributed both vertically and horizontally within certain firms. This segregation prevented senior managers from developing an enterprise-wide perspective on risks to the whole entity. It meant that managers were not fully aware of the extent to which the risks of the different activities undertaken by the firm could, first, become correlated in times of stress and, second, result in high concentrations of risk exposures. To be quite specific, in particular cases, senior management was not fully aware of the firm's latent concentrations to U.S. subprime mortgages, because they did not realize that in addition to the subprime mortgages on their books, they had exposure through off-balance sheet vehicles holding mortgages, through claims on counterparties exposed to subprime, and through certain complex securities. Adequate distribution of information allows for an enterprise-wide perspective on risk. Information must percolate up to senior management, but top executives must, in turn, disseminate their views and analysis back down through the business lines. Effective risk management remains sturdy and durable only if supported by strong and independent risk functions that produce unbiased information. Empowering independent risk managers results in clear, dispassionate thinking about the entire firm's risk profile, with no favoritism toward any business unit. Senior managers should encourage risk managers to dig deep to uncover not only risks within each business unit, but also risk concentrations that can arise from the set of activities undertaken by the firm as a whole as well as latent risks--such as hidden risk concentrations that can arise from correlation of risk in times of stress. Such risk management assessments should lead risk managers to point out cases in which certain business lines are assuming too much risk. In other words, it is good to have a few people within the institution who--to paraphrase a former Federal Reserve Chairman--know when to take away the punch bowl. Being the party pooper, however, can be very difficult in any organization, and that is why it is crucial for the risk manager to be known as an independent voice who is influential with top management and for top executives, of large or small firms, to set the appropriate "tone at the top" with respect to the importance of independent and unbiased risk evaluation. As I discussed in detail at a speech before the Global Association of Risk Professionals a couple of weeks ago, any successful organization needs to develop appropriate mechanisms to ensure adherence to, and sustainability of, its risk management.2Incentive structures are a key mechanism for this purpose. Appropriate incentives reward good behavior and penalize inappropriate behavior. Of course, incentives work best when they are known well in advance, that is, when they serve as ex ante signals of what should and should not be done. Naturally, in very large organizations it is difficult for senior management to monitor each individual, so incentives need to be consistent, permeate even the lowest levels of the organization, and remind each individual that his or her risk-taking affects the whole enterprise. Limits and controls can be useful tools for creating the right incentives and sending appropriate signals, but they of course need to be tailored individually to each firm. Problems can arise when incentives are not properly structured and appropriate "risk discipline" is not exercised--for example, when limits and controls are not set or, if they are set, when adherence to them is not monitored or enforced. Such controls provide incentives for business-line leaders to assume only the risks that the firm can absorb because they penalize those who try to take on excessive risk or inadequate mitigation in the name of maximizing short-term profit. This is just as true at large international firms as it is at community banks. Risk Identification and MeasurementThe second fundamental of sound risk management relates to risk identification and measurement. Timely and accurate information is the lifeblood of sound risk management. A good risk-management structure must encompass risks across the entire firm, gathering and processing information on an enterprise-wide basis in real time. In short, you cannot manage your risks if you do not know what they are. Aggregating information across a large, diversified financial institution is not easy and should be done with appropriate care and with adequate resources for checking timeliness and veracity. The SSG report, for example, noted that some firms could not easily integrate market and counterparty risk positions across risks types, making it difficult for their executives to identify concentrations across the entire firm. Aggregating information about risk exposures and the concentration of risks may not be as challenging at smaller institutions, but checking the timeliness and veracity of the data is important at institutions of all sizes. In other words, risk managers should live by the adage "Trust but verify," being careful not to rely on assessments or data from others without conducting proper due diligence. It is also worth noting that financial institutions should gather a wide range of relevant information before they see market troubles brewing. In other words, scrambling for information once turbulence sets in is not good practice. Understanding a firm's true risk exposures requires examining not just risks on the balance sheet, but also off-balance-sheet risks that are sometimes more difficult to identify and often not so easy to quantify. Latent risks from certain complex products and certain risky activities should be properly recognized, because they can manifest themselves when market turbulence sets in. As the SSG report indicates, some firms had a poor understanding of the risks inherent in certain complex products or failed to recognize that certain activities contained latent risks that could be manifest in unexpected concentrations of risk exposures when market turbulence arose. For example, we witnessed some lapses in credit risk identification and measurement when, as I noted, certain institutions underestimated the actual credit risk of subprime mortgages and the secondary or tertiary effects brought on by disruptions in subprime markets for their broader set of activities. Stress testing and scenario analysis are of paramount importance, since they can reveal potential concentrations of risk that may not be apparent from using information gleaned from normal times. The SSG report emphasizes this point, but the U.S. banking agencies have also highlighted its importance for smaller- and medium-sized institutions, for example in the guidance on commercial real estate (CRE) concentrations we issued at the end of 2006. After on-the-ground supervisors reported seeing increases in CRE concentrations at many institutions across the country, supervisors examined historical data on risks associated with CRE concentrations to provide the basis for developing supervisory guidance. That guidance counseled banking organizations with high CRE exposures relative to capital to engage in stress testing to evaluate behavior of those exposures and the impact on capital in adverse circumstances. Some financial institutions already employ stress tests, but they should re-check their robustness in light of recent events. For example, banking organizations might benefit from expanding tests to include a wider set of variables to stress and to consider shocks they might have considered much less probable one or two years ago. Banks should also remember that past experience is not always predictive of future events, meaning that they should be somewhat creative in designing potential shocks. In CRE, for example, banks should move beyond considering single-name risk and include scenarios involving broader risks to the CRE sector and how such risk may be correlated in times of stress with other parts of the portfolio. In addition, a number of risk-measurement and risk-quantification challenges relate to valuation practices, particularly with new products. Firms should have greater motivation for applying proper valuation practices as part of good risk management.3At the center of these practices is the ability to make appropriate judgments about the quality of information being used for valuations. The process usually starts with an initial experimentation phase in which market participants learn a great deal about the product's expected performance and risk characteristics, preferably under different market conditions. Conducting due diligence about new products can be costly and take time, but it is usually worth it. Unfortunately, in some recent cases new products were developed very quickly and not properly "road-tested." In observing the valuation challenges, the "Trust but verify" adage has equal application. Market participants must ensure that they do not make valuation decisions based solely on excessive reliance of external ratings or evaluations, but that they also undertake their own assessment. And I would suggest that the value of independent due diligence on the part of market participants is especially high for newer and more-complex products. Encouragingly, we have examples of some firms recognizing the potential risks of broad market disruptions, for example, if there were dramatic and unexpected price movements, or if market illiquidity set in. Those firms faring better typically use a number of tools to assess risk positions that draw on differing underlying assumptions. Such tools provide management with more information and different perspectives on its potential risk exposures. In the best cases, the tools are flexible enough to allow perspectives on risk to change as business conditions change. For example, they can help identify when risk concentrations are changing as a result of market movements or changes in counterparty positions. Liquidity Risk ManagementNow I wish to consider the third fundamental. Liquidity risk management. Banks, of course, have been managing expected liquidity demands since the beginning of banking itself.4Because of its central role in the business of banking, liquidity risk requires rigorous and effective management. Naturally, financial institutions both large and small must pay careful attention to liquidity risks, even if they manifest themselves in different ways. Regarding recent events, a number of financial firms were surprised by the extent of market disruptions and were forced to take funding actions not anticipated in their contingency funding plans, including some decisions to support affiliates that were based on reputational concerns rather than contractual obligations. At the same time, some institutions were able to avoid more serious problems from these events by aligning treasury functions more closely with risk-management processes and incorporating information from all businesses into global liquidity planning, including actual and contingent liquidity risk. They also made attempts to embed market liquidity premia or apply market liquidity haircuts in pricing models and valuations. Recent events have shown that during times of systemwide stress, liquidity shocks can become correlated so that the same factors that can lead to liquidity problems for the bank's assets or off-balance sheet vehicles can simultaneously put pressure on banks' own funding liquidity. Again, we see the trouble that risk concentrations can cause if an institution has not tried to identify them in advance and take steps to mitigate their effects. As with other risk areas, supervisors suggest extensive use of firm-wide stress testing to ensure the incorporation of low-probability but potentially severe liquidity events that may have the potential to converge. Smaller banks, as well as large, global banks, should conduct liquidity stress tests to evaluate what could happen to liquidity positions in times of stress. We have also noticed the potential for liquidity risk to have an impact on capital adequacy. As you are well aware, several large global banks ended up having to deal with so-called unplanned asset expansions arising from a variety of liquidity stresses related to the asset side of the balance sheet. In a few cases, these unexpected increases in the balance sheet created some pressures on capital ratios, even if the level of capital remained stable. Although bank liquidity management and capital management may be conceptually distinct, recent events illustrate in practice how liquidity management and capital management are intimately related, particularly in times of financial stress. Since risk concentrations have the potential to manifest themselves during times of stress and at that time adversely affect capital positions, it is particularly important that firms assess how liquidity events could place pressure on capital levels. In a nutshell: liquidity problems always have the potential to affect bank balance sheets and, in doing so, bank capital adequacy. ConclusionOne of the most basic lessons of banking is that lending concentrations must be carefully identified, monitored, and managed. As I noted at the outset, the current financial market turbulence underscores the importance of getting the fundamentals of sound risk management right and being ever vigilant about their consistent application, execution, and improvement in light of new data and experiences. I have highlighted the importance of three fundamentals--governance and risk control; risk identification and measurement; and liquidity risk management--and the SSG report provides evidence that those institutions taking care to get these fundamentals right generally performed better during recent events than other institutions. Concentrations of risk can pose challenges to financial institutions, and top managers must be aware of their potential and have a risk management system in place ready to deal with them. This is true not only for large global players but also for small-and medium-sized banks, as my discussion of the CRE concentration guidance emphasized. As supervisors, we strive to achieve the appropriate balance, recognizing that supervision and regulation has costs and benefits that need to be weighed against one another. For instance, we need to be careful that lending is conducted on a prudent basis, and at the same time, take care not to stifle the provision of credit when it is done properly. Before concluding, I would like to mention a topic in supervision and regulation that I have not yet touched upon in these remarks, namely, credit cards. As you know, the Federal Reserve has proposed new rules under Regulation Z, which implements the Truth in Lending Act, regarding open-end credit to require new, more informative, and consumer-tested disclosures by credit card issuers and expects to propose new rules for credit cards under the Federal Reserve's unfair and deceptive acts and practices authority. To help us better assess the current state of the credit card market and possible challenges in credit card markets for consumers and others involved in those markets, I have invited key credit card market participants--card issuers and processors, consumer advocates, counseling agencies, and other regulatory agencies--to participate in a forum hosted by the Federal Reserve Board on April 8. The forum will allow us to collect additional information about relevant industry trends and to identify areas that may warrant action or further study. Footnotes1.The report is available at:http://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/news/banking/2008/rp080306.htmlReturn to text2Randall S. Kroszner, 2008, "Improving Risk Management in Light of Recent Market Events," speech delivered at the Global Association of Risk Management Professionals Annual Risk Convention, New York, February 25.Return to text3.Randall S. Kroszner, 2007, "Innovation, Information, and Regulation in Financial Markets,"speech delivered at the Philadelphia Fed Policy Forum, Philadelphia, November 30.Return to text4.Randall S. Kroszner (2008), "Liquidity-Risk Management in the Business of Banking," speech delivered at the Institute of International Bankers, Washington, DC, March 3.Return to text Footnotes 1.The report is available at:http://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/news/banking/2008/rp080306.htmlReturn to text 2Randall S. Kroszner, 2008, "Improving Risk Management in Light of Recent Market Events," speech delivered at the Global Association of Risk Management Professionals Annual Risk Convention, New York, February 25.Return to text 3.Randall S. Kroszner, 2007, "Innovation, Information, and Regulation in Financial Markets,"speech delivered at the Philadelphia Fed Policy Forum, Philadelphia, November 30.Return to text 4.Randall S. Kroszner (2008), "Liquidity-Risk Management in the Business of Banking," speech delivered at the Institute of International Bankers, Washington, DC, March 3.Return to text