The Department of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board today announced the release of a joint final rule to implement the Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act of 2006. The Act prohibits gambling businesses from knowingly accepting payments in connection with unlawful Internet gambling, including payments made through credit cards, electronic funds transfers, and checks. The Board and the Treasury are required by the Act to develop a joint rule in consultation with the Department of Justice. The final rule requires U.S. financial firms that participate in designated payment systems to establish and implement policies and procedures that are reasonably designed to prevent payments to gambling businesses in connection with unlawful Internet gambling. The rule provides non-exclusive examples of such policies and procedures and sets out the regulatory enforcement framework. For purposes of the rule, unlawful Internet gambling generally would cover the making of a bet or wager that involves use of the Internet and that is unlawful under any applicable federal or state law in the jurisdiction where the bet or wager is initiated, received, or otherwise made. Compliance with the rule is required by December 1, 2009. TheFederal Registernotice is attached.
The federal bank, thrift, and credit union regulatory agencies today jointly issued for comment proposed Interagency Appraisal and Evaluation Guidelines that reaffirm supervisory expectations for sound real estate appraisal and evaluation practices. The proposed guidance builds on the existing federal regulatory framework to clarify risk management principles and internal controls for ensuring that financial institutions' real estate collateral valuations (both appraisals and evaluations) are reliable and support their real estate-related transactions. The initiative is intended to respond to heightened concerns over appraisals and credit quality. The proposed guidance would replace the1994 Interagency Appraisal and Evaluation Guidelinesto incorporate recent supervisory issuances and reflect changes in industry practice, uniform appraisal standards, and available technologies. As with prior issuances, the proposed guidance would apply to all real estate lending functions within a federal financial institution, including commercial and residential lending departments, capital market groups, and asset securitization and sales units. Volatility within certain real estate markets and associated credit risk underscore the importance of independent and reliable collateral valuations. In this regard, there is an expanded discussion of portfolio management techniques and circumstances under which an institution should update or replace a collateral valuation for an existing real estate transaction. The proposed revisions address: The agencies request comments on all aspects of the proposed guidance. Comments are due to the agencies sixty days after publication in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. A copy of the Federal Register notice with the proposed guidance is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the applications and notices under sections 3 and 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by American Express Company and American Express Travel Related Services Company, Inc., both of New York, New York, to become bank holding companies on conversion of American Express Centurion Bank, Salt Lake City, Utah, to a bank, and to retain certain nonbanking subsidiaries, including American Express Bank, FSB, Salt Lake City, Utah. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the approval of an application by Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento, S.A., Lisbon, Portugal, to establish a branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the notice of Bank of America Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina, to acquire Merrill Lynch & Company, Inc., New York, New York, and thereby indirectly acquire Merrill Lynch Bank & Trust Co., FSB, New York, New York; Merrill Lynch Bank USA, Salt Lake City, Utah; and Merrill Lynch Yatirim Bank A.S., Istanbul, Turkey. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a consent Cease and Desist Order against CapitalSouth Bancorp, Birmingham, Alabama, a registered bank holding company, and CapitalSouth Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, a state-chartered member bank. A copy of the Cease and Desist Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the New York State Banking Department on Thursday announced the issuance of a consent Cease and Desist Order against Dresdner Bank AG, Frankfurt, Germany and the bank's branch in New York, New York. The Order addresses Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money laundering compliance policies and practices at Dresdner Bank AG's New York branch. A copy of the Order is attached.
Patrick M. Parkinson, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics Before the Committee on Agriculture, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Peterson, Ranking Member Goodlatte, and members of the Committee, I appreciate this opportunity to provide an update on recent initiatives by policymakers to enhance the markets in which credit default swaps (CDS) and other over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives trade and are settled. On October 15, I provided the Committee with a more extensive statement about the nature of OTC credit derivatives markets, prudential oversight of those markets, potential changes in market infrastructure, and the policy issues that should be considered in evaluating regulatory changes. Today, I will briefly review the key conclusions of that statement and then discuss the Federal Reserve's recent actions to strengthen market infrastructure, enhance risk management, and increase transparency for these products. I would like to emphasize at the outset that the Federal Reserve has taken these actions in coordination with the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG) and other domestic and international supervisors of key market participants.Summary of October 15 StatementAs noted in my earlier statement, supervisors have worked with market participants since 2005 to strengthen the infrastructure of credit derivatives markets through such steps as greater use of electronic confirmation platforms, adoption of a protocol that requires participants to request counterparty consent before assigning trades to a third party, and creation of a contract repository, which maintains an electronic record of CDS trades. Looking forward, the most important potential change in the infrastructure for credit derivatives is the creation of one or more central counterparties (CCPs) for CDS. The Federal Reserve supports CCP clearing of CDS because, if properly designed and managed, CCPs can reduce risks to market participants and to the financial system. In addition to clearing of CDS through CCPs, the Federal Reserve believes that exchange trading of sufficiently standardized contracts by banks and other market participants can increase market liquidity and transparency and thus should be encouraged.Policy discussions of potential regulatory changes for CDS have focused on preventing market manipulation, improving transparency, and mitigating systemic risk. Manipulation concerns can be addressed by clarifying the Securities and Exchange Commission's (SEC) authority with respect to CDS. Data from a contract repository provide a means for enhancing transparency, a topic I will discuss in greater depth later. To better contain systemic risk, prudential supervisors already have begun to address the weaknesses of major market participants in measuring and managing their counterparty credit risks. This step is fundamental to containing systemic risk because it helps limit the potential for any single large market participant to be the catalyst for transmission of such risk.Strengthening Infrastructure, Enhancing Risk Management, and Increasing TransparencyPWG’s Policy Objectives for OTC DerivativesIn March, the PWG made recommendations to enhance the market infrastructure for CDS and other OTC derivatives. In light of recent developments, last week the PWG announced a broader set of policy objectives to guide efforts to address the full range of challenges associated with OTC derivatives, including risk management of OTC derivatives and the transparency and integrity of CDS markets, as well as further measures to strengthen market infrastructure.1Central Counterparties for CDS and Other Infrastructure IssuesThe PWG's top near-term priority is to oversee the implementation of CCP clearing for CDS. In the past month, authorities in the United States and abroad have sought to speed the development of CCPs for CDS. Four organizations plan to offer clearing for CDS. The primary federal regulators for two of these organizations would be U.S. authorities--in one case, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), and in the other case, the Federal Reserve Board (and its supervisory delegee, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York). The primary regulators for the two others would be authorities in the United Kingdom and Germany. In addition, the two U.S. CCPs for credit derivatives plan to obtain an exemption from the SEC from securities clearing agency registration requirements. The CFTC, SEC, and Federal Reserve recognize their mutual interests in ensuring that all CCPs for credit derivatives are organized and managed prudently. We have been jointly examining the risk management and financial resources of the two organizations that will be supervised by U.S. authorities against the "Recommendations for Central Counterparties," a set of international standards that were agreed to in 2004 by the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) of the central banks of the Group of 10 countries and the Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions.2Last week, the CFTC, SEC, and Federal Reserve signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) that established a framework for ongoing consultation and information sharing related to CCPs for CDS. The MOU is particularly important because it created a mechanism to ensure that we all will have the information necessary for carrying out our respective responsibilities related to these markets regardless of the form in which a CCP is organized and regardless of which agency is the primary regulator.As outlined in my October statement, numerous other efforts are under way to build a more resilient infrastructure for OTC derivatives in addition to the development of a CCP for CDS. Major dealers recently committed to broader improvements in back-office processes for equity, interest rate, commodity, and foreign exchange products as well as credit products. These commitments include greater use of electronic processing of trades, speedier confirmation of trades, and expanded use of central trade repositories, in part to enhance market transparency. Dealers as well as other large market participants also have redoubled their efforts to terminate economically redundant trades that contribute to operational risk. To date in 2008, more than $24 trillion of the notional amount of CDS trades has been terminated.Risk ManagementAlthough the creation of CCPs for CDS will provide an important new tool for managing counterparty credit risk, enhancements to the risk-management policies and procedures for market participants will continue to be a high priority for supervisors. Many transactions that transfer credit risk between market participants will continue to be executed and managed on a bilateral, decentralized basis because they are not sufficiently standardized to be cleared through a CCP. Such OTC transactions are integral to the functioning of today's financial markets. Supervisors recognize, however, that financial institutions need to make changes in their risk-management practices for OTC derivatives by improving internal incentives and controls and by ensuring that traditional credit risk-management disciplines are in place for complex products, regardless of whether they take the form of CDS or of securities. Efforts to implement these changes continue through the Senior Supervisors Group, in which supervisors from the jurisdictions with major OTC derivatives dealers are represented.3Such cooperative groups offer an important tool for ensuring that supervisors set consistent standards for all participants in these global markets.TransparencyMany market observers have expressed concern about the opaqueness of OTC derivatives markets generally. The Depository Trust Clearing Corporation's (DTCC) Trade Information Warehouse, a contract repository, contains an electronic record of a large and growing share of CDS trades. DTCC recently began publishing aggregate market data based upon these records each week. Information is provided, for example, on index, versus single-name, contracts; reference entities on which the contracts are written; and maturities of contracts. However, these data currently are not comprehensive. The PWG has called for a record of all CDS that are not cleared through a CCP to be retained in the DTCC warehouse or a similar repository and for regulators to have access to the data on CDS housed at CCPs and repositories. Furthermore, the PWG has called for public reporting of prices, trading volumes, and aggregate open interest.ConclusionCredit derivatives and other OTC derivatives are integral to the smooth functioning of today's financial markets. With appropriate oversight and prudent risk management by users of these products, derivatives can provide significant benefits to financial market participants and to the financial system generally. The Federal Reserve is working cooperatively with other domestic and international authorities to strengthen the infrastructure through which CDS trades are cleared and settled and to address weaknesses that have been identified in the risk-management practices of major market participants. Efforts to strengthen the infrastructure also will help support significant improvements in transparency, which in turn can enhance efficiency and market integrity.Footnotes1.President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)," March; President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "PWG Policy Objectives (19 KB PDF)," November 14.Return to text2.Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions, Bank for International Settlements (2004), "Recommendations for Central Counterparties (690 KB PDF)," November.Return to text3.Senior Supervisors Group (2008), "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence (373 KB PDF)," March 6.Return to text Summary of October 15 StatementAs noted in my earlier statement, supervisors have worked with market participants since 2005 to strengthen the infrastructure of credit derivatives markets through such steps as greater use of electronic confirmation platforms, adoption of a protocol that requires participants to request counterparty consent before assigning trades to a third party, and creation of a contract repository, which maintains an electronic record of CDS trades. Looking forward, the most important potential change in the infrastructure for credit derivatives is the creation of one or more central counterparties (CCPs) for CDS. The Federal Reserve supports CCP clearing of CDS because, if properly designed and managed, CCPs can reduce risks to market participants and to the financial system. In addition to clearing of CDS through CCPs, the Federal Reserve believes that exchange trading of sufficiently standardized contracts by banks and other market participants can increase market liquidity and transparency and thus should be encouraged. Policy discussions of potential regulatory changes for CDS have focused on preventing market manipulation, improving transparency, and mitigating systemic risk. Manipulation concerns can be addressed by clarifying the Securities and Exchange Commission's (SEC) authority with respect to CDS. Data from a contract repository provide a means for enhancing transparency, a topic I will discuss in greater depth later. To better contain systemic risk, prudential supervisors already have begun to address the weaknesses of major market participants in measuring and managing their counterparty credit risks. This step is fundamental to containing systemic risk because it helps limit the potential for any single large market participant to be the catalyst for transmission of such risk. Strengthening Infrastructure, Enhancing Risk Management, and Increasing TransparencyPWG’s Policy Objectives for OTC DerivativesIn March, the PWG made recommendations to enhance the market infrastructure for CDS and other OTC derivatives. In light of recent developments, last week the PWG announced a broader set of policy objectives to guide efforts to address the full range of challenges associated with OTC derivatives, including risk management of OTC derivatives and the transparency and integrity of CDS markets, as well as further measures to strengthen market infrastructure.1 Central Counterparties for CDS and Other Infrastructure IssuesThe PWG's top near-term priority is to oversee the implementation of CCP clearing for CDS. In the past month, authorities in the United States and abroad have sought to speed the development of CCPs for CDS. Four organizations plan to offer clearing for CDS. The primary federal regulators for two of these organizations would be U.S. authorities--in one case, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), and in the other case, the Federal Reserve Board (and its supervisory delegee, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York). The primary regulators for the two others would be authorities in the United Kingdom and Germany. In addition, the two U.S. CCPs for credit derivatives plan to obtain an exemption from the SEC from securities clearing agency registration requirements. The CFTC, SEC, and Federal Reserve recognize their mutual interests in ensuring that all CCPs for credit derivatives are organized and managed prudently. We have been jointly examining the risk management and financial resources of the two organizations that will be supervised by U.S. authorities against the "Recommendations for Central Counterparties," a set of international standards that were agreed to in 2004 by the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) of the central banks of the Group of 10 countries and the Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions.2 Last week, the CFTC, SEC, and Federal Reserve signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) that established a framework for ongoing consultation and information sharing related to CCPs for CDS. The MOU is particularly important because it created a mechanism to ensure that we all will have the information necessary for carrying out our respective responsibilities related to these markets regardless of the form in which a CCP is organized and regardless of which agency is the primary regulator. As outlined in my October statement, numerous other efforts are under way to build a more resilient infrastructure for OTC derivatives in addition to the development of a CCP for CDS. Major dealers recently committed to broader improvements in back-office processes for equity, interest rate, commodity, and foreign exchange products as well as credit products. These commitments include greater use of electronic processing of trades, speedier confirmation of trades, and expanded use of central trade repositories, in part to enhance market transparency. Dealers as well as other large market participants also have redoubled their efforts to terminate economically redundant trades that contribute to operational risk. To date in 2008, more than $24 trillion of the notional amount of CDS trades has been terminated. Risk ManagementAlthough the creation of CCPs for CDS will provide an important new tool for managing counterparty credit risk, enhancements to the risk-management policies and procedures for market participants will continue to be a high priority for supervisors. Many transactions that transfer credit risk between market participants will continue to be executed and managed on a bilateral, decentralized basis because they are not sufficiently standardized to be cleared through a CCP. Such OTC transactions are integral to the functioning of today's financial markets. Supervisors recognize, however, that financial institutions need to make changes in their risk-management practices for OTC derivatives by improving internal incentives and controls and by ensuring that traditional credit risk-management disciplines are in place for complex products, regardless of whether they take the form of CDS or of securities. Efforts to implement these changes continue through the Senior Supervisors Group, in which supervisors from the jurisdictions with major OTC derivatives dealers are represented.3Such cooperative groups offer an important tool for ensuring that supervisors set consistent standards for all participants in these global markets. TransparencyMany market observers have expressed concern about the opaqueness of OTC derivatives markets generally. The Depository Trust Clearing Corporation's (DTCC) Trade Information Warehouse, a contract repository, contains an electronic record of a large and growing share of CDS trades. DTCC recently began publishing aggregate market data based upon these records each week. Information is provided, for example, on index, versus single-name, contracts; reference entities on which the contracts are written; and maturities of contracts. However, these data currently are not comprehensive. The PWG has called for a record of all CDS that are not cleared through a CCP to be retained in the DTCC warehouse or a similar repository and for regulators to have access to the data on CDS housed at CCPs and repositories. Furthermore, the PWG has called for public reporting of prices, trading volumes, and aggregate open interest. ConclusionCredit derivatives and other OTC derivatives are integral to the smooth functioning of today's financial markets. With appropriate oversight and prudent risk management by users of these products, derivatives can provide significant benefits to financial market participants and to the financial system generally. The Federal Reserve is working cooperatively with other domestic and international authorities to strengthen the infrastructure through which CDS trades are cleared and settled and to address weaknesses that have been identified in the risk-management practices of major market participants. Efforts to strengthen the infrastructure also will help support significant improvements in transparency, which in turn can enhance efficiency and market integrity. Footnotes 1.President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)," March; President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "PWG Policy Objectives (19 KB PDF)," November 14.Return to text 2.Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions, Bank for International Settlements (2004), "Recommendations for Central Counterparties (690 KB PDF)," November.Return to text 3.Senior Supervisors Group (2008), "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence (373 KB PDF)," March 6.Return to text
Patrick M. Parkinson, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics Before the Committee on Agriculture, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Peterson, Ranking Member Goodlatte, and members of the Committee, I appreciate this opportunity to provide an update on recent initiatives by policymakers to enhance the markets in which credit default swaps (CDS) and other over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives trade and are settled. On October 15, I provided the Committee with a more extensive statement about the nature of OTC credit derivatives markets, prudential oversight of those markets, potential changes in market infrastructure, and the policy issues that should be considered in evaluating regulatory changes. Today, I will briefly review the key conclusions of that statement and then discuss the Federal Reserve's recent actions to strengthen market infrastructure, enhance risk management, and increase transparency for these products. I would like to emphasize at the outset that the Federal Reserve has taken these actions in coordination with the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG) and other domestic and international supervisors of key market participants.Summary of October 15 StatementAs noted in my earlier statement, supervisors have worked with market participants since 2005 to strengthen the infrastructure of credit derivatives markets through such steps as greater use of electronic confirmation platforms, adoption of a protocol that requires participants to request counterparty consent before assigning trades to a third party, and creation of a contract repository, which maintains an electronic record of CDS trades. Looking forward, the most important potential change in the infrastructure for credit derivatives is the creation of one or more central counterparties (CCPs) for CDS. The Federal Reserve supports CCP clearing of CDS because, if properly designed and managed, CCPs can reduce risks to market participants and to the financial system. In addition to clearing of CDS through CCPs, the Federal Reserve believes that exchange trading of sufficiently standardized contracts by banks and other market participants can increase market liquidity and transparency and thus should be encouraged.Policy discussions of potential regulatory changes for CDS have focused on preventing market manipulation, improving transparency, and mitigating systemic risk. Manipulation concerns can be addressed by clarifying the Securities and Exchange Commission's (SEC) authority with respect to CDS. Data from a contract repository provide a means for enhancing transparency, a topic I will discuss in greater depth later. To better contain systemic risk, prudential supervisors already have begun to address the weaknesses of major market participants in measuring and managing their counterparty credit risks. This step is fundamental to containing systemic risk because it helps limit the potential for any single large market participant to be the catalyst for transmission of such risk.Strengthening Infrastructure, Enhancing Risk Management, and Increasing TransparencyPWG’s Policy Objectives for OTC DerivativesIn March, the PWG made recommendations to enhance the market infrastructure for CDS and other OTC derivatives. In light of recent developments, last week the PWG announced a broader set of policy objectives to guide efforts to address the full range of challenges associated with OTC derivatives, including risk management of OTC derivatives and the transparency and integrity of CDS markets, as well as further measures to strengthen market infrastructure.1Central Counterparties for CDS and Other Infrastructure IssuesThe PWG's top near-term priority is to oversee the implementation of CCP clearing for CDS. In the past month, authorities in the United States and abroad have sought to speed the development of CCPs for CDS. Four organizations plan to offer clearing for CDS. The primary federal regulators for two of these organizations would be U.S. authorities--in one case, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), and in the other case, the Federal Reserve Board (and its supervisory delegee, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York). The primary regulators for the two others would be authorities in the United Kingdom and Germany. In addition, the two U.S. CCPs for credit derivatives plan to obtain an exemption from the SEC from securities clearing agency registration requirements. The CFTC, SEC, and Federal Reserve recognize their mutual interests in ensuring that all CCPs for credit derivatives are organized and managed prudently. We have been jointly examining the risk management and financial resources of the two organizations that will be supervised by U.S. authorities against the "Recommendations for Central Counterparties," a set of international standards that were agreed to in 2004 by the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) of the central banks of the Group of 10 countries and the Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions.2Last week, the CFTC, SEC, and Federal Reserve signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) that established a framework for ongoing consultation and information sharing related to CCPs for CDS. The MOU is particularly important because it created a mechanism to ensure that we all will have the information necessary for carrying out our respective responsibilities related to these markets regardless of the form in which a CCP is organized and regardless of which agency is the primary regulator.As outlined in my October statement, numerous other efforts are under way to build a more resilient infrastructure for OTC derivatives in addition to the development of a CCP for CDS. Major dealers recently committed to broader improvements in back-office processes for equity, interest rate, commodity, and foreign exchange products as well as credit products. These commitments include greater use of electronic processing of trades, speedier confirmation of trades, and expanded use of central trade repositories, in part to enhance market transparency. Dealers as well as other large market participants also have redoubled their efforts to terminate economically redundant trades that contribute to operational risk. To date in 2008, more than $24 trillion of the notional amount of CDS trades has been terminated.Risk ManagementAlthough the creation of CCPs for CDS will provide an important new tool for managing counterparty credit risk, enhancements to the risk-management policies and procedures for market participants will continue to be a high priority for supervisors. Many transactions that transfer credit risk between market participants will continue to be executed and managed on a bilateral, decentralized basis because they are not sufficiently standardized to be cleared through a CCP. Such OTC transactions are integral to the functioning of today's financial markets. Supervisors recognize, however, that financial institutions need to make changes in their risk-management practices for OTC derivatives by improving internal incentives and controls and by ensuring that traditional credit risk-management disciplines are in place for complex products, regardless of whether they take the form of CDS or of securities. Efforts to implement these changes continue through the Senior Supervisors Group, in which supervisors from the jurisdictions with major OTC derivatives dealers are represented.3Such cooperative groups offer an important tool for ensuring that supervisors set consistent standards for all participants in these global markets.TransparencyMany market observers have expressed concern about the opaqueness of OTC derivatives markets generally. The Depository Trust Clearing Corporation's (DTCC) Trade Information Warehouse, a contract repository, contains an electronic record of a large and growing share of CDS trades. DTCC recently began publishing aggregate market data based upon these records each week. Information is provided, for example, on index, versus single-name, contracts; reference entities on which the contracts are written; and maturities of contracts. However, these data currently are not comprehensive. The PWG has called for a record of all CDS that are not cleared through a CCP to be retained in the DTCC warehouse or a similar repository and for regulators to have access to the data on CDS housed at CCPs and repositories. Furthermore, the PWG has called for public reporting of prices, trading volumes, and aggregate open interest.ConclusionCredit derivatives and other OTC derivatives are integral to the smooth functioning of today's financial markets. With appropriate oversight and prudent risk management by users of these products, derivatives can provide significant benefits to financial market participants and to the financial system generally. The Federal Reserve is working cooperatively with other domestic and international authorities to strengthen the infrastructure through which CDS trades are cleared and settled and to address weaknesses that have been identified in the risk-management practices of major market participants. Efforts to strengthen the infrastructure also will help support significant improvements in transparency, which in turn can enhance efficiency and market integrity.Footnotes1.President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)," March; President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "PWG Policy Objectives (19 KB PDF)," November 14.Return to text2.Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions, Bank for International Settlements (2004), "Recommendations for Central Counterparties (690 KB PDF)," November.Return to text3.Senior Supervisors Group (2008), "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence (373 KB PDF)," March 6.Return to text Summary of October 15 StatementAs noted in my earlier statement, supervisors have worked with market participants since 2005 to strengthen the infrastructure of credit derivatives markets through such steps as greater use of electronic confirmation platforms, adoption of a protocol that requires participants to request counterparty consent before assigning trades to a third party, and creation of a contract repository, which maintains an electronic record of CDS trades. Looking forward, the most important potential change in the infrastructure for credit derivatives is the creation of one or more central counterparties (CCPs) for CDS. The Federal Reserve supports CCP clearing of CDS because, if properly designed and managed, CCPs can reduce risks to market participants and to the financial system. In addition to clearing of CDS through CCPs, the Federal Reserve believes that exchange trading of sufficiently standardized contracts by banks and other market participants can increase market liquidity and transparency and thus should be encouraged. Policy discussions of potential regulatory changes for CDS have focused on preventing market manipulation, improving transparency, and mitigating systemic risk. Manipulation concerns can be addressed by clarifying the Securities and Exchange Commission's (SEC) authority with respect to CDS. Data from a contract repository provide a means for enhancing transparency, a topic I will discuss in greater depth later. To better contain systemic risk, prudential supervisors already have begun to address the weaknesses of major market participants in measuring and managing their counterparty credit risks. This step is fundamental to containing systemic risk because it helps limit the potential for any single large market participant to be the catalyst for transmission of such risk. Strengthening Infrastructure, Enhancing Risk Management, and Increasing TransparencyPWG’s Policy Objectives for OTC DerivativesIn March, the PWG made recommendations to enhance the market infrastructure for CDS and other OTC derivatives. In light of recent developments, last week the PWG announced a broader set of policy objectives to guide efforts to address the full range of challenges associated with OTC derivatives, including risk management of OTC derivatives and the transparency and integrity of CDS markets, as well as further measures to strengthen market infrastructure.1 Central Counterparties for CDS and Other Infrastructure IssuesThe PWG's top near-term priority is to oversee the implementation of CCP clearing for CDS. In the past month, authorities in the United States and abroad have sought to speed the development of CCPs for CDS. Four organizations plan to offer clearing for CDS. The primary federal regulators for two of these organizations would be U.S. authorities--in one case, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), and in the other case, the Federal Reserve Board (and its supervisory delegee, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York). The primary regulators for the two others would be authorities in the United Kingdom and Germany. In addition, the two U.S. CCPs for credit derivatives plan to obtain an exemption from the SEC from securities clearing agency registration requirements. The CFTC, SEC, and Federal Reserve recognize their mutual interests in ensuring that all CCPs for credit derivatives are organized and managed prudently. We have been jointly examining the risk management and financial resources of the two organizations that will be supervised by U.S. authorities against the "Recommendations for Central Counterparties," a set of international standards that were agreed to in 2004 by the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) of the central banks of the Group of 10 countries and the Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions.2 Last week, the CFTC, SEC, and Federal Reserve signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) that established a framework for ongoing consultation and information sharing related to CCPs for CDS. The MOU is particularly important because it created a mechanism to ensure that we all will have the information necessary for carrying out our respective responsibilities related to these markets regardless of the form in which a CCP is organized and regardless of which agency is the primary regulator. As outlined in my October statement, numerous other efforts are under way to build a more resilient infrastructure for OTC derivatives in addition to the development of a CCP for CDS. Major dealers recently committed to broader improvements in back-office processes for equity, interest rate, commodity, and foreign exchange products as well as credit products. These commitments include greater use of electronic processing of trades, speedier confirmation of trades, and expanded use of central trade repositories, in part to enhance market transparency. Dealers as well as other large market participants also have redoubled their efforts to terminate economically redundant trades that contribute to operational risk. To date in 2008, more than $24 trillion of the notional amount of CDS trades has been terminated. Risk ManagementAlthough the creation of CCPs for CDS will provide an important new tool for managing counterparty credit risk, enhancements to the risk-management policies and procedures for market participants will continue to be a high priority for supervisors. Many transactions that transfer credit risk between market participants will continue to be executed and managed on a bilateral, decentralized basis because they are not sufficiently standardized to be cleared through a CCP. Such OTC transactions are integral to the functioning of today's financial markets. Supervisors recognize, however, that financial institutions need to make changes in their risk-management practices for OTC derivatives by improving internal incentives and controls and by ensuring that traditional credit risk-management disciplines are in place for complex products, regardless of whether they take the form of CDS or of securities. Efforts to implement these changes continue through the Senior Supervisors Group, in which supervisors from the jurisdictions with major OTC derivatives dealers are represented.3Such cooperative groups offer an important tool for ensuring that supervisors set consistent standards for all participants in these global markets. TransparencyMany market observers have expressed concern about the opaqueness of OTC derivatives markets generally. The Depository Trust Clearing Corporation's (DTCC) Trade Information Warehouse, a contract repository, contains an electronic record of a large and growing share of CDS trades. DTCC recently began publishing aggregate market data based upon these records each week. Information is provided, for example, on index, versus single-name, contracts; reference entities on which the contracts are written; and maturities of contracts. However, these data currently are not comprehensive. The PWG has called for a record of all CDS that are not cleared through a CCP to be retained in the DTCC warehouse or a similar repository and for regulators to have access to the data on CDS housed at CCPs and repositories. Furthermore, the PWG has called for public reporting of prices, trading volumes, and aggregate open interest. ConclusionCredit derivatives and other OTC derivatives are integral to the smooth functioning of today's financial markets. With appropriate oversight and prudent risk management by users of these products, derivatives can provide significant benefits to financial market participants and to the financial system generally. The Federal Reserve is working cooperatively with other domestic and international authorities to strengthen the infrastructure through which CDS trades are cleared and settled and to address weaknesses that have been identified in the risk-management practices of major market participants. Efforts to strengthen the infrastructure also will help support significant improvements in transparency, which in turn can enhance efficiency and market integrity. Footnotes 1.President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)," March; President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "PWG Policy Objectives (19 KB PDF)," November 14.Return to text 2.Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions, Bank for International Settlements (2004), "Recommendations for Central Counterparties (690 KB PDF)," November.Return to text 3.Senior Supervisors Group (2008), "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence (373 KB PDF)," March 6.Return to text
Patrick M. Parkinson, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics Before the Committee on Agriculture, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Peterson, Ranking Member Goodlatte, and members of the Committee, I appreciate this opportunity to provide an update on recent initiatives by policymakers to enhance the markets in which credit default swaps (CDS) and other over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives trade and are settled. On October 15, I provided the Committee with a more extensive statement about the nature of OTC credit derivatives markets, prudential oversight of those markets, potential changes in market infrastructure, and the policy issues that should be considered in evaluating regulatory changes. Today, I will briefly review the key conclusions of that statement and then discuss the Federal Reserve's recent actions to strengthen market infrastructure, enhance risk management, and increase transparency for these products. I would like to emphasize at the outset that the Federal Reserve has taken these actions in coordination with the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG) and other domestic and international supervisors of key market participants.Summary of October 15 StatementAs noted in my earlier statement, supervisors have worked with market participants since 2005 to strengthen the infrastructure of credit derivatives markets through such steps as greater use of electronic confirmation platforms, adoption of a protocol that requires participants to request counterparty consent before assigning trades to a third party, and creation of a contract repository, which maintains an electronic record of CDS trades. Looking forward, the most important potential change in the infrastructure for credit derivatives is the creation of one or more central counterparties (CCPs) for CDS. The Federal Reserve supports CCP clearing of CDS because, if properly designed and managed, CCPs can reduce risks to market participants and to the financial system. In addition to clearing of CDS through CCPs, the Federal Reserve believes that exchange trading of sufficiently standardized contracts by banks and other market participants can increase market liquidity and transparency and thus should be encouraged.Policy discussions of potential regulatory changes for CDS have focused on preventing market manipulation, improving transparency, and mitigating systemic risk. Manipulation concerns can be addressed by clarifying the Securities and Exchange Commission's (SEC) authority with respect to CDS. Data from a contract repository provide a means for enhancing transparency, a topic I will discuss in greater depth later. To better contain systemic risk, prudential supervisors already have begun to address the weaknesses of major market participants in measuring and managing their counterparty credit risks. This step is fundamental to containing systemic risk because it helps limit the potential for any single large market participant to be the catalyst for transmission of such risk.Strengthening Infrastructure, Enhancing Risk Management, and Increasing TransparencyPWG’s Policy Objectives for OTC DerivativesIn March, the PWG made recommendations to enhance the market infrastructure for CDS and other OTC derivatives. In light of recent developments, last week the PWG announced a broader set of policy objectives to guide efforts to address the full range of challenges associated with OTC derivatives, including risk management of OTC derivatives and the transparency and integrity of CDS markets, as well as further measures to strengthen market infrastructure.1Central Counterparties for CDS and Other Infrastructure IssuesThe PWG's top near-term priority is to oversee the implementation of CCP clearing for CDS. In the past month, authorities in the United States and abroad have sought to speed the development of CCPs for CDS. Four organizations plan to offer clearing for CDS. The primary federal regulators for two of these organizations would be U.S. authorities--in one case, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), and in the other case, the Federal Reserve Board (and its supervisory delegee, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York). The primary regulators for the two others would be authorities in the United Kingdom and Germany. In addition, the two U.S. CCPs for credit derivatives plan to obtain an exemption from the SEC from securities clearing agency registration requirements. The CFTC, SEC, and Federal Reserve recognize their mutual interests in ensuring that all CCPs for credit derivatives are organized and managed prudently. We have been jointly examining the risk management and financial resources of the two organizations that will be supervised by U.S. authorities against the "Recommendations for Central Counterparties," a set of international standards that were agreed to in 2004 by the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) of the central banks of the Group of 10 countries and the Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions.2Last week, the CFTC, SEC, and Federal Reserve signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) that established a framework for ongoing consultation and information sharing related to CCPs for CDS. The MOU is particularly important because it created a mechanism to ensure that we all will have the information necessary for carrying out our respective responsibilities related to these markets regardless of the form in which a CCP is organized and regardless of which agency is the primary regulator.As outlined in my October statement, numerous other efforts are under way to build a more resilient infrastructure for OTC derivatives in addition to the development of a CCP for CDS. Major dealers recently committed to broader improvements in back-office processes for equity, interest rate, commodity, and foreign exchange products as well as credit products. These commitments include greater use of electronic processing of trades, speedier confirmation of trades, and expanded use of central trade repositories, in part to enhance market transparency. Dealers as well as other large market participants also have redoubled their efforts to terminate economically redundant trades that contribute to operational risk. To date in 2008, more than $24 trillion of the notional amount of CDS trades has been terminated.Risk ManagementAlthough the creation of CCPs for CDS will provide an important new tool for managing counterparty credit risk, enhancements to the risk-management policies and procedures for market participants will continue to be a high priority for supervisors. Many transactions that transfer credit risk between market participants will continue to be executed and managed on a bilateral, decentralized basis because they are not sufficiently standardized to be cleared through a CCP. Such OTC transactions are integral to the functioning of today's financial markets. Supervisors recognize, however, that financial institutions need to make changes in their risk-management practices for OTC derivatives by improving internal incentives and controls and by ensuring that traditional credit risk-management disciplines are in place for complex products, regardless of whether they take the form of CDS or of securities. Efforts to implement these changes continue through the Senior Supervisors Group, in which supervisors from the jurisdictions with major OTC derivatives dealers are represented.3Such cooperative groups offer an important tool for ensuring that supervisors set consistent standards for all participants in these global markets.TransparencyMany market observers have expressed concern about the opaqueness of OTC derivatives markets generally. The Depository Trust Clearing Corporation's (DTCC) Trade Information Warehouse, a contract repository, contains an electronic record of a large and growing share of CDS trades. DTCC recently began publishing aggregate market data based upon these records each week. Information is provided, for example, on index, versus single-name, contracts; reference entities on which the contracts are written; and maturities of contracts. However, these data currently are not comprehensive. The PWG has called for a record of all CDS that are not cleared through a CCP to be retained in the DTCC warehouse or a similar repository and for regulators to have access to the data on CDS housed at CCPs and repositories. Furthermore, the PWG has called for public reporting of prices, trading volumes, and aggregate open interest.ConclusionCredit derivatives and other OTC derivatives are integral to the smooth functioning of today's financial markets. With appropriate oversight and prudent risk management by users of these products, derivatives can provide significant benefits to financial market participants and to the financial system generally. The Federal Reserve is working cooperatively with other domestic and international authorities to strengthen the infrastructure through which CDS trades are cleared and settled and to address weaknesses that have been identified in the risk-management practices of major market participants. Efforts to strengthen the infrastructure also will help support significant improvements in transparency, which in turn can enhance efficiency and market integrity.Footnotes1.President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)," March; President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "PWG Policy Objectives (19 KB PDF)," November 14.Return to text2.Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions, Bank for International Settlements (2004), "Recommendations for Central Counterparties (690 KB PDF)," November.Return to text3.Senior Supervisors Group (2008), "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence (373 KB PDF)," March 6.Return to text Summary of October 15 StatementAs noted in my earlier statement, supervisors have worked with market participants since 2005 to strengthen the infrastructure of credit derivatives markets through such steps as greater use of electronic confirmation platforms, adoption of a protocol that requires participants to request counterparty consent before assigning trades to a third party, and creation of a contract repository, which maintains an electronic record of CDS trades. Looking forward, the most important potential change in the infrastructure for credit derivatives is the creation of one or more central counterparties (CCPs) for CDS. The Federal Reserve supports CCP clearing of CDS because, if properly designed and managed, CCPs can reduce risks to market participants and to the financial system. In addition to clearing of CDS through CCPs, the Federal Reserve believes that exchange trading of sufficiently standardized contracts by banks and other market participants can increase market liquidity and transparency and thus should be encouraged. Policy discussions of potential regulatory changes for CDS have focused on preventing market manipulation, improving transparency, and mitigating systemic risk. Manipulation concerns can be addressed by clarifying the Securities and Exchange Commission's (SEC) authority with respect to CDS. Data from a contract repository provide a means for enhancing transparency, a topic I will discuss in greater depth later. To better contain systemic risk, prudential supervisors already have begun to address the weaknesses of major market participants in measuring and managing their counterparty credit risks. This step is fundamental to containing systemic risk because it helps limit the potential for any single large market participant to be the catalyst for transmission of such risk. Strengthening Infrastructure, Enhancing Risk Management, and Increasing TransparencyPWG’s Policy Objectives for OTC DerivativesIn March, the PWG made recommendations to enhance the market infrastructure for CDS and other OTC derivatives. In light of recent developments, last week the PWG announced a broader set of policy objectives to guide efforts to address the full range of challenges associated with OTC derivatives, including risk management of OTC derivatives and the transparency and integrity of CDS markets, as well as further measures to strengthen market infrastructure.1 Central Counterparties for CDS and Other Infrastructure IssuesThe PWG's top near-term priority is to oversee the implementation of CCP clearing for CDS. In the past month, authorities in the United States and abroad have sought to speed the development of CCPs for CDS. Four organizations plan to offer clearing for CDS. The primary federal regulators for two of these organizations would be U.S. authorities--in one case, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), and in the other case, the Federal Reserve Board (and its supervisory delegee, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York). The primary regulators for the two others would be authorities in the United Kingdom and Germany. In addition, the two U.S. CCPs for credit derivatives plan to obtain an exemption from the SEC from securities clearing agency registration requirements. The CFTC, SEC, and Federal Reserve recognize their mutual interests in ensuring that all CCPs for credit derivatives are organized and managed prudently. We have been jointly examining the risk management and financial resources of the two organizations that will be supervised by U.S. authorities against the "Recommendations for Central Counterparties," a set of international standards that were agreed to in 2004 by the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) of the central banks of the Group of 10 countries and the Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions.2 Last week, the CFTC, SEC, and Federal Reserve signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) that established a framework for ongoing consultation and information sharing related to CCPs for CDS. The MOU is particularly important because it created a mechanism to ensure that we all will have the information necessary for carrying out our respective responsibilities related to these markets regardless of the form in which a CCP is organized and regardless of which agency is the primary regulator. As outlined in my October statement, numerous other efforts are under way to build a more resilient infrastructure for OTC derivatives in addition to the development of a CCP for CDS. Major dealers recently committed to broader improvements in back-office processes for equity, interest rate, commodity, and foreign exchange products as well as credit products. These commitments include greater use of electronic processing of trades, speedier confirmation of trades, and expanded use of central trade repositories, in part to enhance market transparency. Dealers as well as other large market participants also have redoubled their efforts to terminate economically redundant trades that contribute to operational risk. To date in 2008, more than $24 trillion of the notional amount of CDS trades has been terminated. Risk ManagementAlthough the creation of CCPs for CDS will provide an important new tool for managing counterparty credit risk, enhancements to the risk-management policies and procedures for market participants will continue to be a high priority for supervisors. Many transactions that transfer credit risk between market participants will continue to be executed and managed on a bilateral, decentralized basis because they are not sufficiently standardized to be cleared through a CCP. Such OTC transactions are integral to the functioning of today's financial markets. Supervisors recognize, however, that financial institutions need to make changes in their risk-management practices for OTC derivatives by improving internal incentives and controls and by ensuring that traditional credit risk-management disciplines are in place for complex products, regardless of whether they take the form of CDS or of securities. Efforts to implement these changes continue through the Senior Supervisors Group, in which supervisors from the jurisdictions with major OTC derivatives dealers are represented.3Such cooperative groups offer an important tool for ensuring that supervisors set consistent standards for all participants in these global markets. TransparencyMany market observers have expressed concern about the opaqueness of OTC derivatives markets generally. The Depository Trust Clearing Corporation's (DTCC) Trade Information Warehouse, a contract repository, contains an electronic record of a large and growing share of CDS trades. DTCC recently began publishing aggregate market data based upon these records each week. Information is provided, for example, on index, versus single-name, contracts; reference entities on which the contracts are written; and maturities of contracts. However, these data currently are not comprehensive. The PWG has called for a record of all CDS that are not cleared through a CCP to be retained in the DTCC warehouse or a similar repository and for regulators to have access to the data on CDS housed at CCPs and repositories. Furthermore, the PWG has called for public reporting of prices, trading volumes, and aggregate open interest. ConclusionCredit derivatives and other OTC derivatives are integral to the smooth functioning of today's financial markets. With appropriate oversight and prudent risk management by users of these products, derivatives can provide significant benefits to financial market participants and to the financial system generally. The Federal Reserve is working cooperatively with other domestic and international authorities to strengthen the infrastructure through which CDS trades are cleared and settled and to address weaknesses that have been identified in the risk-management practices of major market participants. Efforts to strengthen the infrastructure also will help support significant improvements in transparency, which in turn can enhance efficiency and market integrity. Footnotes 1.President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)," March; President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "PWG Policy Objectives (19 KB PDF)," November 14.Return to text 2.Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions, Bank for International Settlements (2004), "Recommendations for Central Counterparties (690 KB PDF)," November.Return to text 3.Senior Supervisors Group (2008), "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence (373 KB PDF)," March 6.Return to text
Governor Randall S. Kroszner Before the Committee on Small Business, U.S. House of Representatives Chairwoman Velázquez, Ranking Member Chabot, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to appear before you on behalf of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to discuss the availability of credit to small businesses. Small businesses are critical to the health of the U.S. economy. They generate more than half of nonfarm business gross domestic product, employ more than half of private-sector workers, and over the past decade have created well over half of net new jobs annually. Moreover, larger firms often begin as smaller firms that prosper and grow. If small businesses are to continue to provide major benefits to the economy, their access to credit is clearly a high priority. My statement today will address how the ongoing turmoil in the financial sector and the weakening macroeconomy appear to be affecting small businesses' access to credit, while recognizing that the impressive diversity across both industry and geography of the small business sector makes it very difficult to draw too many general conclusions. In addition, I will discuss the policy actions that the Federal Reserve, the Congress, the Treasury, and other government agencies have taken in recent weeks to address the overall functioning of financial markets and deteriorating economic conditions as well as how these policies should assist small businesses going forward. Recent Financial Market and Economic DevelopmentsAs you know, the U.S. financial sector has been under severe stress for more than a year as a result of declining house prices, large losses on mortgages and mortgage-related instruments at financial institutions, and an abrupt pullback from risk-taking by investors. These strains intensified in late September and early October, and lending between banks and other financial institutions beyond more than a few days virtually shut down. Withdrawals from money market mutual funds and fears that net asset values would fall further severely disrupted commercial paper and other short-term funding markets, and longer-term credit became much more costly as risk spreads on corporate debt instruments jumped and private interest rates rose. The problems in credit markets and concerns about the economy have caused equity prices to swing sharply and to decline significantly, on net. Even before the recent heightening of the financial market turmoil, economic activity had shown considerable signs of weakening. In the labor market, private nonfarm payroll employment fell in August by a notably larger amount than in the previous seven months of the year, and in September and October, job losses were even more sizeable. The unemployment rate in October moved sharply higher to 6-1/2 percent. On the spending side, consumption expenditures, business investment outlays, and residential investment spending all declined in the third quarter, and overall real economic activity contracted 1/4 percent. Consistent with the emerging slack in both product and labor markets and a drop in the price of energy and other commodities, headline and core measures of price inflation have both decelerated in recent months. In addition, measures of inflation expectations have also declined. Small Business Access to Credit in the Current EnvironmentWith this general background in mind, I will now turn to how current financial and macroeconomic conditions appear to be affecting access to credit by small businesses. As you may recall, former Federal Reserve Governor Frederic Mishkin testified before the Senate Committee on Small Business in April and concluded that credit standards for small businesses had almost certainly tightened since the onset of the crisis, and that much of this tightening appeared to be reflected in an increased cost of credit to small businesses rather than any significant reduction in the availability of credit.1He noted, however, the high degree of uncertainty surrounding this assessment, which remains the case now with even more data in hand. In my statement today, I will discuss how both credit supply and credit demand factors appear to be affecting small business access to credit, while recognizing that, in practice, it is normally quite difficult to separate the effects of these two forces. With respect to credit supply, access to credit for both small and large businesses may be affected by a decline in the willingness of banks and other lenders to make loans to small businesses because of, for example, credit market disruptions or other stresses that financial institutions may be enduring. In addition, small business access to credit can be reduced by a drop in the creditworthiness of small businesses because of, for example, a decline in the value of collateral they can post to back a loan. Alternatively, a drop in the demand for small businesses' products and services resulting from, for instance, weakening macroeconomic conditions will reduce current and expected sales and revenues. The likely resulting pullback in expansion plans will reduce businesses' demand for credit over and above any effects coming from the supply side of the market. To summarize our conclusions, the information that we have received since April from both banks and small businesses suggest, rather convincingly, that over the last six months it has become more difficult for small businesses to access credit, but that at the same time, small business demand for credit has declined. Commercial banks, the most common source of credit for small businesses, have generally both imposed more-stringent credit standards and increased interest rate spreads and fees. In addition, deteriorating financial positions in both the small business and the household sectors are almost surely reducing the creditworthiness of many small businesses and thereby constraining their access to credit. That being said, the information we have on the volume of small business loans suggests that credit is generally available, albeit on significantly stricter terms. In addition, small businesses generally report that reduced demand for their products and services caused by a lower level of economic activity is a more serious concern than is the tightening of credit supply conditions. Put differently, while credit supply concerns are real, the weakened state of the economy appears to be the more serious challenge facing most small businesses in the current environment. Importantly, there is some evidence that concern over access to credit is relatively stronger at larger businesses. The remainder of my statement discusses the information on which we base these conclusions. Incoming survey data for the banking sector suggest that small businesses access to credit has tightened further over the past half year. For example, in the Board's most recent Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices conducted in October, a net 75 percent of the domestic banks surveyed--a larger net fraction than in the July survey--reported that over the previous three months, they had tightened the standards applied when approving commercial and industrial (C&I) loans to small firms.2But small businesses were not alone; almost a net 85 percent of the domestic banks surveyed reported having tightened lending standards on C&I loans to large and middle-market firms over the previous three months. In both the July and October surveys, a significant and increasing net fraction of banks noted that they had increased the interest rate spreads over their cost of funds and fees on the C&I loans they had approved for small firms, and a somewhat smaller net fraction of banks reported tightening nonprice conditions, such as collateral requirements and loan covenants. Importantly, in both the July and October surveys, the net fractions of banks reporting tighter lending standards and tighter price terms on C&I loans to small firms were very high by historical standards going back to 1990. These results are also true for loans made to medium-size and large businesses. Somewhat in contrast to the above results, information from the most recent (August) quarterly Survey of Terms of Business Lending suggested that there has been relatively little net change in average interest rate spreads on C&I loans since late 2006.3Loan rate spreads at small domestic banks, which are an important source of financing for small businesses, remained toward the low end of the wide range within which they have fluctuated since 2004. Spreads on C&I loan originations smaller than $100,000 at all banks, which are loans that are likely made to small businesses, have also remained broadly unchanged since 2006. While differences between the two surveys, including their relative timeliness, likely explain part of the contrasting results, on balance, the quarterly Survey of Terms of Business lending results serve to temper the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey results.4 Data on changes in the quantity of C&I loans at banks also support the view that small businesses have generally maintained their access to bank credit, although new loans and new loan commitments are being subjected to stricter lending standards and terms. Based on a sample of banks of all sizes that report weekly to the Federal Reserve, the dollar volume of outstanding C&I loans at both large and small U.S. commercial banks expanded robustly over the first four months of this year, increased moderately over the months of May through August, and surged dramatically in September. A special set of questions on the October Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey attempted to help explain these patterns. The results suggested that firms' drawing on unused portions of loans made under previous commitments was not especially important for explaining the September surge in lending at banks with less than $20 billion in total assets. Indeed, over one-third of those smaller banks reported having increased loans not made under previous commitments. However, many of those banks noted that the increased demand was accounted for, in part, by firms that were substituting bank loans for other funding sources. Incoming data from business surveys also indicate that lending conditions for small businesses have tightened--in some cases, significantly. For example, recent monthly surveys of the National Federation of Independent Businesses (NFIB), which are available through October, suggest that financing conditions for small businesses have deteriorated substantially over the past several months. In particular, the net percentage of respondents that reported that credit was harder to obtain over the preceding three months and the net percentage of respondents that expected credit conditions to tighten over the next three months have climbed to the higher end or the top of their ranges over the past two decades. That said, financing conditions have continued to be ranked as the top business concern by only a modest fraction of small business--5 percent in October--although this is up from 2 percent last March. However, this modest level of concern may, in part, reflect the dominance of other factors, such as weak demand conditions, a topic to which I will return shortly. The Duke/CFO Magazine Global Business Outlook Survey, conducted most recently in September, also suggested that the ongoing financial turmoil is having an increasingly adverse effect on small businesses' access to credit.5Almost 40 percent of the chief financial officers (CFOs) of small businesses who responded to the survey said that credit had become more costly, less available, or both as a result of the financial turmoil. This proportion is up slightly from the March survey when this sentiment was reported by about one-third of responding small business CFOs. This survey also asked respondents to rank their top three concerns for their business, with (changing) options given in the survey. "Credit markets/interest rates" was ranked second to "consumer demand" as the top concern among small business CFOs in both the September 2008 and the March 2008 surveys. This survey also suggested, as did the Senior Loan Officer Survey discussed above, that access to credit is a relatively more serious concern for larger firms. For example, some 38 percent of the Duke/CFO Magazine survey respondents with less than 500 employees indicate that the financial turmoil is adversely impacting their access to credit, but 47 percent of larger firms say this is true. Consumer demand is the top business concern for firms of all sizes. The effect of the current crisis on household balance sheets is an additional channel through which small business access to credit is being affected. As you know, small business and household finances are, in practice, very closely intertwined. For example, data from the Board's 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances indicated that about 11 percent of households own and actively manage a small business, and of these households, about 18 percent use personal assets to guarantee or collateralize loans for the business.6A broadly similar fraction of households that own and actively manage a small business also have made one or more loans to the business. In addition, the most recent Survey of Small Business Finances (SSBF) indicated that about 15 percent of the total value of small business loans in 2003 was collateralized by "personal" real estate (and some 37 percent was collateralized by business real estate assets).7Because the condition of household balance sheets can be relevant to the ability of some small businesses to obtain credit, the fact that declining house prices have weakened household balance-sheet positions suggests that the housing market crisis has likely had an adverse impact on the volume and price of credit that small businesses are able to raise over and above the effects of the broader credit market turmoil. Another indicator of the stress that current conditions have placed on small business credit access is the recent experience of the Small Business Administration's (SBA) 7(a) guaranteed loan program. This program is generally used to provide loans to small businesses when they cannot get conventional loans. Although SBA-guaranteed loans are only a small portion of total small business loans, in recent months the dollar volume of these loans has dropped significantly, and in October 2008 the volume was less than 50 percent of its level 12 months earlier. These declines are the result of a number of factors--lower demand overall for loans due to the weaker economic outlook, tightened credit standards by lenders, and declining creditworthiness among applicants because of their deteriorating financial condition. In addition, market reports indicate that in recent weeks, banks and other lenders that make SBA loans have not been able to securitize and sell SBA-backed loans to other institutions in the secondary market. Turning to credit demand, the NFIB survey's results are even more pessimistic than they were in April. For example, the survey's index of small business optimism dropped in October to its lowest level since the monthly surveys began in 1986. This subdued level reflects deterioration in several components of the index, including that the fraction of respondents considering expansion in the next three months and the fraction considering capital expenditures in the next three to six months have fallen to the bottom of their ranges over the past two decades. Weak plans for business expansion will likely reduce demand for loans, which could result in future declines in small business loans even without any tightening of credit supply conditions. As noted earlier, although only 5 percent of small businesses in the NFIB survey ranked financing conditions as their top concern, some 23 percent of firms indicated that sales were their main concern. These results, when combined with the Duke/CFO Magazine survey data, suggest that consumer demand concerns generally provide the most serious challenges facing small businesses. Policy Responses to Financial and Economic Developments and Their Implications for Small Business Credit AccessI would now like to turn to a discussion of the policy actions that the Federal Reserve, the Congress, the Treasury, and other government agencies have taken in recent weeks to address the overall functioning of financial markets and the weakening of economic activity as well as how these policies should assist small businesses going forward. In response to the escalation in financial market stress that began in late September, policymakers both in the United States and other countries have taken a series of extraordinary actions aimed at restoring market functioning and improving investor confidence. The Federal Reserve has continued to address ongoing problems in interbank funding markets by expanding its existing lending facilities, increasing the quantity of term funds that it auctions to banks, and accommodating greater demand for funds from banks and primary dealers. The Federal Reserve has also implemented several important temporary facilities to alleviate the pressures on money market mutual funds and commercial paper issuers. The Emergency Economic Stabilization Act (EESA), enacted by Congress in early October, provides critically important new tools to address financial market problems. The Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), authorized by the legislation, allows the Treasury to provide capital to financial institutions across a wide spectrum of sizes and to purchase or guarantee troubled mortgage-related and possibly other assets held by banks and other financial institutions. The EESA also temporarily raises the limit on the deposit insurance coverage provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) from $100,000 to $250,000 per depositor and temporarily fully covers non-interest-bearing transactions accounts, such as payroll accounts. As you know, this latter action was aimed particularly at helping small businesses. In response to weakening macroeconomic activity and the increased downside risks to economic growth and employment implied by the recent escalation in financial market stress (along with diminished upside risks to inflation), the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), in a coordinated effort with other central banks, lowered the target federal funds rate 50 basis points to 1-1/2 percent on October 8. This cut was followed by a further 50 basis point easing to 1 percent at the October FOMC meeting. Additionally, on November 12, the federal banking agencies released an interagency statement aimed at ensuring that all banking organizations fulfill their fundamental role in the economy as intermediaries of credit to businesses, consumers, and other creditworthy borrowers.8 These actions should have a wide range of positive effects across the entire economy, including small businesses. Policymakers' actions over the last two months in interbank funding markets, commercial paper markets, and the money market mutual fund industry should help restore market functioning and allow short-term funding to be directed to where the economy most needs it. Likewise, the activities permitted as part of the EESA legislation should help rebuild confidence in the financial system, increase the liquidity of financial markets, and improve the ability of a broad range of financial institutions to raise capital from private sources. The expansion in the coverage of deposit insurance provided by the FDIC should also bolster public confidence and provide additional liquidity to FDIC-insured institutions. The FOMC's cumulative 1 percentage point reduction in the federal funds rate in October, combined with previous reductions between September 2007 and May 2008, should lower lending costs and stimulate economic activity in coming quarters. And, the agencies' recent guidance should encourage lending to creditworthy borrowers. The benefits to small businesses from some of the above-described policy actions will be largely indirect, but nevertheless real. For example, although small businesses do not themselves issue nonfinancial commercial paper, they nonetheless benefit when large nonfinancial firms can issue commercial paper in well-functioning markets and thus do not have to tap backup lines of credit at banks. Similarly, improving interbank funding markets and restoring public confidence in banks and other financial institutions benefits small businesses--again, indirectly--by lowering intermediaries' and thereby small businesses' borrowing costs and increasing the volume of loans that banks can extend. The temporary increase in FDIC deposit insurance coverage should reinforce these effects by further strengthening public confidence and providing additional liquidity to FDIC-insured institutions. Importantly, some of these policy actions will also directly benefit small businesses. For example, the higher deposit insurance coverage limits confer direct benefits by greatly reducing the volume of exposed small business deposits as well as by decreasing the number of small businesses with exposed bank deposits. Data from the 2003 SSBF indicate that under the $100,000 deposit insurance ceiling, an estimated $178 billion of small business deposits were uninsured, and 8.7 percent of small businesses had some deposit exposure. With the increased ceiling of $250,000 and the full insurance of non-interest-bearing transactions accounts, the 2003 SSBF data suggest that total small business deposit exposure fell to $37 billion and that less than 1 percent of small businesses have any deposit exposure. Among firms with fewer than 10 employees--which represent over 80 percent of all small businesses--the broader deposit insurance coverage reduces total deposit exposure from an estimated $22.1 billion to $1.6 billion and leaves only 0.3 percent of these businesses with any deposit exposure. The recent reductions in the federal funds rate should directly benefit small businesses. Lower policy rates should result in small businesses facing lower borrowing costs, especially because rates on small business loans tend to be tied to the prime interest rate, which generally moves closely with the federal funds rate.9In addition, stronger economic activity resulting from lower interest rates should result in small businesses enjoying increased demand for their products and services. Of course, the magnitude of the effects of recent policies are highly uncertain, given the current climate of extreme financial stress as well as the nonconventional nature of a number of these policy actions. Thus, the Federal Reserve will continue to monitor closely how the effects of recent policy actions are affecting small business conditions and economic activity more broadly. ConclusionThe health of the U.S. economy depends importantly on the vitality of the small business sector, and continued access to credit on competitive terms is necessary for that vitality. On balance, credit supply conditions to small businesses have tightened substantially since last April. Although credit appears to be generally available, such availability usually comes with tougher standards and at a higher cost. However, while credit concerns are real, the weakened state of the economy and the resulting drop in demand for their products and services appear to be the more serious challenge for small businesses in the current environment. How small businesses' access to credit will evolve will likely be strongly influenced by the success of recent policies undertaken by the Federal Reserve, the Congress, and other policy institutions aimed at improving the functioning of financial institutions and markets, rebuilding confidence in the financial system, and stimulating economic activity. Given the current financial and economic environment, the sizes of the effects of recent policies on both the economy and small businesses are highly uncertain. For these reasons, the Federal Reserve will continue to monitor evolving financial market and economic conditions and their effects on small business access to credit as part of its broader efforts to restore the health of the U.S. financial system and our economy. Footnotes 1.See Frederic S. Mishkin (2008), "Small Business Lending," testimony before the Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship, U.S. Senate, April 16.Return to text 2.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices,October, andJuly.Return to text 3.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), Statistical Release E.2, "Survey of Terms of Business Lending," August 4-8.Return to text 4.The majority of loans considered in the Survey of Terms of Business Lending are drawn under pre-existing commitments, which differs from the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey that considers changes in the terms and standards being applied to new loans. This difference between the two surveys likely explains in part why the C&I loan spreads reported in the Survey of Terms of Business Lending show little change despite the notable tightening in the price terms on C&I loans reported in the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey.Return to text 5.See Duke University, Fuqua School of Business, and CFO Magazine (2008), Duke/CFO Magazine Global Business Outlook Survey, September, www.cfosurvey.org.Return to text 6.Data collection for the 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances was completed early in 2008 and processing of the data is under way. An article reviewing the highlights of the data is expected to be published in theFederal Reserve Bulletinin the first quarter of 2009. Release of the public version of the micro data is expected to follow that publication (see2007 Survey of Consumer Finances).Return to text 7.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2003),Survey of Small Business Finances.Return to text 8.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers," joint press release, November 12.Return to text 9.The Survey of Terms of Bank Lending indicated that 40 percent of the dollar volume and two-thirds of the number of C&I loans originated over the past year have been tied to the prime rate.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced that it will alter the formulas used to determine the interest rates paid to depository institutions on required reserve balances and excess reserve balances. Previously, the rate on required reserve balances had been set at the average target federal funds rate established by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) over a reserves maintenance period minus 10 basis points. The rate on excess balances had been set as the lowest federal funds rate target in effect during a reserve maintenance period minus 35 basis points. Under the new formulas, the rate on required reserve balances will be set equal to the average target federal funds rate over the reserve maintenance period. The rate on excess balances will be set equal to the lowest FOMC target rate in effect during the reserve maintenance period. These changes will become effective for the maintenance periods beginning Thursday, November 6. The Board judged that these changes would help foster trading in the funds market at rates closer to the FOMC's target federal funds rate.
The Federal Reserve announced on Tuesday that it will initiate a program to purchase the direct obligations of housing-related government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs)--Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and the Federal Home Loan Banks--and mortgage-backed securities (MBS) backed by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae. Spreads of rates on GSE debt and on GSE-guaranteed mortgages have widened appreciably of late. This action is being taken to reduce the cost and increase the availability of credit for the purchase of houses, which in turn should support housing markets and foster improved conditions in financial markets more generally. Purchases of up to $100 billion in GSE direct obligations under the program will be conducted with the Federal Reserve's primary dealers through a series of competitive auctions and will begin next week. Purchases of up to $500 billion in MBS will be conducted by asset managers selected via a competitive process with a goal of beginning these purchases before year-end. Purchases of both direct obligations and MBS are expected to take place over several quarters. Further information regarding the operational details of this program will be provided after consultation with market participants.
On November 24, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $150 billion in 13-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. This was a forward auction designed to provide term funding over year-end--the awarded loans will settle on December 23, 2008. Following are the results of the auction: The awarded loans will mature on January 5, 2009. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EST on November 25, 2008. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on November 25, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On November 10, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $150 billion in 17-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. This was a forward auction designed to provide term funding over year-end--the awarded loans will settle on December 22, 2008. Following are the results of the auction:Stop-out rate:0.528 percentTotal propositions submitted:$12.629 billionTotal propositions accepted:$12.629 billionBid/cover ratio:0.08Number of bidders:16The awarded loans will mature on January 8, 2009. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans.Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EST on November 12, 2008. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on November 12, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Stop-out rate:0.528 percentTotal propositions submitted:$12.629 billionTotal propositions accepted:$12.629 billionBid/cover ratio:0.08Number of bidders:16 The awarded loans will mature on January 8, 2009. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EST on November 12, 2008. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on November 12, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On November 17, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $150 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: The awarded loans will settle on November 20, 2008, and will mature on December 18, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EST on November 18, 2008. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on November 18, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On November 3, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $150 billion in 84-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction:Stop-out rate:0.600 percentTotal propositions submitted:$138.939 billionTotal propositions accepted:$138.939 billionBid/cover ratio:0.93Number of bidders:89The awarded loans will settle on November 6, 2008, and will mature on January 29, 2009. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans.Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EST on November 4, 2008. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on November 4, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Stop-out rate:0.600 percentTotal propositions submitted:$138.939 billionTotal propositions accepted:$138.939 billionBid/cover ratio:0.93Number of bidders:89 The awarded loans will settle on November 6, 2008, and will mature on January 29, 2009. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EST on November 4, 2008. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on November 4, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the creation of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF), a facility that will help market participants meet the credit needs of households and small businesses by supporting the issuance of asset-backed securities (ABS) collateralized by student loans, auto loans, credit card loans, and loans guaranteed by the Small Business Administration (SBA). Under the TALF, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) will lend up to $200 billion on a non-recourse basis to holders of certain AAA-rated ABS backed by newly and recently originated consumer and small business loans. The FRBNY will lend an amount equal to the market value of the ABS less a haircut and will be secured at all times by the ABS. The U.S. Treasury Department--under the Troubled Assets Relief Program (TARP) of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008--will provide $20 billion of credit protection to the FRBNY in connection with the TALF. The attached terms and conditions document describes the basic terms and operational details of the facility. The terms and conditions are subject to change based on discussions with market participants in the coming weeks. New issuance of ABS declined precipitously in September and came to a halt in October. At the same time, interest rate spreads on AAA-rated tranches of ABS soared to levels well outside the range of historical experience, reflecting unusually high risk premiums. The ABS markets historically have funded a substantial share of consumer credit and SBA-guaranteed small business loans. Continued disruption of these markets could significantly limit the availability of credit to households and small businesses and thereby contribute to further weakening of U.S. economic activity. The TALF is designed to increase credit availability and support economic activity by facilitating renewed issuance of consumer and small business ABS at more normal interest rate spreads.
Financial Services Policy Committee David FettigFSPC Spokesman(612) 204-5274[email protected] Minneapolis, Minn.--The Federal Reserve Banks today announced that the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland will serve as the single paper check processing and adjustments site and that the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta will serve as the single electronic check processing site for the Federal Reserve System. The Reserve Banks also announced they will utilize a flexible restructuring schedule that scales back or shifts operations at their other sites when paper check volumes no longer justify the existing operation. This strategy updates the June 2007 announcement that identified the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Dallas, Philadelphia, and Cleveland as regional processing sites. Since that time, paper check volumes have declined significantly and no longer support the need for four full-service regional sites. The transition from four to one full service paper processing site is likely to take place by the end of 2009. In addition, the schedules for transitioning the other current processing sites are being accelerated to take place earlier in 2009 than previously planned. "This more rapid transition effort, while difficult on our staff, is a clear measure of success in terms of the industry's efforts to move to a more efficient electronic solution for clearing checks," said Gary Stern, chairman of the Reserve Banks' Financial Services Policy Committee and president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Under the Reserve Banks' plans, selected sites may remain as capture/print sites or print-only sites for a period of time during this transition based on market conditions and remaining paper check volume. The specific transition dates for all paper processing sites, including Atlanta, Dallas, and Philadelphia, will be determined on that same basis. Customers in affected territories will receive a minimum of 60 days notice before processing operations are shifted to a new site or any service level changes take place. Virtually all customers currently receiving paper will receive substitute checks, as opposed to the original paper check, as this transition unfolds. A schedule has not been established for the transition to a central electronic check processing site to Atlanta. That information will be communicated when it is available. Cleveland was also selected as the Reserve Banks' single check adjustments site over the other previously announced long-term adjustments sites Charlotte, N.C., Jacksonville, Fla., and Portland, Ore. Check adjustments is the back-office check processing function where processing issues are remediated. Because adjustments are handled for both paper and Check 21 processing, the adjustments function transition to a single site is expected to occur over a somewhat longer timeframe than paper processing and be driven by overall declines in adjustment case level volume. The schedule for restructuring adjustments sites is subject to change, and the Reserve Banks will notify employees and customers at least 60 days in advance of the confirmed date. As a result of the actions announced today, the Reserve Banks expect to reduce their overall check staff by approximately 750 positions. Some staff reductions may occur through attrition and there may be some opportunities for reassignment. To assist affected staff, the Reserve Banks will offer a variety of programs, including separation packages, extended medical coverage, and career transition assistance. The Reserve Banks' restructuring moves of the past six years have been an important part of their efforts to meet requirements for recovering costs for providing check services over the long term. The number of checks paid in the United States has fallen from 42 billion in 2001, to 37 billion in 2003, and to 30 billion in 2006. While restructuring check operations will continue to be challenging, this process and related changes support the Reserve Banks' mission to promote the long-term efficiency and integrity of the nation's payments system.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday alerted the public to instances of questionable solicitations directed at consumers. These solicitations promise consumers access to personal loans through a nonexistent Federal Reserve lending program. Under this fraudulent scheme, targeted individuals are told that that they can work through a broker to access a Federal Reserve program that extends sizable secured loans to consumers. Consumers are encouraged to deposit large sums of money into a bank account, under the guise of a security deposit, in order to receive the purported loan. The Federal Reserve is advising consumers that it has no involvement in these solicitations and does not directly sponsor consumer lending programs. The matter has been referred to the appropriate authorities for action. Consumers are strongly urged to verify the legitimacy of potential service providers before entering into a business transaction. Individuals seeking personal finance options are encouraged to do business only with reputable lenders and to shop around for the most favorable loan terms. Consumers with questions about solicitations that they suspect may be fraudulent are encouraged to contact the Federal Reserve Board Consumer Help Center athttp://www.federalreserveconsumerhelp.govor by calling 1-888-851-1920.
The Federal Reserve Board and the U.S. Treasury on Monday announced the restructuring of the government's financial support to the American International Group (AIG) in order to keep the company strong and facilitate its ability to complete its restructuring process successfully. These new measures establish a more durable capital structure, resolve liquidity issues, facilitate AIG's execution of its plan to sell certain of its businesses in an orderly manner, promote market stability, and protect the interests of the U.S. government and taxpayers. Equity PurchaseThe U.S. Treasury on Monday announced that it will purchase $40 billion of newly issued AIG preferred shares under the Troubled Asset Relief Program. This purchase will allow the Federal Reserve to reduce from $85 billion to $60 billion the total amount available under the credit facility established by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (New York Fed) on September 16, 2008. Credit FacilityCertain other terms of the existing New York Fed credit facility, established on September 16, will be modified to help achieve the objectives described above. In particular, the interest rate on the facility will be reduced to three-month Libor plus 300 basis points from the current rate of three-month Libor plus 850 basis points, and the fee on undrawn funds will be reduced to 75 basis points from the current rate of 850 basis points. The length of the facility will be extended from two years to five years. The other material terms of the facility remain unchanged. The facility will continue to be secured by a lien on many of the assets of AIG and of its subsidiaries. Additional Lending FacilitiesThe Federal Reserve Board has authorized the New York Fed to establish two new lending facilities relating to AIG undersection 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. These facilities are designed to alleviate capital and liquidity pressures on AIG associated with two distinct portfolios of mortgage-related securities. Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities FacilityIn one new facility, the New York Fed will lend up to $22.5 billion to a newly formed limited liability company (LLC) to fund the LLC’s purchase of residential mortgage-backed securities from AIG's U.S. securities lending collateral portfolio. AIG will make a $1 billion subordinated loan to the LLC and bear the risk for the first $1 billion of any losses on the portfolio. The loans will be secured by all of the assets of the LLC and will be repaid from the cash flows produced by these assets as well as proceeds from any sales of these assets. The New York Fed and AIG will share any residual cash flows after the loans are repaid. Proceeds from this facility, together with other AIG internal resources, will be used to return all cash collateral posted for securities loans outstanding under AIG's U.S. securities lending program. As a result, the $37.8 billion securities lending facility established by the New York Fed on October 8, 2008, will be repaid and terminated. Collateralized Debt Obligations FacilityIn the second new facility, the New York Fed will lend up to $30 billion to a newly formed LLC to fund the LLC's purchase of multi-sector collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) on which AIG Financial Products has written credit default swap (CDS) contracts. AIG will make a $5 billion subordinated loan to the LLC and bear the risk for the first $5 billion of any losses on the portfolio. In connection with the purchase of the CDOs, the CDS counterparties will concurrently unwind the related CDS transactions. The loans will be secured by all of the LLC's assets and will be repaid from cash flows produced by these assets as well as the proceeds from any sales of these assets. The New York Fed and AIG will share any residual cash flows after the loans are repaid. The U.S. government intends to exit its support of AIG over time in a disciplined manner consistent with maximizing the value of its investments and promoting financial stability.
On November 24, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $150 billion in 13-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. This is a forward auction designed to provide term funding over year-end--awarded loans will settle on December 23, 2008. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction Parameters Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EST on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. EST on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
On November 10, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $150 billion in 17-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. This is a forward auction designed to provide term funding over year-end--awarded loans will settle on December 22, 2008. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction Parameters Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EST on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. EST on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
On November 17, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $150 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm).Description of Offering and Auction Parameters Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EST on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. EST on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
On November 3, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $150 billion in 84-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm).Description of Offering and Auction ParametersOffering Amount:$150 billionTerm:84-day loanBid Submission Date:November 3, 2008Opening Time:11:00 a.m. ESTClosing Time:12:30 p.m. ESTNotification Date:November 4, 2008Settlement Date:November 6, 2008Maturity Date:January 29, 2009Minimum Bid Amount (per bid):$5 millionBid Increment:$100,000Maximum Bid Amount (per institution):$15 billion (10% of Offering Amount)Minimum Bid Rate:0.60 percentIncremental Bid Rate:0.001 percentMinimum Award:$10,000Maximum Award:$15 billion (10% of Offering Amount)Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date.NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EST on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. EST on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000. On November 3, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $150 billion in 84-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm).Description of Offering and Auction ParametersOffering Amount:$150 billionTerm:84-day loanBid Submission Date:November 3, 2008Opening Time:11:00 a.m. ESTClosing Time:12:30 p.m. ESTNotification Date:November 4, 2008Settlement Date:November 6, 2008Maturity Date:January 29, 2009Minimum Bid Amount (per bid):$5 millionBid Increment:$100,000Maximum Bid Amount (per institution):$15 billion (10% of Offering Amount)Minimum Bid Rate:0.60 percentIncremental Bid Rate:0.001 percentMinimum Award:$10,000Maximum Award:$15 billion (10% of Offering Amount) Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date.NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EST on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. EST on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EST on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. EST on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
The Federal Open Market Committee on Thursday announced it would expand its December meeting to two days to allow additional time for discussion. The upcoming meeting, previously planned as a one-day meeting, will begin on the afternoon of Monday December 15 and conclude on Tuesday December 16. The Committee's statement will be released as previously planned, around 2:15 p.m. EST on Tuesday.
The Department of the Treasury, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Federal Reserve have recently put into place several programs designed to promote financial stability and to mitigate procyclical effects of the current market conditions. These programs make new capital widely available to U.S. financial institutions, broaden and increase the guarantees on bank deposit accounts and certain liabilities, and provide backup liquidity to U.S. banking organizations. These efforts are designed to strengthen the capital foundation of our financial system and improve the overall functioning of credit markets. The ongoing financial and economic stress has highlighted the crucial role that prudent bank lending practices play in promoting the nation's economic welfare. The recent policy actions are designed to help support responsible lending activities of banking organizations, enhance their ability to fund such lending, and enable banking organizations to better meet the credit needs of households and business. At this critical time, it is imperative that all banking organizations and their regulators work together to ensure that the needs of creditworthy borrowers are met. As discussed below, to support this objective, consistent with safety and soundness principles and existing supervisory standards, each individual banking organization needs to ensure the adequacy of its capital base, engage in appropriate loss mitigation strategies and foreclosure prevention, and reassess the incentive implications of its compensation policies. Lending to creditworthy borrowersThe agencies expect all banking organizations to fulfill their fundamental role in the economy as intermediaries of credit to businesses, consumers, and other creditworthy borrowers. Moreover, as a result of problems in financial markets, the economy will likely become increasingly reliant on banking organizations to provide credit formerly provided or facilitated by purchasers of securities. Lending to creditworthy borrowers provides sustainable returns for the lending organization and is constructive for the economy as a whole. It is essential that banking organizations provide credit in a manner consistent with prudent lending practices and continue to ensure that they consider new lending opportunities on the basis of realistic asset valuations and a balanced assessment of borrowers' repayment capacities. However, if underwriting standards tighten excessively or banking organizations retreat from making sound credit decisions, the current market conditions may be exacerbated, leading to slower growth and potential damage to the economy as well as the long-term interests and profitability of individual banking organizations. Banking organizations should strive to maintain healthy credit relationships with businesses, consumers, and other creditworthy borrowers to enhance their own financial well-being as well as to promote a sound economy. The agencies have directed supervisory staffs to be mindful of the procyclical effects of an excessive tightening of credit availability and to encourage banking organizations to practice economically viable and appropriate lending activities. Strengthening capitalMaintaining a strong capital position complements and facilitates a banking organization's capacity and willingness to lend and bolsters its ability to withstand uncertain market conditions. Banking organizations should focus on effective and efficient capital planning and longer-term capital maintenance. An effective capital planning process requires a banking organization to assess both the risks to which it is exposed and the risk management processes in place to manage and mitigate those risks; evaluate its capital adequacy relative to its risks; and consider the potential impact on earnings and capital from economic downturns. Further, an effective capital planning process requires a banking organization to recognize losses on bank assets and activities in a timely manner; maintain adequate loan loss provisions; and adhere to prudent dividend policies. In particular, in setting dividend levels, a banking organization should consider its ongoing earnings capacity, the adequacy of its loan loss allowance, and the overall effect that a dividend payout would have on its cost of funding, its capital position, and, consequently, its ability to serve the expected needs of creditworthy borrowers. Banking organizations should not maintain a level of cash dividends that is inconsistent with the organization's capital position, that could weaken the organization's overall financial health, or that could impair its ability to meet the needs of creditworthy borrowers. Supervisors will continue to review the dividend policies of individual banking organizations and will take action when dividend policies are found to be inconsistent with sound capital and lending policies. Working with mortgage borrowersThe agencies expect banking organizations to work with existing borrowers to avoid preventable foreclosures, which can be costly to both the organizations and to the communities they serve, and to mitigate other potential mortgage-related losses. To this end, banking organizations need to ensure that their mortgage servicing operations are sufficiently funded and staffed to work with borrowers while implementing effective risk-mitigation measures. Given escalating mortgage foreclosures, the agencies urge all lenders and servicers to adopt systematic, proactive, and streamlined mortgage loan modification protocols and to review troubled loans using these protocols. Lenders and servicers should first determine whether a loan modification would enhance the net present value of the loan before proceeding to foreclosure, and they should ensure that loans currently in foreclosure have been subject to such analysis. Such practices are not only consistent with sound risk management but are also in the long-term interests of lenders and servicers, as well as borrowers. Systematic efforts to address delinquent mortgages should seek to achieve modifications that result in mortgages that borrowers will be able to sustain over the remaining maturity of their loan. Supervisors will fully support banking organizations as they work to implement effective and sound loan modification programs. Banking organizations that experience challenges in implementing loss mitigation efforts on their mortgage portfolios or in making new loans to borrowers should work with their primary supervisors to address specific situations. Structuring compensationPoorly-designed management compensation policies can create perverse incentives that can ultimately jeopardize the health of the banking organization. Management compensation policies should be aligned with the long-term prudential interests of the institution, should provide appropriate incentives for safe and sound behavior, and should structure compensation to prevent short-term payments for transactions with long-term horizons. Management compensation practices should balance the ongoing earnings capacity and financial resources of the banking organization, such as capital levels and reserves, with the need to retain and provide proper incentives for strong management. Further, it is important for banking organizations to have independent risk management and control functions. The agencies expect banking organizations to regularly review their management compensation policies to ensure they are consistent with the longer-run objectives of the organization and sound lending and risk management practices. The agencies will continue to take steps to promote programs that foster financial stability and mitigate procyclical effects of the current market conditions. However, regardless of their participation in particular programs, all banking organizations are expected to adhere to the principles in this statement. We will work with banking organizations to facilitate their active participation in those programs, consistent with safe and sound banking practices, and thus to support their central role in providing credit to support the health of the U.S. economy.
Washington,DC --The U.S. government is committed to supporting financial market stability, which is a prerequisite to restoring vigorous economic growth. In support of this commitment, the U.S. government on Sunday entered into an agreement with Citigroup to provide a package of guarantees, liquidity access, and capital. As part of the agreement, Treasury and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation will provide protection against the possibility of unusually large losses on an asset pool of approximately $306 billion of loans and securities backed by residential and commercial real estate and other such assets, which will remain on Citigroup's balance sheet. As a fee for this arrangement, Citigroup will issue preferred shares to the Treasury and FDIC. In addition and if necessary, the Federal Reserve stands ready to backstop residual risk in the asset pool through a non-recourse loan. In addition, Treasury will invest $20 billion in Citigroup from the Troubled Asset Relief Program in exchange for preferred stock with an 8% dividend to the Treasury. Citigroup will comply with enhanced executive compensation restrictions and implement the FDIC's mortgage modification program. With these transactions, the U.S. government is taking the actions necessary to strengthen the financial system and protect U.S. taxpayers and the U.S. economy. We will continue to use all of our resources to preserve the strength of our banking institutions and promote the process of repair and recovery and to manage risks. The following principles guide our efforts:
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from September 29 through October 29, 2008. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on October 28-29, 2008 and of the conference calls held on September 29, 2008 and October 7, 2008. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the October 28-29, 2008 meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. Summaries of economic projections are released on an approximately quarterly schedule. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's web site athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. Minutes of Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 29, October 7, and October 28-29, 2008:141 KB PDF|HTML
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Cato Institute's 26th Annual Monetary Policy Conference, Washington, D.C. As you know, we are in the midst of a global financial crisis that is now weighing heavily on economies around the world. Although the outlook remains extremely uncertain, both the fragility of the financial system and the weakness in real activity seem likely to persist for a while. To promote maximum sustainable economic growth and price stability, the Federal Reserve has responded to this crisis by easing monetary policy markedly, and we have greatly expanded our liquidity facilities to keep credit flowing when private lenders have become reluctant or unable to do so. Other central banks have also cut policy rates significantly and expanded their lending. In addition, the federal government and governments around the world have taken extraordinary actions to strengthen financial systems to preserve the ability of households and businesses to borrow and spend.1 The current situation is so severe that it calls for careful review of how such a crisis evolved and how we can prevent a similar situation from happening again. This conference is a welcome step in that review, as it asks about the lessons we have learned, particularly for monetary policy, from the collapse of subprime lending and the preceding house-price bubble--developments that contributed importantly to the present financial crisis. This morning I would like to reflect on some of what I, in my role as a monetary policy maker, have learned from recent developments in the housing sector and, more broadly, in financial markets as a whole. In doing so, I will revisit the remarks I made in 2006 in Frankfurt at a festschrift for Otmar Issing.2There I argued that a central bank facing a possible asset bubble would have to surmount some high hurdles before it would be justified in tightening policy beyond what the outlook for output and inflation would require, after taking into account past and projected asset price developments. In the aftermath of the collapse of the housing market and in the midst of the ensuing financial and economic turmoil, does that conclusion still hold? More time and study will be needed before we can be confident about the lessons of the current crisis. But to foreshadow the remainder of these remarks, based on what we know today, I still have serious questions about whether trying to use monetary policy to check speculative activity on a regular, systematic basis would yield benefits that outweigh its costs. I hasten to add that it is evident from the current crisis that much has to change on the regulatory front. Governments around the world face the challenge of revamping the regulatory structure governing financial markets. And changes in this area, I believe, will prove to be the most necessary and effective at reducing the odds on another severe financial crisis. Today, however, I will focus on some of the lessons of the current crisis for monetary policy. Alternative Strategies for Addressing Asset Price BubblesIn my 2006 speech, I discussed two different strategies for monetary policy to deal with a possible asset price bubble--the "conventional strategy" and "extra action." A central bank following the conventional strategy does not attempt to use monetary policy to influence the speculative component of asset prices, on the assumption that it has little ability to do so and that any attempt will only result in sub-optimal economic performance in the medium run. Instead, the central bank responds to asset price movements, whether driven by fundamentals or not, only to the degree that those movements have implications for future output and inflation. This conventional strategy conforms to the Federal Reserve's dual mandate under the law and it has been our policy strategy; it also has been consistent with the practices of most inflation-targeting central banks. However, some observers have argued for a more activist policy than this one. Specifically, they have urged central banks, upon perceiving the development of an asset bubble, to take extra action by tightening policy beyond what the conventional strategy would suggest, with the hope of limiting the size of the bubble and thus the fallout from its deflation. Such a strategy, if successful, could deliver substantial benefits, and a number of central bankers have talked about the need to consider a policy of extra action on occasion, and perhaps have even implemented such a strategy. However, taking extra action also would entail some costs, such as creating, for a time, higher unemployment and lower inflation than would otherwise be desired. In assessing these two alternatives for monetary policy, in the 2006 speech I concluded that a strategy of extra action might be justified if three tough conditions were met. First, policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, a somewhat tighter monetary policy must have a high probability that it will help to check at least some of the speculative activity. And third, the expected improvement in future economic performance that would result from the curtailment of the bubble must be sufficiently great. Of course, we live in an uncertain world, and accordingly policymakers should always be open to the possibility that these conditions might be satisfied and that extra action would be appropriate. But my thought at the time was that, in practice, the likelihood of ever meeting the three conditions seemed remote. In the aftermath of the bursting of the housing bubble, however, the severity of the fallout might seem to call this judgment into question. So let's re-examine each of the three conditions and see what the current crisis has taught us. Potential Gain from Limiting BubblesLet me start with my third condition, the potential gain from limiting bubbles, because this is where my views have changed the most. Although I was concerned about the potential fallout from a collapse of the housing market, I think it is fair to say that these costs have turned out to be much greater than I and many other observers imagined. In particular, I and other observers underestimated the potential for house prices to decline substantially, the degree to which such a decline would create difficulties for homeowners, and, most important, the vulnerability of the broader financial system to these events. In retrospect, I may have been unduly comforted by the resilience of the U.S. economy to the collapse of the high-tech bubble, to the earlier Russian debt default and failure of Long-Term Capital Management, and even to the commercial and residential real estate debacles of the late 1980s and early 1990s (as difficult as that recovery was). But mopping up after this asset price bubble has turned out to be much harder because of its greater magnitude, the centrality of residential housing and finance to our economy and financial system, and the surprising ways obscure and complex financial transactions have exposed banks and other financial institutions to heavy losses. In addition, financial and economic linkages across countries have made this crisis truly global in scope, affecting both developed and developing economies. As a result of all these factors, the economic disruption here and abroad is likely to be considerably more severe than in past episodes. The severe fallout may indicate a larger potential gain than I had anticipated to leaning against excess exuberance in asset markets. However, realizing that potential rests on meeting my two other conditions as well--the timely identification of the bubble, and the ability of a central bank to materially influence the trajectory of the speculative component of asset prices. Identifying Bubbles in a Timely MannerAs for the first of the three conditions, events of the past few years, coupled with advances in our understanding of how bubbles form and persist, have made me a little less dubious that policymakers can reliably identify a serious bubble before it bursts. However, I am still skeptical about our ability to detect bubbles early enough to make a general policy of leaning against them successful on average. The identification of bubbles in real time is tricky because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable; thus, any judgment by a central bank that an asset is overpriced is by nature uncertain. My views on this aspect of the identification problem have been reinforced by my experience during the inflation of the housing bubble. Over the first half of the decade, we saw a sustained, rapid rise in both home values and mortgage debt. As this process continued, concern about its sustainability grew and many observers started speculating that a bubble was in place. During this period, staff throughout the Federal Reserve System examined whether house prices were overvalued and arrived at a wide range of answers. For example, one set of models that linked rental rates and house prices indicated as early as the start of 2004 that the market was significantly overvalued, while another set of models suggested, even as late as December 2005, that house prices could be justified by fundamentals.3Thus, controversy over the existence of a bubble persisted almost right up to the actual peak in the housing market. Because the economic consequences of mistakenly responding to a misidentified bubble are substantial, central bankers may be reluctant to take extra action in the face of such uncertainty, especially if they are risk-averse. Policymakers may also be reluctant to act because a bubble "call" might seem to require them to be more knowledgeable than market participants. After all, if at least some market participants perceive the emergence of a bubble, wouldn't they arbitrage that mispricing away? Recent research, however, suggests reasons for why market participants who think they know that a bubble exists still may not trade to eliminate it. For example, if some market participants recognize the presence of a bubble but do not know how common their knowledge is, they might reasonably expect to make the most profits by riding the bubble for as long as possible, with the goal of trying to sell the asset just before it collapses.4Other research emphasizes that certain institutional structures--such as secured lending and delegated portfolio management--can create substantial costs in trading against an asset price bubble, so that even market participants who are conscious of the bubble will not find it profitable to trade against it.5Together, these studies suggest that policymakers may be able to detect bubbles that will not be quickly arbitraged away, thus strengthening the argument for considering extra action.6 Nonetheless, even if policymakers are confident that a bubble has emerged, the question of the timeliness of the call remains. The essential problem is the timing of the detection of the bubble relative to the timing of its collapse. The risk is that the detection and subsequent policy response occur not long before the bubble collapses on its own. Given the lags associated with monetary policy, the resulting contractionary effects on the economy of the monetary tightening would occur just when the adverse effects of the bubble's collapse are being realized, worsening rather than mitigating the effects of the bubble's collapse. And the inevitable lags in detecting bubbles increase the likelihood that, by the time action is taken, speculative activity will have progressed to the point that its collapse is not far off. Thus, even if we could have known for sure that a housing bubble existed, and that tighter monetary policy would have significantly checked the unwarranted rise in home prices, policymakers would have had to make this call early on--at least a year and probably more before the peak in the real estate market in 2006--for such an action to have been beneficial. Ability of Monetary Policy to Influence BubblesThis brings me to the remaining condition--the requirement that monetary policy be able to materially check expansions in asset bubbles. Clearly, interest rates play an important role in determining thefundamentalvalue of corporate equity, houses, and other assets. However, I noted in my earlier speech that the influence of interest rates on thespeculativecomponent of asset prices is unclear from both a theoretical and empirical standpoint. My views on this issue have not changed much, largely because of the still-murky role that monetary policy played in promoting the surge in house prices and the accompanying run-up in both conventional and subprime mortgage debt. Although tighter monetary policy might have succeeded in shifting down the path of house prices, it is still not clear to what extent small or even moderate policy actions would have discouraged the broader speculative developments that have characterized the current episode: overly optimistic expectations of price appreciation, excessive leveraging, and a marked increase in risk-taking by homeowners and investors. Of course, a substantial tightening of policy, leading to a significant slowing in the economy and rise in unemployment, might have had a marked effect on housing price gains. But undertaking such a policy course on a regular basis whenever asset price misalignments are detected would likely prove to be a relatively poor strategy on average, especially given the possibility of false positives in identifying these misalignments, and the existence of other potential remedies. In general, taking more-targeted steps--for example, regulatory changes intended to strengthen the financial system--would seem a better course of action under such circumstances. To be sure, some observers contend that the low level of the federal funds rate in 2003 and 2004 was clearly a primary cause of the housing bubble, and that a significantly tighter stance of monetary policy would have been warranted. As you know, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), after having sharply lowered its policy rate during the 2001 recession, further lowered the federal funds rate in late 2002 and 2003 in response to an outlook for continued tepid real growth and a possible unwelcome disinflation. This accommodative stance helped set the stage for a more robust recovery, and as the expansion took hold in 2004, the FOMC began to tighten in a gradual manner that was publicly signaled in advance. How might these monetary policy actions have fueled speculation? Perhaps a low policy rate early in the decade, by stimulating housing demand and pushing up the level of home prices, incorrectly led households and lenders to extrapolate these price increases into the indefinite future. Overly optimistic expectations may have had an unusually stimulative effect on the housing market after 2003 because borrowing constraints were being eased by new financial developments, such as the growth of subprime lending and other nontraditional mortgages, fueled in part by investor demands for the higher yields on complex structured products.7In addition, the increased use of adjustable-rate mortgages--which are more closely tied to short-term policy rates--may have initially boosted the stimulus from a lower federal funds rate. These stories have a certain plausibility, but a closer examination raises questions about monetary policy and the housing and credit bubbles. Although low short-term interest rates probably supported housing demand and home prices for a time--an effect that helped offset the negative effects on economic growth and employment of the steep decline in business investment--the role of monetary policy in fueling the speculation in real estate is still not clear. Studies that have tried to address how much monetary policy contributed to the increase in house prices during this period are inconclusive.8And in general, the channel from interest rates to house prices has not been strongly established empirically, suggesting it might take a very large hike in the federal funds rate to have a substantial effect on real estate values.9Moreover, if accommodative monetary policy engendered extrapolative expectations and speculation starting in 2003, why did it not restrain these factors after mid-2004 as the federal funds rate was increased? Tightening should have limited the extent to which households (especially those using variable-rate mortgages) were able to borrow, thereby slowing the pace of house price appreciation. Furthermore, many of the worst subprime loans were made after the federal funds rate had normalized, and reflected a wide array of deficiencies in the financial markets. The contrasting movement of short-run and long-term interest rates over this period further complicates any assessment of the link between monetary policy and the housing market. Housing demand and home prices are, presumably, most closely linked to the 30-year fixed mortgage rate and the expected average borrowing rate to be paid over the life of adjustable-rate mortgages. That these actual and expected loan rates moved sideways even as the federal funds rate rose suggests that other factors besides monetary policy were at work, especially since the FOMC clearly signaled that it would be returning the funds rate to a normal level over time (albeit at a "measured pace"). A good portion of the appreciation in house prices probably is due to the structural changes that were taking place in mortgage financing--specifically, the opening up of subprime lending and the expansion in associated securitization markets with its strong demand for mortgages from investors. Gauging the effects of expanded subprime lending on house prices is complicated by two-way causality--more lending can drive up house prices, but expected house price increases can also induce more lending. Undoubtedly, causality did indeed run both directions. But studies do indicate that an expansion in credit leads to increased house prices, and suggest that structural changes in mortgage finance likely boosted the rate of house price appreciation.10 Another key observation that must be reconciled with any explanation of recent events is that the run-up and subsequent decline in house prices was not limited to the United States; indeed, some countries have experienced even larger swings in house prices.11In most countries during this period, long-term interest rates were low despite the fact that their central banks did not ease monetary policy as markedly as the Federal Reserve. A common factor behind these low rates, and perhaps in part behind the shared increase in house prices as well, is the "global saving glut" identified by Chairman Bernanke--the large amounts of savings, both official and private, from Asian and oil-exporting nations that tended to lower neutral interest rates globally.12 In a broader sense, perhapstheunderlying cause of the current crisis was complacency. With the onset of the "Great Moderation" back in the mid-1980s, households and firms in the United States and elsewhere have enjoyed a long period of reduced output volatility and low and stable inflation. These calm conditions may have led many private agents to become less prudent and to underestimate the risks associated with their actions. While we cannot be sure about the ultimate sources of the moderation, many observers believe better monetary policy here and abroad was one factor; if so, central banks may have accidentally contributed to the current crisis. But would a somewhat tighter stance of policy in recent years have reversed this complacency? It seems doubtful. Central banks would likely have needed to produce recessions of some consequence in order to force agents to reevaluate the costs of taking on risk--an outcome unlikely to improve societal welfare. Rather than using the blunt tool of monetary policy to induce prudence, we should examine more closely the possibility of using regulation and prudential supervision to address concerns about overleveraging and other risk-taking behavior. In short, we still do not fully know what caused the run-up in house prices and over-building. Short-term rates were low in 2002-04 as the Federal Reserve countered the risks it saw to good economic performance, and these low rates probably had some effect on housing markets at the time. But the problems largely built up after policy rates were well on their way to neutral, and other factors appear to have played major roles. We have learned little about the likely effect that a somewhat higher funds rate would have had on the speculative element of prices. Of course, it is important to keep an open mind about the relationship of short-term interest rates and speculative activity. If it becomes clear that monetary policy can predictably influence the evolution of bubbles, central banks should take that ability into account when crafting policies intended to keep output rising in line with its potential and inflation low and stable. ConclusionIn sum, I am not convinced that the events of the past few years and the current crisis demonstrate that central banks should switch to trying to check speculative activity through tighter monetary policy whenever they perceive a bubble forming. The recent experience may have made us a bit more confident about detecting bubbles, but it has not resolved the problem of doing so in a timely manner. Nor has it shown that small-to-modest policy actions will reliably and materially damp speculation. For these reasons, the case for extra action still remains questionable, despite our having learned that the aftermath of a bubble can be far more painful than we imagined. Some may object to this assessment, arguing that the current crisis is so bad that, in retrospect, monetary policy should have been appreciably tighter to deflate or forestall the housing boom earlier in the decade, even if that meant a substantially weaker economy. This argument has two defects. First, monetary policy is made in real time, not with the benefit of hindsight, and any evaluation of competing strategies for the systematic conduct of policy must be grounded in that fact. Although we must learn from history, we cannot implement policy strategies that assume more information about the future than we can ever have. Second, even if we ignore the fact that policymakers at the time could not have known what the future held in store if the funds rate followed the path it actually did, we also need to recognize that we cannot be sure what would have happened if policy had taken a different course. If policy had tightened appreciably at an early stage of the housing boom, say in mid-2003, it would have done so when the unemployment rate was still rising and inflation seemed poised to move to an undesirably low level. Such a course of action might well have created its own unforeseen consequences that we might now be ruing. This assessment aside, recent events would seem to have some implications for the conduct of monetary policy. For example, in light of the demonstrated importance to the real economy of speculative booms and busts (which can take years to play out), central banks probably should always try to look out over a long horizon when evaluating the economic outlook and deliberating about the appropriate accompanying path of the policy rate. The Federal Reserve staff has for sometime regularly provided the FOMC with this sort of extended-horizon analysis. In particular, the staff regularly generates likely paths for the economy over the next five years or so under different economic and policy assumptions; these scenarios often highlight different possibilities for the evolution of prices for homes and other assets. Note that the focus here is not a single baseline outlook; rather, the emphasis is on exploring the various ways events could play out and the implications for monetary policy. Another lesson of the current crisis is that central banks need to improve their understanding of the workings of the financial system, its vulnerabilities, and its links to the real economy. We must try to find ways to discern more quickly if financial innovation and other factors are leading to a buildup of destabilizing forces, such as rapidly rising asset prices or excessive leverage. Moreover, the unexpectedly rapid resonance of financial turmoil through global markets signals a need for further study of the complex cross-country linkages among lenders and borrowers, and the ways in which those linkages are influenced by such factors as leverage, interdependent counterparty relationships, and backup liquidity agreements. Finally, more effort needs to be spent on further investigation of the financial accelerator and other credit-channel effects, given the accumulating evidence that such effects can give rise to an adverse feedback loop between financial markets and the real economy. Overcoming these deficiencies in our knowledge will not be easy, but the potential benefits could be great. Finally, as I emphasized at the outset, we must thoroughly review the regulatory structure of the U.S. and global financial systems, with the objective of both identifying and implementing the comprehensive changes needed to reduce the odds of future bubbles arising, and improving the ability of banks and other financial institutions to weather the fallout from unexpected adverse changes in asset prices. Ultimately, this process should prove our best line of defense against the problems of the sort we now face. References Abreu, Dilip, and Markus K. Brunnermeier (2003), "Bubbles and Crashes,"Econometrica, vol. 71(1), pp. 173-204. Bernanke, Ben S. (2005). "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit," speech delivered at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Va., March 10. Campbell, Sean, Morris Davis, Joshua Gallin, and Robert Martin (2006). "A Trend and Variance Decomposition of the Rent-Price Ratio in Housing Markets," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2006-29. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April. Cardarelli, Roberto, Deniz Igan, and Alessandro Rebucci (2008). "The Changing Housing Cycle and the Implications for Monetary Policy (988 KB PDF)," InWorld Economic Outlook: Housing and the Business Cycle, chapter 3. Washington: International Monetary Fund, April. Del Negro, Marco, and Christoher Otrok (2007). "99 Luftballons: Monetary Policy and the House Price Boom across U.S. States,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 54, pp. 1962-85. Gallin, Joshua (2004). "The Long-Run Relationship between House Prices and Rents," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2004-50. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. (Also, forthcoming inReal Estate Economics.) Iacoviello, Matteo, and Stefano Neri (2008). "Housing Market Spillovers: Evidence from an Estimated DSGE Model (443 KB PDF)," working paper. Boston: Boston College, August 9. Kohn, Donald L. (2006). "Monetary Policy and Asset Prices," speech delivered at Monetary Policy: A Journey from Theory to Practice, a European Central Bank colloquium held in honor of Otmar Issing, Frankfurt, Germany, March 16. Kohn, Donald L., and Brian P. Sack (2003). "Central Bank Talk: Does It Matter and Why? (93 KB PDF)" paper presented at the Macroeconomics, Monetary Policy, and Financial Stability Conference in honor of Charles Freedman, Bank of Canada, Ottawa, Canada, June 20. Leamer, Edward (2007). "HousingIsthe Business Cycle (3.76 MB PDF)." InHousing, Housing Finance, and Monetary Policy, proceeding of a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1, pp. 149-233. Lui, Jun, and Francis A. Longstaff (2004), "Losing Money on Arbitrage: Optional Dynamic Portfolio Choice in Markets with Arbitrage Opportunities,"Review of Financial Studies, vol. 17(3), pp. 611-41. McCarthy, Jonathan, and Richard W. Peach (2005). "Is There a 'Bubble' in the Housing Market Now? (164 KB PDF)" working paper. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December. Mian, Atif R., and Amir Sufi (2008). "The Consquences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the 2007 Mortgage Default Crisis," NBER working paper 13936, April. Stein, Jeremy C. (2005), "Why Are Most Funds Open-End? Competition and the Limits of Arbitrage,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 120(1), pp. 247-72. Wheaton, William C., and Gleb Nechayev (2008). "The 1998-2005 Housing 'Bubble' and the Current 'Correction': What's Different This Time?"Journal of Real Estate Research, vol. 30(1), pp. 1-26. Footnotes 1.The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee.Brian Doyle,Rochelle Edge, andDavid Reifschneiderof the Board staff contributed to these remarks.Return to text 2.See Kohn (2006).Return to text 3.For a contemporaneous view that homes were overvalued, see Gallin (2004); for an opposing view, see McCarthy and Peach (2005).Return to text 4.See Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003).Return to text 5.See Lui and Longstaff (2004) and Stein (2005).Return to text 6.Some of the literature in this area would seem to imply that small policy moves explicitly motivated by a potential bubble, or similarly motivated public statements and regulatory changes, could effectively signal or induce market participants who know about the bubble to trade against it. Whether such actions would be able to limit the expansion of asset price bubbles merits further research. Kohn and Sack (2003) did not find that statements by then-Chairman Greenspan on valuations affected misaligned asset prices, but the many warnings from central bankers in financial stability reports and speeches about mispriced risk and even housing bubbles in some countries would seem to provide material for much needed further research on this topic.Return to text 7.For example, Cardarelli, Igan, and Rebucci (2008) found evidence that house prices have become more sensitive to monetary policy in countries with more mortgage deregulation.Return to text 8.Del Negro and Otrok (2007) find little influence on the national component of house price appreciation from 2001 to 2005. In contrast, Iacoviello and Neri (2008) contend that monetary policy accounted for more than a quarter of the run-up. However, both of these papers only look at the effects of the non-systematic component of monetary policy. In addition, Iacoviello and Neri include the Regulation Q period in their estimation sample, likely increasing the effect of monetary policy on the housing sector.Return to text 9.Studies of the relationship between house prices, interest rates, and other factors find only a weak interest-sensitivity of home prices to both short-term and long-term interest rates when estimated using aggregate time-series data over the past 25 years, as documented by Gallin (2004) and Campbell, Davis, Gallin, and Martin (2006).Return to text 10.Mian and Sufi (2008) found that Zip code areas with high latent credit demand prior to the bubble's emergence experienced larger expansions in the supply of mortgage credit and larger increases in house prices, despite being subject to weaker economic conditions; this result also held for Zip codes that, because of inelastic housing supply, would not be expected to see price increases above the inflation rate for construction costs. Overall, this study attributed 40 percent of the national rise in house prices to increased subprime lending. Leamer (2007) noted that house price increases occurred in some of the lowest-priced Zip codes. Wheaton and Nechayev (2008), using results obtained from time series regressions for a number of different housing markets over the period from 1975 to 1998, found a correlation between measures of credit availability and unexplained movements in house prices, which suggests that structural changes in mortgage finance may have contributed to the increase in house prices. Finally, Cardarelli, Igan, and Rebucci (2008) found evidence that countries with the most advanced housing finance systems are more exposed to housing sector shocks.Return to text 11.In addition, housing credit in several other countries appears to have expanded beyond the traditional pool of households in recent years, although probably (comparable data are scarce) to a lesser degree than in the United States.Return to text 12.See Bernanke (2005).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the issuance of a Consent Order of Prohibition against David Lee, former managing director of the Commodities Trading Group and institution-affiliated party of the Chicago, Illinois, branch of the Bank of Montreal ("BMO"). Mr. Lee, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order based on his alleged participation in unsafe and unsound banking practices, breaches of fiduciary duty and violations of law, in connection with his natural gas options trading activity at BMO. The Order asserts that Mr. Lee allegedly compromised the independent price verification process BMO relied on to ascertain the true value of his trading book, and also executed and then misvalued exchange of options for options trades in order to conceal the true value of his book, which led to after-tax losses to the bank of at least C$327,000,000. In addition, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York and the District Attorney for New York County announced today that Mr. Lee has agreed to plead guilty to criminal charges relating to this matter. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission also separately announced the filing of civil lawsuits in related matters. A copy of the Order is attached.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Fifth European Central Bank Central Banking Conference, The Euro at Ten: Lessons and Challenges, Frankfurt, Germany I am pleased to be here in Frankfurt today to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the euro. The euro’s introduction was a remarkable achievement. As an academic, I did a bit of consulting for the European Monetary Institute, the European Central Bank’s (ECB) predecessor, on monetary transmission mechanisms; I thus played a part, albeit an extremely small one, in this grand project. I mention this only as a reminder that the creators of the euro drew on monetary expertise from around the world, an early example of the international cooperation that has since proven to be one of the hallmarks of the ECB. Indeed, the run-up to the euro’s establishment and the experience of the past decade have been associated with an unprecedented degree of policy coordination among the sovereign states within the euro area, including cooperation in the areas of fiscal and regulatory policies as well as monetary policy. The current financial crisis and global economic slowdown likewise have been an occasion for unprecedented international policy coordination, within Europe but also globally. For example, in its regulatory capacity, the Federal Reserve has worked closely with regulators and supervisors from a number of European nations, and we are active participants in the international Financial Stability Forum and the standard-setting bodies operating under the aegis of the Bank for International Settlements. My focus today, however, will be cooperation in monetary policy and, especially, in the meeting of the liquidity needs of our increasingly globalized financial markets. As you know, financial markets remain under severe strain. The proximate cause of the financial turmoil was the end of the U.S. housing boom and the attendant losses on mortgages and mortgage-related assets by many institutions. However, more fundamentally, the turmoil was the product of a global credit boom, characterized by a broad underpricing of risk, excessive leverage by financial institutions, and an increasing reliance on complex and opaque financial instruments that have proven to be fragile under stress. The unwinding of this boom (and the associated financial losses) has led to the withdrawal of many investors from credit markets and deleveraging by financial institutions, both of which have acted to constrict available credit to households and businesses. This credit squeeze is, in turn, a principal cause of the economic slowdown now taking place in many countries. Central bankers have been working closely together throughout this period of financial turmoil. Personally, I have found the opportunity to share views regularly with President Trichet and other leading central bankers at various international meetings extremely valuable. We are all in frequent contact by phone as well. Our consultations allow us to keep abreast of developments in other countries, to compare our analyses of developing trends, and to draw on each other’s experience and knowledge. The merits of coordinated monetary policies have been discussed by policymakers and academics for decades, but in practice, such coordination has been quite rare. However, on October 8, the Federal Reserve announced a reduction in its policy interest rate jointly with five other major central banks--the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the ECB, Sveriges Riksbank, and the Swiss National Bank (SNB)--with the Bank of Japan expressing support. Last month’s joint action was motivated by the abatement of inflationary pressures and increased indications of economic slowing in our respective economies. In addition, the coordinated rate cut was intended to send a strong signal to the public and to markets of our resolve to act together to address global economic challenges. As you know, however, monetary policy actions have not resolved the ongoing strains in financial markets, including interbank funding markets. The Federal Reserve has responded to the strong demand for funding by banks and primary dealers by dramatically increasing the amount of term funding that it auctions to banks, providing new lending facilities for nonbanks, supplying high-quality securities for use in repurchase agreement (repo) markets and for other collateralized lending, and funding purchases of commercial paper. Elsewhere, including Canada, the euro area, and the United Kingdom, central banks have introduced or expanded similar measures to boost the provision of liquidity in their local currencies. In addition to these measures, governments in many countries broadened deposit insurance coverage and announced plans to inject capital into their banking systems and to guarantee bank debts. All of these steps are consistent with the principles agreed to by the Group of Seven finance ministers and central bank governors in their October 10 communiqué. Although the range of mechanisms we have used has been broad, our provision of liquidity conforms to a central bank’s traditional role as the lender of last resort. However, a novel aspect of the current situation is that the balance sheets of financial institutions have increasingly come to include instruments denominated in foreign currencies. The need for currencies outside an issuing country’s markets arises primarily from the global role played by key international currencies, such as the dollar and the euro. For example, over the past decade, international loans and deposits have grown tremendously, as has the issuance of international debt securities--that is, bonds, notes, and money market instruments sold outside the borders of the borrower’s country and sometimes denominated in foreign currencies. These developments have posed new challenges for conventional central bank liquidity and lender-of-last-resort policies. For example, injecting euros or sterling into national money markets may not be sufficient to restore market function in these economies when funding shortages are in dollars. Indeed, a significant feature of the recent financial market stress is the strong demand for dollar funding not only in the United States, but also abroad. Many financial institutions outside the United States, especially in Europe, had substantially increased their dollar investments in recent years, including loans to nonbanks and purchases of asset-backed securities issued by U.S. residents.1Also, the continued prominent role of the dollar in international trade, foreign direct investment, and financial transactions contributes to dollar funding needs abroad. While some financial institutions outside the United States have relied on dollars acquired through their U.S. affiliates, many others relied on interbank and other wholesale markets to obtain dollars. As such, the recent sharp deterioration in conditions in funding markets left some participants outside the United States without adequate access to short-term dollar financing. The emergence of dollar funding shortages around the globe has required a more internationally coordinated approach among central banks to the lender-of-last-resort function. The principal tool we have used is the currency swap line, which allows each collaborating central bank to draw down balances denominated in its foreign partner’s currency. The Federal Reserve has now established temporary swap lines with more than a dozen other central banks.2Many of these central banks have drawn on these lines and, using a variety of methods and facilities, have allocated these funds to meet the needs of institutions within their borders.3Although funding needs during the current turmoil have been the most pronounced for dollars, they have arisen for other currencies as well. For example, the ECB has set up swap lines and repo facilities with the central banks of Denmark and Hungary to provide euro liquidity in those countries. The terms of many swap agreements have been adjusted with the changing needs for liquidity: The sizes of the swaps have increased, the types of collateral accepted by these central banks from financial institutions in their economies have been expanded, and the maturities at which these funds have been made available have been tailored to meeting the prevailing needs. Notably, in mid-October, the Federal Reserve eliminated limits on the sizes of its swap lines with the ECB, the Bank of England, the SNB, and the Bank of Japan so as to accommodate demands for U.S. dollar funding of any scale. Taken together, these actions have helped improve the distribution of liquidity around the globe. This collaborative approach to the injection of liquidity reflects more than the global, multi-currency nature of funding difficulties. It also reflects the importance of relationships between central banks and the institutions they serve. Under swap agreements, the responsibility for allocating foreign-currency liquidity within a jurisdiction lies with the domestic central bank. This arrangement makes use of the fact that the domestic central bank is best positioned to understand the mechanics and special features of its own country’s financial and payments systems and, because of its existing relationships with domestic financial institutions, can best assess the strength of each institution and its needs for foreign-currency liquidity. The domestic central bank is also typically best informed about the quality of the collateral offered by potential borrowers. The efforts by central banks around the world to increase the availability of liquidity, along with other steps taken by central banks and governments, have contributed to tentative improvements in credit market functioning. However, the continuing volatility of markets and recent indicators of economic performance confirm that challenges remain. For this reason, policymakers will remain in close contact, monitor developments closely, and stand ready to take additional steps should conditions warrant. In times like these, we are especially aware of the importance of having close working relationships with our central bank colleagues around the world. These relationships are fostered by the ties established in forums like this one and in the many venues where policymakers regularly gather. The 10th anniversary of the euro is an opportunity not only to celebrate an impressive and historic achievement, but also to reaffirm our commitment to cooperation as we address the challenges of an increasingly integrated global economy. Central bankers and other policymakers around the world must continue to work together to address disruptions in credit markets and to promote a vibrant global economy. Footnotes 1.See Patrick McGuire and Goetz von Peter (2008), “International Banking Activity amidst the Turmoil,”BISQuarterly Review, June; also see ECB (2008), “The International Role of the Euro (923.7 KB PDF),” July. The ECB report noted that investment banks based in the United States and financial institutions based in the United Kingdom have been among the top non-euro-area issuers of euro-denominated bonds; it also said that banks in Europe and some firms located mainly in the United Kingdom with business concentrated in the securitization of residential mortgages have been among the top non-U.S. issuers of dollar-denominated bonds.Return to text 2.The central banks include those in Australia, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, the euro area, Korea, Japan, New Zealand, Mexico, Norway, Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.Return to text 3.Some other countries with extensive accumulated stocks of dollar reserves have made these dollars available in their economies through auctions and regional arrangements.Return to text
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Official Celebration of the 10th Anniversary of the Banque Centrale du Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Luxembourg I am pleased to participate in this panel discussion on the importance of the growth and productivity of the financial sector for monetary policy. I am certain that when the European Money and Finance Forum and the Central Bank of Luxembourg planned their conference, they did not imagine how significant the topic would be.1 We are in the midst of very difficult times for world financial markets and economies. Over the past several decades, we witnessed a rapid expansion of financial intermediation and financial instruments around the globe. We always understood that the new financial relationships were substantially influencing the characteristics of economic activity--especially in recent years, U.S. mortgage markets and residential construction, in particular, and household borrowing and spending more generally. Unfortunately, that long period of innovation and heightened financial activity exploded into an unsustainable credit boom that was marked by a failure to appropriately evaluate risks in lending to households and businesses, excessive leverage by both borrowers and lenders, and increased reliance on complex and opaque financial instruments that were poorly understood and fragile under stress. The resulting financial strains and severity of their effects on real activity have clearly shown the limits of our ability to anticipate how and where problems in the financial sector would emerge and of our understanding of the channels through which the financial stresses could lead to a broad-based pullback in lending and adverse spillovers into the real economy. The recent experience has also underscored the difficulties associated with measuring financial services and the productivity of financial firms. The Financial Sector and Economic ActivityBanks and other financial institutions allocate credit. At the most fundamental level, they take savings from the household sector and elsewhere and lend it to firms, households, and governments that want to borrow to spend. In the best circumstances, the operation of financial markets is transparent to the macroeconomy. The financial system allocates credit efficiently to firms that invest in capital resources that improve the productivity of other inputs (for example, labor) and contribute to the growth of the economy. The financial system also offers households choices about how they allocate consumption over time. Financial institutions can be viewed as reducing information asymmetries that impede borrowers’ access to credit, and they provide transaction services to borrowers. And by reducing the cost of external finance to firms generally, productivity gains in the financial sector can foster gains in a wide array of other industries as well. Even before the proliferation of financial institutions and products, the translation of the economic concept of financial services into a workable measure of output posed very thorny problems. This conference is an indication that important research continues quite actively on a variety of issues related to the measurement of the output of financial services and the efficiency of financial institutions. More important from a policymaker’s perspective is the need to assess the contribution to economy-wide productivity and stability of the extraordinary expansion in the size and scope of the financial sector that occurred in the past several decades. Certainly, as financial innovations accelerated, we had solid reasons to believe that those advances were contributing to the pickup in overall productivity and, possibly, to the moderation in fluctuations of economic activity. Increased technical capabilities, together with enhanced mathematical applications, permitted the development of products such as derivatives and loan securitizations that provided new ways to unbundle risks. We thought that risks were being redistributed more efficiently to individuals and firms according to their risk tolerances and their abilities to absorb risk. And evidence suggested that opening credit markets to more households, by enabling them to smooth spending in response to shocks, was contributing to the overall moderation in business cycles. Information technology also appeared to be making intermediation more efficient by reducing the cost and uncertainty of processing information that helps financial intermediaries make superior investment choices with better risk and return characteristics. Information technology also made possible the creation, valuation, and exchange of complex financial instruments on a global basis. Financial transactions were occurring faster and were less expensive to initiate and complete. The assumption was that markets were becoming deeper and more liquid. These innovations did produce lasting gains, but these gains were clearly accompanied by increasing vulnerabilities. In the United States, financial innovation, especially in the origination and distribution of subprime mortgages, ended up contributing to an excess supply of houses at prices well above long-term sustainable levels. And innovations enabled households to liquefy the wealth embedded in houses, thereby boosting loan amounts relative to the value of the house. Moreover, both borrowers and lenders badly mispriced and misunderstood risks, which often became embedded in new, complex, financial instruments. Neither was protected against a substantial decline in the price of houses. And that mispricing was not just confined to the housing sector. Compensation for risk was too low across a broad array of credits. Ironically, an important contributor to these misalignments in spending and lending was the long period of economic expansion and low inflation over the past 25 years, interrupted only a few times by mild recession. This good economic performance provided skewed data and bred complacency: House prices could only go up; income interruptions and problems servicing debt were likely to be short lived; financial markets would always be liquid. Models based on theory and estimated with data from the 1990s and early 2000s fit well--too well. Complacency, in turn, contributed to the unwillingness of many financial market participants to enhance their risk-management systems sufficiently to take full account of the new (perhaps unknown) risks they were taking on. In this environment, financial institutions stretched the amount of capital they were holding, building leverage. With better models, sophisticated contracts, and the belief that risks had been distributed more efficiently, many market participants believed that less capital was needed. Because the amount of capital held by financial institutions on their balance sheets was so small, productivity in the financial sector looked as though it had increased dramatically when the amount of securitization and other off-balance-sheet activities (for example, derivatives) increased. But many of those off-balance-sheet instruments came back onto the balance sheet when markets started to seize up. Finally, many market participants also had inadequate liquidity backstops, apparently because they (wrongly) assumed that markets would be sufficiently liquid to smoothly adjust risk profiles to new developments in markets and the broader economy. Thus, capital and liquidity cushions fell short of what was needed for the complexity of instruments that were created, for the funding risks being incurred, and for the broad array of market and other risks to the firms and to the financial system more generally. Systemic risk is an externality that results from exposures that cannot be diversified away. The financial turmoil that we have been experiencing for more than a year originated in the market for subprime mortgages, in which the combination of falling house prices and poor underwriting standards triggered a rapid rise in delinquencies. Multilayered securitizations made it more difficult to implement loan modifications and other time-honored mechanisms to reduce default costs and other negative consequences of foreclosures. What has occurred since then has revealed how closely interwoven the global array of highly leveraged financial structures and investors had become. Risk did not go away when it was sliced and diced across market participants, and it was not as distributed and diversified as had been thought--in short, the amount of capital to insure against such risks should not have been reduced as much as it was. With the viability of counterparties in question, financial institutions needed to conserve capital and liquidity. Perceptions of inadequate capital and liquidity cushions sparked a flight to liquidity and safety by those lending to financial institutions, beginning an unwinding of leverage that, in turn, has exacerbated economic weakness. As the market price of risk increased, more capital was needed for risks that had already been undertaken. The financial decelerator engaged: Households and businesses needed more collateral and net worth to qualify for loans; lenders, in turn, needed more collateral and capital to back their own liabilities, which had become more costly to issue. The resulting tightening of lending terms and conditions and reduction in credit availability has restrained spending--first in housing and then, as financial distress spread, in many other sectors. Robust, dynamic markets are the lifeblood of market economies. They are the source of rising productivity and, as such, of increasing standards of living. But the dynamic functioning of markets also means that productivity advances will not necessarily occur smoothly--and, indeed, are likely to involve some cyclical overshooting and undershooting, often exacerbated by waves of optimism and pessimism that seem to be inherent in human nature. Innovation by its nature is risky; some innovations work better than others, and, thus, some new ideas and the businesses that invest in or use them must be allowed to fail. In many instances, these cyclical swings in productivity--such as the boom and bust in high-technology investment in the late 1990s--occur in sectors with limited spillovers to the functioning of the financial markets. Risks are borne by private investors who reap the rewards or bear the losses associated with the economic outcomes of their investments. And they are often funded by equity, not debt, so financial intermediaries are not at risk.The gains to aggregate economic activity from successful innovation--as in the high-tech case--are realized over time. When overinvestment occurs, market returns respond, new investment slows, and the capital stock eventually adjusts. In the end, productivity is higher than it would have been otherwise. In contrast, as we have seen, when the innovations heavily involve the financial sector, the unwinding of any resulting boom can quickly begin to entail more far-reaching and deeper effects on the functioning of credit markets and, thus, can pose a more serious threat to economic stability. Although we are far from having written the final chapter on the current situation, we can identify several challenges that it has raised for central banks. The Challenges for Central BanksThe most immediate and important challenge is to take actions that will help restore the financial system to productive functioning and put our economies on a path to growth and price stability. Government authorities and central banks have responded to the current crisis with forceful and innovative measures to rebuild confidence in the financial system, improve the ability of financial institutions to raise capital from private sources, and free up the flow of credit to businesses and households. For central banks, these measures have entailed lowering policy interest rates and opening or expanding liquidity facilities to banks and others to augment the credit that private parties are unable or unwilling to extend to each other. Although we have seen signs of improvement, financial market functioning remains impaired in many ways, and we will need to continue to consider whether additional steps are needed to re-open credit flows and support the economy. When, in the future, the financial system stabilizes and our economies start to recover, central banks will need to decide how best to phase out these extraordinary liquidity actions and credit-market interventions. In many cases, the rates charged for credit under these facilities have been set to be attractive when markets are disrupted, but uneconomical for users once more-normal functioning returns, and usage should naturally decline as risk-taking returns. But, in addition, we will need to decide the appropriate timing of the winding-down of many of the special lending facilities. The actions taken by the Federal Reserve to intervene directly in some financial markets, such as the commercial paper market, are clearly emergency operations only. Except in the most extreme circumstances, when market functioning breaks down and systemic risk reaches unacceptable levels, central banks should distance themselves from decisions about the allocation of credit among private parties. The most critical challenge policymakers are facing involves deciding what steps they can take to minimize the risk that such a severe financial crisis will be repeated. To this end, central banks are already considering what lessons they can draw from their experiences for the design of their policy instruments in a financial environment where borders between countries, institutions, and instruments have all eroded, producing tight linkages among previously disparate markets. Some of what we have done--for example, swaps with other central banks and auctions of discount window credit--might be part of our permanent tool kit, kept on standby to contain the effects of a future emergency. As I indicated in my opening remarks, we must improve our understanding of the financial structure and, as it evolves, of where it may be vulnerable when stressed. In broad terms, policymakers must look for ways to identify those waves of innovation and expansion in financial services--or in any other sector, for that matter--that may be accompanied by a buildup of destabilizing forces, such as rapidly rising asset prices or excessive leverage. We should not underestimate the difficulty of this problem. As the recent financial boom continued, many policymakers did indeed worry about the overpricing of houses and the underpricing of risk, but we were only partly successful in identifying the circumstances and channels that have seemed to trigger the most distress. Almost by definition, it is the unanticipated event that causes the most problems. And the way financial turmoil resonated through the global financial system indicates that the linkages among lenders and borrowers through leverage, complex interdependent counterparty relationships, and backup liquidity agreements propagated and intensified financial distress in ways neither the private nor the public sector understood very well. Clearly, to improve the likelihood that we can contain systemic risk, we need to continue to learn more about financial products and market functioning. A related challenge is to improve our understanding of the linkages between the financial sector and real activity. The recent experience indicates that we did not fully appreciate how financial innovation interacted with the channels of credit to affect real economic activity--both as credit and activity expanded and as they have contracted. In this regard, the macroeconomic models that have been used by central banks to inform their monetary policy decisions are clearly inadequate. These models incorporate few, if any, complex relationships among financial institutions or the financial-accelerator effects and other credit interactions that are now causing stresses in financial markets to spill over to the real economy. Rather, these models abstract from institutional arrangements and focus on a few simple asset-arbitrage relationships, leaving them incapable of explaining recent developments in both credit volumes and risk premiums. Economists at central banks and in academia will need to devote much effort to overcoming these deficiencies in coming years. However these models are adapted, recent events suggest that central banks should be wary of placing too much faith in model-based analyses, which are necessarily predicated on past empirical correlations and relationships. As we have seen, financial innovation can induce structural changes that can importantly alter the way financial institutions, markets, and the broader economy respond to shocks. For this reason, policymakers should take a critical approach to evaluating analyses of this sort, and should always probe to find the sensitivity of results to unstated assumptions that may no longer be valid. Given our limited understanding, the first line of defense against systemic risk must be building more robust and resilient financial systems. Private parties are doing a great deal to increase capital and liquidity and enhance risk-management practices. But policymakers must also adapt their supervisory and regulatory structures to promote a robust financial system that can withstand occasional shocks, even severe ones, without systemic problems that become destabilizing. We must ensure that financial firms--especially those central to the functioning of our highly interlinked markets--have sufficient capital, liquidity, and management resources to back financial intermediation activities both on and off their balance sheets. Another important consideration should be to make sure that our regulatory policies do not exacerbate credit and business cycles. And we should be considering ways to promote transparency that would enhance market functioning and the ability of investors to bring their own discipline to bear on decisions to buy and sell. A central challenge will be to structure financial oversight to both deter unwanted and excessive risk-taking and permit the innovation that can ultimately boost economic growth. Because central banks are ultimately responsible for financial stability, they must work closely with legislators and with other supervisory authorities at home and abroad to ensure that these goals are met. Can the conduct of monetary policy also be adapted to reduce the odds of systemic financial events, and should the manipulation of short-term interest rates take account of the potential for imbalances and price bubbles as well as the traditional objectives of price stability and economic growth? Here I think the lessons of the current episode need to be studied further. Before the recent experience, I believed that the appropriate strategy for conventional monetary policy was to focus exclusively on the stability of economic activity and overall prices for goods and services over the next several years. Under such a policy, a central bank would respond to signs of a potentially destabilizing rise in asset prices or leverage by incorporating the implications of those developments for future output and inflation into its deliberations. However, it would not go further and try to lean against the speculative component of asset prices per se, on the assumption that such an attempt would likely not work. Instead, a central bank would do better to wait for an asset bubble to run its course, and then deal with the consequences when values inevitably returned to normal. This is how the Federal Reserve thought about asset markets as it made monetary policy. Whether a different approach would have produced a better outcome is still in my view an open question. Would somewhat higher interest rates a few years ago have damped the speculation in housing and the deterioration of lending standards? Have we learned enough about the formation and propagation of credit-market problems to identify them in a timely manner? Are we able to look sufficiently far enough ahead to be reasonably certain that responding to a perceived speculative boom with tighter monetary policy will yield longer-run benefits without undue shorter-run costs? I believe the answers to these critical questions are still unclear. Certainly, policymakers at central banks and elsewhere have a full agenda before them. I have been encouraged by the way in which governments around the globe have collaborated to craft new approaches to problems. A continued spirit of cooperation can help as we face the challenges that this panel is discussing. Our economies have proved resilient in the face of other economic shocks, and I am certain that we will ultimately succeed in restoring a stronger and more robust financial system that can support solid and sustainable economic expansion. Footnotes 1.The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board. Joyce Zickler,David Reifschneider,Diana Hancock, andPaul Lengermann, of the Board staff, contributed to these remarks.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board has approved amendments to Appendix A of Regulation CC that reflect the restructuring of the Federal Reserve's check processing operations in the Seventh District. Appendix A provides a routing number guide that helps depository institutions determine the maximum permissible hold periods for most deposited checks. As of January 31, 2009, the Des Moines office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago no longer will process checks, and banks currently served by that office will be reassigned to the head office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. To ensure that the information in Appendix A accurately describes the structure of check processing operations within the Federal Reserve System, the final rule deletes the reference in Appendix A to the Des Moines office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and reassigns the routing numbers listed thereunder to the head office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. To coincide with the effective date of the underlying check processing changes, the amendments are effective January 31, 2009. As a result of these changes, some checks deposited in the affected regions that currently are nonlocal checks will become local checks that are subject to shorter permissible hold periods. The Board's notice is attached.
Governor Kevin Warsh At the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, New York OverviewThe financial markets did not observe the August anniversary of the onset of turmoil with even a hint of fondness.1Instead, market participants seemed to mark the occasion as a kind of coming-of-age opportunity to act out. The subsequent despair among market participants, disrepair in credit markets, and disregard for proper market functioning was more pronounced than witnessed in generations. Significant market dislocations disrupted credit flows to households and firms and impaired economic growth. All and all, these conditions demanded--and received--a forceful response from monetary, fiscal, and financial policymakers. There are some notable signs of improvement. Short-term funding spreads are retreating from extremely elevated levels. Funding maturities are being extended beyond the very near term. Money market funds and commercial paper markets are showing signs of stabilization. And credit default swap spreads of banking institutions are narrowing significantly. Nonetheless, financial markets overall remain strained. Risk spreads remain quite high and lending standards appear strict. Indications of economic activity in the United States have turned decidedly negative. The economy contracted slightly in the third quarter, and the recent data on sales and production suggest that the fourth quarter will be weak. Still, the depth and duration of this period of weak economic activity remain highly uncertain. The financial turmoil revealed that the old financial architecture is broken. But its successor is not yet established.2In my view, the prospects for robust economic growth over the intermediate term are likely to be determined, not principally by the trajectory of housing prices, but by the speed with which a new financial architecture emerges and the form that it takes. This challenge of creating a new financial architecture is hardly unique to the United States. The difficult choices made by policymakers and market participants around the globe will have real implications for future growth prospects. What do I mean by a new financial architecture? Recent travails contributed to a consensus that the financial regulatory framework requires fundamental reform. But, in my view, the financial architecture is necessarily broader than the government's regulatory and supervisory response. The new financial architecture, properly understood, must account for the dynamic relationship between private-market actions and public-sector strictures. The economy's financial architecture is a function of the relationship among financial institutions and market participants that transfer capital and risk between borrowers and savers. But the architecture is also informed by the mix of prescriptions and postures of the Congress, the Administration, and the financial regulators, including the Federal Reserve. This circumstance is particularly the case during times of financial turmoil. In my remarks today, I will first advance a plain assessment of what is afflicting global financial markets. Many observers judge that weaknesses in housing finance, and the associated boom and bust in the housing sector, are the principal cause of the market turmoil and economic malaise. In my view, however, recent market developments--in the United States and abroad--strongly indicate that the causes of the turmoil are broader and more fundamental than the problems in the mortgage markets. Second, I will highlight actions by financial market participants in the transition to a new financial architecture. Financial institutions are being fundamentally transformed by the events of the last several quarters. Massive changes in business models, corporate forms, and funding sources are taking place faster than could be imagined even a few months ago. There is no going back to the old arrangements, nor should there be. And a new equilibrium will take shape only when financial institutions seize new opportunities and the changes in the rules of engagement and the relationship with the official sector are more clearly understood. Third, I will discuss actions of the official sector during this period of turmoil. Most of these policy actions have been taken in vigorous pursuit of financial stability--that is, to reduce financial stresses, shore up credit intermediation, and thereby support economic activity. And that makes good sense. Some material lessening of financial instability is essential so that markets can function properly and the economy can avoid more substantial weakness. But stability in and of itself should not be the be-all and end-all of policy. Rather, actions fostering financial stability should be temporary, providing a bridge to a new, more effective financial architecture. And that architecture should aspire to increase, not decrease, potential output through an economic cycle. The Nature of the Financial Market TurmoilMany observers maintain that the boom and bust in the housing market are the root cause of the current turmoil. No doubt housing-related losses are negatively affecting household wealth and spending. Moreover, the weakness in housing markets and uncertainty about its path have caused financial institution balance sheets to deteriorate. This situation has further accelerated the deleveraging process and tightened credit conditions for businesses and households. When liquidity pulled back dramatically in August 2007, housing suffered mightily.3For reasons well documented, including expectations that home prices would invariably increase, housing proved to be a highly vulnerable asset class. Many homeowners, particularly those that purchased properties during 2005 through 2007, are suffering. And many banks and other financial firms that extended mortgage credit or purchased mortgage-related assets have written down sharply the value of those assets. Public and private policy actions have been taken to help cushion the blow to many homeowners and financial firms.4 While housing may well have been the trigger for the onset of the broader financial turmoil, I have long believed it is not the fundamental cause.5Indeed, recent financial market developments strongly indicate that housing, as an asset class, does not stand alone. Indeed, the problems associated with housing finance reveal broader failings, including inadequate market discipline, excessive reliance on credit ratings, and poor credit and liquidity risk-management practices by many financial firms. During the past several months, this domestic housing-centric diagnosis has also been subjected to a natural experiment. Among U.S. financial institutions, asset quality concerns are no longer confined to the mortgage sector. At the same time, non-U.S. financial institutions--including some with relatively modest exposures to the United States or their own domestic housing markets--appear to be suffering substantial losses. Equity prices of European banks declined more on average during 2008 year-to-date than their U.S. counterparts. Moreover, economic weakness among our advanced foreign trading partners is increasingly evident, even among economies with more modest exposures to the housing sector. If the challenges to the economy were predominantly about the value of the housing stock, my focus today would be far narrower than the establishment of a new financial architecture. So, what diagnosis, beyond housing weakness, is consistent with the unprecedented levels of volatility and dramatic financial market and economic distress? I would advance the following: We are witnessing a fundamental reassessment of the value of virtually every asset everywhere in the world. Short-term funding markets have become suspect. Roll-overs of existing maturities reveal systematic underpricing of once seemingly benign risks--credit, liquidity, counterparty, and even sovereign risks--which demand reassessment and recalibration. Indeed, wide-ranging assessments of these risks are being crudely incorporated into the pricing of virtually all assets. In some cases, at present, the risks do not appear to be reliably quantifiable, and trading has become impaired. Until these assessments are more cleanly refined and more broadly understood, we are likely to observe elevated levels of volatility and unwillingness by many investors to participate in certain asset markets virtually at any price. This phenomenon is proving quite detrimental to global economic growth. In my view, the speed and success of a new financial architecture is likely to be more consequential to economic growth than the design and implementation of well-intended housing policies alone. The establishment of a new financial architecture, thus, is the essential policy response to the greatest economic challenge of our time. Financial Institution Response in Pursuit of Survival and SuccessIn a speech about seven months ago, I noted that the transformation of financial institutions would be among the key variables that would affect the path of the real economy, but "the changing paradigm of financial intermediation" is happening even more abruptly.6The largest investment banks chose a different fate, or had one chosen for them. Many of the largest nonbank financial companies are no doubt reviewing their regulatory status. Large numbers of hedge funds, recently perceived as central to a well-diversified asset allocation program, are struggling for survival. Their investors are being rudely reminded that alpha-returns cannot, by definition, be universally achieved. Large money center banks are casting a keen eye on their sources and uses of funding. And traditional community-based banks are adapting to a dramatically different competitive dynamic with respect to deposits and lending opportunities alike. The business of banking--and credit intermediation, more broadly--is fundamentally changing. Wholesale funding models are severely stressed. Heavy reliance on interbank funding and short-term indebtedness is proving highly detrimental to a financial institutions' health and society's welfare. Some of the highest-rated financial products, ironically, are suffering the greatest diminutions in value. Selling volatility and insuring tail risks are far riskier propositions than many imagined. These products and practices are proving to be a significant source of large, uncapped losses threatening to impair once-hearty franchises. We are witnessing perhaps the fastest, most significant structural shift in the history of the financial services sector. The direct share of value added in the finance and insurance sector approximated 8 percent of U.S. gross domestic produce (GDP) in recent years. This is about 3 percentage points higher than the contribution of financial services to GDP only a generation ago. Similarly, profits of the Standard & Poor's 500 attributable to the finance sector peaked at more than 21 percent during this cycle, 5-1/2 percentage points greater than a decade ago. As the financial sector continues to delever and many financial products disappear altogether, the sector's shares of GDP and profits will shrink further. This reduction could involve many firms shrinking largely in tandem or, more likely, the orderly unwinding or sale of inefficient or unwise firms.7The markets are fearful, in part I suspect, because of the swiftness of the reallocation of resources in the financial sector. The Official Sector Response in Pursuit of Financial StabilityThe turmoil of the past several quarters coincides with further erosion of confidence in what financial institutions and other market participants knew--or thought they knew--about the environment in which they were operating. It is no surprise, then, that those bearing the brunt of the turmoil are pining for calmer times, a period of less volatility, when market prices again comport with historical regressions and newfangled financial models. To wit, a return to financial stability. Government officials, in the U.S. and abroad, are not unsympathetic to this aspiration for calmer times.8But policymakers are prudent to balance the near-term imperative to take actions to achieve financial stability with the objective--just over the horizon--of facilitating the development of a new financial architecture in which market participants re-engage, provide credit to the real economy, and yes, succeed or fail. The Fed has a long and proud tradition, not solely as the monetary authority, but also as a regulator, supervisor, and lender of last resort to help foster financial stability.9The Fed is in the financial stability business. But it's not our only business. The Federal Reserve's financial stability responsibilities are not, in my view, an independent goal of policy. They are best understood through the lens of our broader objectives for the economy. The conduct of monetary policy, banking supervision and regulation, and the provision of liquidity are regular Federal Reserve activities that contribute to financial stability, and in so doing, help achieve improved macroeconomic performance. During this period of turmoil, the Fed has increasingly been called upon to be a steadying influence. When appropriate, and after due consideration, the Fed has chosen to employ its balance sheet, authority, and credibility to lessen the harm to the real economy. That is our role and responsibility. But we should resist the temptation to play a larger role than statutorily mandated or economically prudent. Good-faith pleas for relief in the name of financial stability will continue for some time, and the Fed should carefully consider the facts and circumstances. That period of consideration may require us, however, to be cognizant of the perils of popularity and decline to take action, including when it may be more properly considered or better addressed by the fiscal authorities. So it is, financial stability has become the watchword of the global economy. But its frequency in our lexicon should not be confused with clarity as to its meaning or the timing of its achievement. Nor should it be construed as the sole beacon of policy. What is financial stability? It is perhaps easier to define by its absence.10Financial instability is a situation in which stresses on markets and institutions are sufficiently severe that the intermediation between borrowers and savers is threatened, with the prospect of significant risks to the broader economy. Financial stability, moreover, should not be equated with an absence of volatility. If some unexpected news arrives, markets adjust, often sharply. Generally, these adjustments are not cases of financial instability. A healthy and well-functioning financial system will reward well-managed risk-taking and punish imprudence, sometimes harshly. Such outcomes are not pretty and can be marked by large and pervasive losses, but most do not necessitate extraordinary policy interventions. Nonetheless, circumstances of pronounced financial instability, while rare, do arise. In the most recent episode, we policymakers deemed it necessary to take significant actions to mitigate the risks to the real economy. Financial firms became highly protective of their balance sheets and sought to disengage en masse from the provision of credit. The Fed responded, introducing lending facilities designed to support liquidity in overnight and short-term funding markets. With the approval of the Congress, Treasury also took significant action, making large capital injections directly into banks to help jump-start the credit intermediation process. This action was supplemented by various forms of government guarantees. But bold official policy responses, even when successful in combating financial instability, may not be enough to support the resumption of trend economic growth over the medium term. Why is government action aimed at financial stability not sufficient to usher in a new era of prosperity? Because the broader financial architecture remains in substantial flux, as is sometimes unavoidable. Confidence in markets and institutions cannot be demanded or forced by edict. Confidence in a new architecture cannot be jury-rigged, even by well-designed government actions. Nor can confidence be rushed. Comprehensive policy prescriptions to address financial instability are now being delivered to the ailing patient. But a dose of patience itself may be equally important to help the recuperative process. Time is required for the medicines to be administered and their efficacy to be judged. New prescriptions, however well intentioned, can prove unsettling to a patient who is searching to find his footing. Of course, policy must respond to serious situations as they arise; and, during the past 15 months, these developments have been difficult to anticipate with precision. But, if the framework for policy decisions is not viewed as clear, consistent, and predictable by market participants, the resulting actions run the risk of contributing to, rather than reducing, market volatility--at the most inauspicious of times. Finally, actions intended to help achieve financial stability should not be allowed to interfere with the establishment of a sturdy, new financial architecture. Concluding RemarksI am reminded of a certain Omaha-based investor who says that his investment style is to be greedy when other investors are fearful, and be fearful when others are greedy.11I would modify the advice somewhat to make it applicable to policymakers: We should be steady when financial market participants are fearful, and fearful when markets appear steady. This call for steadiness is not some nostrum, implying that the government should be passive during times of significant economic turmoil. Quite the contrary. But comprehensive policy prescriptions are most effective when they establish new rules of engagement that are clear in intent, consistent in application, and reasonably predictable in effect. This policy formulation should allow financial firms to regain their footing and market participants, more broadly, to take new, constructive actions to facilitate the availability of credit. Perhaps in this way, policymakers and market participants alike can best contribute to the development of a reformed and robust financial architecture. I see more promise than peril over the horizon. The speed of these changes in the financial architecture understandably brings fear to some market participants, but it may equally sow the seeds of recovery. Policymakers are keenly observing the pulse of private financial institutions and other market participants to gauge their ability to take up the cause of reform and renewal. If financial institutions readily and steadily approach new ways of intermediating credit, the real economy might recover sooner and with more vigor than expected. If not, if private market participants prove unable or unwilling to establish new business models, then the effects of the current financial market turmoil may be a significant drag on economic growth long after stability is ostensibly achieved. Getting the architecture right is essential to address the central challenge facing our economy. Footnotes 1.The views expressed herein are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of other members of the Board of Governors or of the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful for the assistance ofNellie LiangandBill Englishof Board staff, who contributed to these remarks.Return to text 2.In these remarks, I will elaborate on some topics I discussed when I last spoke here at New York University. (See Kevin Warsh (2008), "Financial Market Turmoil and the Federal Reserve: The Plot Thickens," speech delivered at the New York University School of Law Global Economic Policy Forum, New York, April 14.)Return to text 3.See Kevin Warsh (2007), "Financial Intermediation and Complete Markets," speech delivered at the European Economics and Financial Centre, London, June 5; see also Kevin Warsh (2007), "Financial Market Developments," speech delivered at the State University of New York at Albany's School of Business, Albany, New York, September 21.Return to text 4.To help homeowners, the Hope for Homeowners program enacted as part of the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 (HERA) allows the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) to facilitate mortgage refinancings. HERA also established a first-time homebuyer tax credit and appropriated funds to provide housing counseling assistance. FHA Secure is another refinancing option available to some borrowers. In addition, the Hope Now Alliance is an industry-based effort of mortgage servicers, housing counselors, and investors committed to establishing industry guidelines to facilitate loan modifications.Return to text 5.See Warsh, "Financial Market Developments," in note 3.Return to text 6.See Warsh, "Financial Market Turmoil," in note 2.Return to text 7.See, for example, Kenneth Rogoff (2008), "The World Cannot Grow Its Way Out of This Slowdown,"Financial Times, July 29.Return to text 8.Central bankers, finance ministers, and others have convened the world over to ponder the causes and consequences of the recent period of financial instability, its impact on the global economy, and the actions that might be taken to avoid future outbreaks. The President's Working Group on Financial Markets, the Financial Stability Forum, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Committee on the Global Financial System, the Institute for International Finance, the Counterparty Risk Management Group, and many other public and private groups are making significant contributions to the discussion.Return to text 9.The Federal Reserve was created in response to the periods of panic and bank runs that affected the United States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The Federal Reserve regularly responded to financial crises by extending credit and by using its expertise and credibility with market participants to address market strains.Return to text 10.See Kevin Warsh (2007), "Financial Stability and the Federal Reserve," speech delivered at the New York State Economics Association 60th Annual Conference, Loudonville, New York, October 5.Return to text 11.See Warren Buffett (2008), “Buy American. I Am.” an op-ed inNew York Times, October 17.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate having this opportunity to review some of the activities to date of the Treasury's Troubled Asset Relief Program, or TARP, and to discuss recent steps taken by the Federal Reserve and other agencies to support the normalization of credit markets. The legislation that created the TARP put in place a Financial Stability Oversight Board to review the actions of the Treasury in administering the program. That Oversight Board includes the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, the Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency, and the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. We have met four times, reviewing the operational plans and policy initiatives of the TARP and discussing possible additional steps that might be taken. Officers for the Oversight Board have been appointed, and the Federal Reserve and the other agencies are providing staff support for the board. Minutes of each meeting are being posted to a special website established by the Treasury.1In addition, staff members of the agencies whose heads are participating in the Oversight Board have met with staff from the Government Accountability Office to explore strategies for coordinating the oversight that the two bodies are required to perform under the enabling legislation. The value of the TARP in promoting financial stability has already been demonstrated. The financial crisis intensified greatly in the latter part of September and spread to many countries that had not yet been touched by it, which led to grave concerns about the stability of the global financial system. Failure to prevent an international financial collapse would almost certainly have had dire implications for both the U.S. and world economies. Fortunately, the existence of the TARP allowed the Treasury to react quickly by announcing a plan to inject $250 billion in capital into U.S. financial institutions. Nine large institutions received the first $125 billion, and the remainder is being made available to other banking organizations through an application process. In addition, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation announced that it would guarantee non-interest-bearing transaction accounts at depository institutions and certain other liabilities of depository institutions and their holding companies, and the Federal Reserve expanded its provision of backstop liquidity to the financial system. These actions, together with similar measures in many other countries, appeared to stabilize the situation and to improve investor confidence in financial firms. Notably, spreads on credit default swaps for large U.S. banking organizations, which had widened substantially over the previous few weeks, declined sharply on the day of the joint announcement. Going forward, the ability of the Treasury to use the TARP to inject capital into financial institutions and to take other steps to stabilize the financial system--including any actions that might be needed to prevent the disorderly failure of a systemically important financial institution--will be critical for restoring confidence and promoting the return of credit markets to more normal functioning. As I noted earlier, the Federal Reserve has taken a range of policy actions to provide liquidity to the financial system and thus promote the extension of credit to households and businesses. Our recent actions have focused on the market for commercial paper, which is an important source of short-term financing for many financial and nonfinancial firms. Normally, money market mutual funds are major lenders in the commercial paper markets. However, in mid-September, a large fund suffered losses and heavy redemptions, causing it to suspend further redemptions and then close. In the next few weeks, investors withdrew almost $500 billion from prime money market funds. The funds, concerned about their ability to meet further redemptions, began to reduce their purchases of commercial paper and limit the maturity of such paper to only overnight or other very short maturities. As a result, interest rate spreads paid by issuers on longer-maturity commercial paper widened significantly, and issuers were exposed to the costs and risks of having to roll over increasingly large amounts of paper each day. The Federal Reserve has developed three programs to address these problems. The first allows money market mutual funds to sell asset-backed commercial paper to banking organizations, which are then permitted to borrow against the paper on a non-recourse basis from the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. Usage of that facility peaked at around $150 billion. The facility contributed importantly to the ability of money funds to meet redemption pressures when they were most intense and remains available as a backstop should such pressures reemerge. The second program involves the funding of a special-purpose vehicle that purchases highly rated commercial paper issued by financial and nonfinancial businesses at a term of three months. This facility has purchased about $250 billion of commercial paper, allowing many firms to extend significant amounts of funding into next year. A third facility, expected to be operational next week, will provide a liquidity backstop directly to money market mutual funds. This facility is intended to give funds confidence to extend significantly the maturities of their investments and reduce over time the reliance of issuers on sales to the Federal Reserve's special-purpose vehicle. All of these programs, which were created under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, must be terminated when conditions in financial markets are determined by the Federal Reserve to no longer be unusual and exigent. The primary objective of these and other actions we have taken is to stabilize credit markets and to improve the access to credit of businesses and households. There are some signs that credit markets, while still quite strained, are improving. Interbank short-term funding rates have fallen notably since mid-October, and we are seeing greater stability in money market mutual funds and in the commercial paper market. Interest rates on higher-rated bonds issued by corporations and municipalities have fallen somewhat, and bond issuance for these entities rose a bit in recent weeks. The ongoing capital injections under the TARP are continuing to bring stability to the banking system and have reduced some of the pressure on banks to deleverage, two critical first steps toward restarting flows of new credit. However, overall, credit conditions are still far from normal, with risk spreads remaining very elevated and banks reporting that they continued to tighten lending standards through October. There has been little or no bond issuance by lower-rated corporations or securitization of consumer loans in recent weeks. To help address the tightness of credit, on November 12 the federal banking agencies issued a joint statement on meeting the needs of creditworthy borrowers. The statement took note of the recent strong policy actions designed to promote financial stability and improve banks' access to capital and funding. In light of those actions, which have increased the capacity of banks to lend, it is imperative that all banking organizations and their regulators work together to ensure that the needs of creditworthy borrowers are met in a manner consistent with safety and soundness. As capital adequacy is critical in determining a banking organization's ability and willingness to lend, the joint statement emphasizes the need for careful capital planning, including setting appropriate dividend policies. The statement also notes the agencies' expectation that banking organizations should work with existing borrowers to avoid preventable foreclosures, which can be costly to all involved--the borrower, the lender, and the communities in which they are located. Steps that should be taken in this area include ensuring adequate funding and staffing of mortgage servicing operations and adopting systematic, proactive, and streamlined mortgage loan modification protocols aimed at providing long-term sustainability for borrowers. Finally, the agencies expect banking organizations to conduct regular reviews of their management compensation policies to ensure that they encourage prudent lending and discourage excessive risk-taking. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. Footnotes 1.See U.S. Department of the Treasury,Emergency Economic Stabilization Act website.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Currie Bancorporation, Inc., Currie, Minnesota, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among FirstBank Financial Services, Inc., McDonough, Georgia, a registered bank holding company, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and the Banking Commissioner of the State of Georgia. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Paramount Bancorp, Inc., a registered bank holding company, Paramount Bank, a state chartered member bank, both of Farmington Hills, Michigan, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and the Michigan Office of Financial and Insurance Regulation. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Riverside Gulf Coast Banking Company, Riverside Bank of the Gulf Coast, both of Cape Coral, Florida, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and the State of Florida Office of Financial Regulation. A copy of the Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Southern Community Bancshares, Inc., Fayetteville, Georgia, a registered bank holding company, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and the Banking Commissioner of the State of Georgia. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Team Financial, Inc., Paola, Kansas, Post Bancorp, Inc., Colorado Springs, Colorado, Team Financial Acquisition Subsidiary, Inc., Paola, Kansas, all registered bank holding companies, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.