The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the proposal by Fifth Third Bancorp, Cincinnati, Ohio, to acquire First Charter Corporation and its subsidiary bank, First Charter Bank, both of Charlotte, North Carolina. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the proposal by JPMorgan Chase & Co., New York, New York, to acquire Bear Stearns Bank & Trust, Princeton, New Jersey. JPMorgan Chase & Co. is not required to obtain the Board's prior approval under the Bank Holding Company Act to acquire The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and Kansas City, decreasing the discount rate at the Banks from 2-1/2 percent to 2-1/4 percent, effective immediately.The Board also approved an action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, decreasing the discount rate at the Bank from 2-1/2 percent to 2-1/4 percent, effective May 1, 2008.
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the Princeton University Center for Economic Policy Studies Dinner, New York, New York One of the things I often tell my 25-year-old son is, "Keep your options open." In effect, this means that today he should make the best decision possible using the information he has at hand, and when tomorrow comes he should reconsider all of his options, and again the next day, and so on. In the terminology of economists, this strategy is usually referred to as "dynamic optimal policy under discretion." And the idea of complete discretion may sound like a great idea--after all, why should you restrict your choices? Nevertheless, in the context of central banking, the modern science of monetary policy indicates that a discretionary approach can lead to poor economic outcomes.1 Therefore, in my remarks today, I would like to explain how a commitment to keeping inflation low and stable can help foster the stability of economic activity as well as the stability of prices. After analyzing the pitfalls of discretion and the benefits of a firm commitment to a nominal anchor, I will discuss the role of central bank communication in promoting this commitment. I will then illustrate these conceptual principles by considering the experiences of other central banks that have adopted explicit numerical inflation objectives. As usual, these remarks reflect only my own views and are not intended to reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System.2 Pitfalls of Discretionary Monetary PolicyStarting in the 1970s, the economics profession began to recognize that the evolution of economic activity and inflation--and hence the design of optimal monetary policy--depends crucially on how households, firms, and financial market investors form their expectations regarding the future course of policy.3This recognition of the central role of expectations in macroeconomic outcomes led to the discovery of thetime-inconsistency problem, a concept that sounds highfalutin but is actually quite intuitive.4 This problem arises whenever the possibility of short-run gains creates a temptation to renege on an existing plan, even though following that plan would produce a better outcome over the longer run. In essence, if a good long-run plan will not be followed consistently over time because the short-run gains of deviating from the plan are too tempting, then that plan is said to betime-inconsistent. In such a setting, thetime-consistentpolicy is to reoptimize every period, whereas the preferable alternative would be to establish afirm commitmentto the optimal long-run plan. To take a common example that illustrates the time-inconsistency problem, someone may make a New Year’s resolution about starting a diet. At some point thereafter, however, it becomes hard to resist having a little bit of Rocky Road ice cream, and then a bit more, and pretty soon the weight begins to pile back on. The time-inconsistency problem arises in the context of monetary policy, because there is a temptation to give a short-run boost to economic output and employment by pursuing a course of policy that is more expansionary than firms or workers had initially expected.5Nevertheless, if the economy is already at full employment, then this boost is merely transitory: As economic activity rises above its sustainable level, wages and prices begin to rise, and the private sector's inflation expectations start to pick up. Of course, the central bank must eventually remove the policy stimulus to avoid a continuous upward spiral of inflation. At that point, economic activity drops back to a sustainable level. However, inflation settles in at a permanently higher rate because prospects of future monetary expansions become embedded in expectations, and hence in wage and price adjustments, and the higher average inflation rate generates undesirable economic distortions.6Thus, failing to address the time-inconsistency problem poses the risk of ending up with a higher average inflation rate, with detrimental long-run consequences for economic efficiency and the general standard of living. As my mother often told me when I was growing up, "The road to hell is paved with good intentions." Similarly, discretionary monetary policy, even though well intended, can lead to poor economic outcomes. Benefits of a Firm Commitment to a Nominal AnchorHow can a central bank overcome the time-inconsistency problem? The answer is to establish a firm commitment to a nominal anchor--that is, to ensure that inflation remains low and stable over time. In a speech that I gave last week, I highlighted the merits of specifying an inflation objective in terms of a specific numerical value.7With an explicit numerical inflation objective, the central bank's strategy is aimed at keeping economic activity close to a sustainable growth path and at maintaining a low and stable inflation rate. Such a commitment ensures that the central bank resists the temptation to pursue short-run expansionary policies that are inconsistent with the long-run goals of price stability and maximum sustainable employment. A strong commitment to an explicit numerical inflation objective has other significant benefits. First, the long-run inflation expectations of households and firms are a key factor in determining the actual behavior of inflation.8In the absence of a firm nominal anchor, these expectations may wander over time as the private sector revises its assessment of the rate at which inflation is likely to settle down, and those movements in long-run inflation expectations can generate pressure on the current inflation rate. Thus, by establishing a transparent and credible commitment to a specific numerical objective, monetary policy can provide a firm anchor for long-run inflation expectations, avoiding such pressures and thereby directly contributing to the objective of low and stable inflation. Moreover, such a commitment can play an important role in minimizing the risk of “inflation scares”--that is, episodes in which longer-term inflation expectations jump sharply in response to specific macroeconomic developments or monetary policy actions.9 Second, as I emphasized in a speech in late February, establishing a firm commitment to a nominal anchor can help stabilize output and employment.10Specifically, to counter a contractionary demand shock, the monetary authorities need to reduce the short-run nominal interest rate; however, the effectiveness of such a policy action may be hindered if long-run inflation expectations are not firmly anchored. For example, if the private sector becomes less certain about the longer-run inflation outlook, then an increase in the inflation risk premium could boost longer-term interest rates by more than the increase in expected inflation. The higher inflation risk premium would place upward pressure on the real costs of long-term financing for households and businesses (whose debt contracts are almost always expressed in nominal terms) and hence might partially offset the direct monetary stimulus. Thus, a central bank commitment that firmly anchors long-run inflation expectations can make an important contribution to the effectiveness of the central bank’s actions aimed at stabilizing economic activity in the face of adverse demand shocks. Third, a strong commitment to an explicit inflation objective provides the central bank with greater flexibility to respond decisively to adverse demand shocks. Such a commitment helps ensure that an aggressive policy easing is not misinterpreted as signaling a shift in the central bank's inflation objective, and thereby minimizes the possibility that inflation expectations could move upward and lead to a rise in actual inflation. A strong nominal anchor can be especially valuable in periods of financial market stress; at such times, prompt and decisive policy action may be required to prevent the financial market disruption from causing a severe contraction in economic activity that could further exacerbate uncertainty and financial market stress, leading to a further deterioration in macroeconomic activity, and so on.11Thus, by providing the central bank with greater flexibility in mitigating the risk of such an adverse feedback loop, the strong commitment to an explicit inflation objective can play an important role in promoting financial stability as well as the stability of economic activity and inflation. Fourth, a strong nominal anchor can help minimize the effects of an adverse cost shock, such as a persistent rise in the price of energy. Generally speaking, such shocks tend to result in weaker economic activity as well as higher inflation. However, when longer-term inflation expectations are firmly anchored, an adverse cost shock is likely to have only transitory effects on actual inflation; hence, there may be no need to raise interest rates aggressively to keep inflation from moving upward. Thus, the commitment to a nominal anchor can help reduce output and employment fluctuations that impose unnecessary hardship on workers and, more broadly, the economy. The bottom line is that a transparent and credible commitment to an explicit numerical inflation objective can provide significant benefits in facilitating the central bank's task of stabilizing both economic activity and inflation as well as fostering the stability of the financial system. The Role of Central Bank CommunicationAlthough a strong commitment to a nominal anchor is associated with significant benefits, establishing and maintaining such a commitment tends to be easier said than done. After all, my discussion of the time-inconsistency problem indicates that there are always pressures to renege on that commitment. Here I will argue that central bank communication to increase transparency and accountability can play a key role in helping central banks maintain a strong commitment to a nominal anchor. The public announcement of an explicit numerical inflation objective increases the accountability of a central bank and therefore promotes the monetary authority's commitment to delivering low and stable inflation. As put by a former governor of the Bank of Canada, such objectives give the public a "precise yardstick for measuring how [the central bank] is doing."12The credibility of the central bank may rise over time as the public comes to appreciate its success in delivering inflation outcomes consistent with its stated numerical objective. Similarly, the temptation to pursue policy actions inconsistent with the objective--and hence renege on its commitment--may be diminished, because large or persistent deviations of inflation from the stated goal would be observed by the public and thus would be more likely to be called into question. As I argued in a speech last week, accountability is further enhanced if the inflation objective is stated as a numerical value rather than a range or comfort zone.13 But couldn't a numerical inflation objective be easily changed at the whim of the central bank or the government? The time-inconsistency problem could then rear its ugly head, because raising the numerical inflation objective could be used to justify more expansionary monetary policy to generate higher employment and output in the short run. Although this temptation to renege on keeping inflation low and stable might be present, the transparency of a public change in the numerical inflation objective, which will subject it to public scrutiny and debate, makes it much harder to engage in such opportunistic behavior. Unless an adjustment of the explicit inflation objective is perceived to be driven by analytical considerations, it will be viewed as violating the public's trust. The resulting loss of credibility on the part of the central bank (or the government) could be devastating; hence, there are strong incentives not to change the inflation objective absent sound technical reasons for doing so. Indeed, adjustments to the numerical inflation objective or the inflation measure have rarely occurred in practice, and those adjustments have been consistent with clear scientific reasoning.14 However, two important communication challenges arise in establishing a firm commitment to an explicit numerical inflation objective. First, a central bank must make clear that this commitment should not be regarded as implying that the central bank will continuously maintain inflation at the specified rate or even that the inflation rate will always return to that rate over a fixed time horizon, in the same way that one might pledge to lose 20 pounds in the next six or nine months. Given that every economy is constantly buffeted by various shocks, it is generally neither feasible nor desirable to try to keep inflation constant at some specific level. Thus, a commitment to keep inflation low and stable should be interpreted in a probabilistic sense--that is, policy will act in a manner that keeps inflation close to the inflation objective on average over time, and unusually large shocks may result in more persistent deviations from this objective. A second challenge stems from the fact that the optimal monetary policy under commitment to an inflation objective is oriented toward minimizing variability in the real economy as well as keeping inflation low and stable.15As a consequence, when a given shock causes inflation to deviate significantly from the numerical objective, the central bank must communicate how its policy strategy will bring inflation back to this rate within a reasonable timeframe and how this strategy will minimize fluctuations in output and employment over that horizon.16For example, it is generally desirable to reduce inflation gradually following an adverse cost shock in order to alleviate the contractionary effects on the real economy. These challenges highlight the extent to which central bank projections for economic activity and inflation play an important role in maintaining a strong commitment to a nominal anchor.17The central bank must clarify how the economic outlook shapes its current policy actions as well as the anticipated path of policy. Moreover, as the economy deviates from those forecasts, as it inevitably does, the central bank must explain how policy will adapt to achieve the broad economic goals of price stability and maximum sustainable employment. Publicly announcing forecasts of inflation has the additional benefit of helping anchor inflation expectations, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of monetary policy actions to stabilize economic activity and lowering the economic cost of maintaining low and stable inflation. Another benefit of publishing such forecasts is that discussion of the forecast can be used to highlight the analysis and reasoning behind monetary policy decisions, which can help the public to better understand monetary policy actions and strengthen the central bank’s credibility. Although communication is a crucial element in establishing and maintaining a strong commitment to a nominal anchor, with its attendant benefits, there are, of course, other elements as well. Even if a central bank recognizes that a policy geared solely toward near-term economic activity will lead to poor outcomes--high inflation with lower economic growth--it still may not be able to commit to a strong nominal anchor and avoid the time-inconsistency problem, because special interests may try to apply pressure on the central bank to boost employment in the short term through an overly expansionary monetary policy.18 How can the central bank be insulated from short-run pressures to pursue expansionary policy at the expense of high inflation? There is a broad international consensus that the central bank should have full authority to determine the short-run setting of its policy instruments, without any external interference.19In addition, I believe that central bank communication is crucial in promoting public support for maintaining low and stable inflation. Indeed, in a democratic society, every government agency is ultimately accountable to the public, and the establishment of transparent objectives and of a clear policy strategy plays an essential role in facilitating that accountability. The old adage correctly states that "Actions speak louder than words," and, clearly, just announcing an objective for inflation does not mean anything unless the actual policies pursued by the monetary authorities are consistent with the objective. Words, however, do matter if those words help ensure that the appropriate policy actions will be taken and strengthen the public's confidence that the central bank will continue to act in a manner consistent with its long-run objectives. As I have argued here, the increase in transparency and accountability, which results from clear communication about inflation objectives and about how monetary policy will be conducted to achieve these objectives, creates stronger incentives for central banks to avoid the pursuit of short-run overly expansionary policies. This approach also helps establish a credible commitment to pursuing policies that keep inflation under control and economic activity growing on a sustainable path. The International ExperienceMy discussion so far has been pretty theoretical. But one might reasonably ask whether communication about inflation objectives and about how monetary policy is conducted to achieve these objectives actually helps strengthen the commitment to fostering low and stable inflation, and thereby produces better economic outcomes. More specifically: Does communication of inflation objectives lead to increased public support for the central bank? Improved inflation performance? More firmly anchored inflation expectations? Over the past two decades, most of the major foreign central banks have adopted frameworks which have the overriding objective of bolstering public confidence that policymakers will act to keep inflation low and stable. While self-declared "inflation targeters" are the most prominent in this regard, other central banks also have introduced explicit inflation objectives of some kind, generally in the form of a preferred inflation point or range.20To address the questions that I listed earlier, I will draw lessons from the international experience with explicit numerical inflation objectives, while deferring further consideration of the United States until the conclusion of these remarks. Central Bank Independence.I have already noted that increased central bank independence helps support a commitment to a strong nominal anchor and thus should lead to better inflation performance. Evidence supports the conjecture that macroeconomic performance is improved when central banks are more independent. For example, when central banks in industrialized countries are ranked according to the degree of legal independence of the central bank, those countries with the highest degree of central bank independence are found to have the best inflation performance.21 I have also argued that adopting an explicit objective can help strengthen the accountability of monetary policy actions and hence may promote public support for the operational independence of the central bank. Although there has been a pronounced trend toward increased central bank independence at the same time that monetary policy frameworks have adopted explicit inflation objectives, it would be unwarranted to claim that this correlation implies causation from adoption of explicit inflation objectives to central bank independence. However, this is where case studies can help us. One example that illustrates how having an explicit inflation objective encouraged public support for stabilizing inflation and for the independence of the central bank occurred in Canada in 1996. At that time, there was an important public debate about whether monetary policy was excessively contractionary.22In this case, the existence of an explicit inflation objective channeled that debate into a substantive discussion over what should be the appropriate target for inflation, with both the Bank of Canada and its critics obliged to make explicit their assumptions and estimates of the costs and benefits of different levels of inflation. Indeed, the debate, as well as the Bank of Canada's record and responsiveness to that debate, led to increased support for the Bank, with the result that criticism of the Bank and its conduct of monetary policy became much less of a political issue. Another interesting example, which I do not have time to discuss in detail here, occurred with the granting of operational independence to the Bank of England in May 1997 after it had adopted an explicit numerical inflation objective.23In explaining the decision to grant operational independence to the Bank of England, the government specifically pointed to the Bank's successful performance in providing forecasts and clear explanations of the likely effects of a range of policy alternatives, thereby increasing accountability and making the central bank more responsive to political oversight. Inflation Outcomes. The adoption of a monetary policy framework with an explicit inflation objective has hinged on the belief that such a framework ultimately delivers better inflation outcomes. Thus, it is legitimate to inquire whether inflation outcomes in the economies that have adopted such frameworks have been in line with the stated objectives. Chart 1displays the inflation objective and the relevant measure of realized inflation in a sample of industrialized economies. Overall, the economies that adopted explicit inflation objectives have experienced substantial improvements in their inflation performance; indeed, in each case the central bank has been largely successful at keeping inflation in line with the stated objective, sometimes even more than might have been anticipated when establishing that objective.24Of course, inflation has occasionally deviated from the objective, as one would expect from the fact that every economy is continuously buffeted by various sorts of shocks. Nonetheless, these inflation deviations have been relatively small and transitory by historical standards. Most important, there is little evidence of a systematicupwardbias in inflation, which would arise if the central bank were attempting to stimulate output beyond what would be consistent with maintaining low and stable inflation. I also want to emphasize that this improvement in inflation performance hasnotbeen at the expense of higher employment and output fluctuations; indeed, the variability of output and employment fluctuations has generally declined in those economies where the central bank has maintained an explicit inflation objective.25 Inflation Expectations. Economies with explicit numerical inflation objectives have (fortunately) not been alone in enjoying relatively low and stable inflation over the past couple of decades; indeed, in some cases, inflation was already low and stable prior to the adoption of the explicit objective. It is thus legitimate to investigate whether the establishment of an explicit inflation objective has had other measurable effects, particularly with regard to the anchoring of long-run inflation expectations.26 Chart 2presents realized inflation along with a survey-based measure of mean inflation expectations at the two-year-ahead and six-to-ten-year-ahead horizons. The evidence supports the view that medium- to long-term expectations have become well anchored around the official objectives. First, survey-based measures of long-term inflation expectations have converged toward the official inflation objective in all countries. This fact is consistent with central banks making credible, long-term commitments to pursuing their objectives, even in countries where the objective must be renewed on a regular basis. Moreover, surveys of professional forecasters in each of these economies reveal that, on average, forecasters expect deviations in realized inflation to disappear within two years or less. In effect, these forecasters anticipate that the central bank will take the policy actions necessary to ensure that inflation lines up with the explicit objective over a reasonable time horizon. Econometric analysis of financial market data also indicates that long-run inflation expectations are firmly anchored in each of the economies in which the central bank has an explicit numerical inflation objective.27 ConclusionIn a speech last week, I argued that the science of monetary policy provides a strong rationale for framing the inflation goal in terms of a specific point objective rather than a range or comfort zone.28My remarks today provide further elaboration about how the establishment of a firm commitment to an explicit numerical inflation objective contributes to better outcomes for both inflation and economic activity. First, I have explained the pitfalls of discretionary monetary policy and the benefits of a strong commitment to a nominal anchor. Second, I have considered how central bank communications promote such a commitment. Third, I have highlighted some key lessons from the experiences of other major industrial economies that have adopted explicit inflation objectives. Finally, you may have noticed that I haven’t said much about the United States in this speech. Nevertheless, the principles emphasized in my remarks today and in last week's speech have potentially important implications for the ongoing process of refining the Federal Reserve's policy framework and of enhancing our communications. Indeed, as Chairman Bernanke has recently indicated, our communication strategy is "a work in progress," and the Federal Reserve "will continue to look for ways to improve the accountability and public understanding of U.S. monetary policy making."29I hope that these remarks will be helpful in contributing to the continuation of that process. ReferencesAlesina, Alberto, and Lawrence H. Summers (1993). "Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 25 (May), pp. 151-62. Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon (1983). "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate Model,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 91 (August), pp. 589-610. Beechey, Meredith, Benjamin Johannsen, and Andrew Levin (2007). "Are Long-Run Inflation Expectations Anchored More Firmly in the Euro Area than in the United States?" Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper 6536. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion, October. Bean, Charles (1998). "The New UK Monetary Arrangements: A View from the Literature,"Economic Journal, vol. 108 (November), pp. 1795-809. Bernanke, Ben S. (2007). "Federal Reserve Communications," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14. Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999).Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Calvo, Guillermo A. (1978). "On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary Economy,"Econometrica, vol. 46 (November), pp. 1411-28. Castelnuovo, Efrem, Sergio Nicoletti Altimari, and Diego Rodríguez-Palenzuela (2003). "Definition of Price Stability, Range and Point Inflation Targets, and the Anchoring of Long-Term Inflation Expectations," in O. Issing, ed.,Background Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation of its Monetary Policy Strategy(1.82 MB PDF). Frankfurt: European Central Bank, pp. 43-90. Cukierman, Alex (1993). "Central Bank Independence, Political Influence and Macroeconomic Performance: A Survey of Recent Development,"Cuadernos de Economía, vol. 30 (no. 91), pp. 271-92. _________ (2006). "Central Bank Independence and Monetary Policy Making Institutions: Past, Present, and Future,"Journal Economía Chileña, vol. 9 (April), pp. 5-23. Debelle, Guy, and Stanley Fischer (1994). "How Independent Should a Central Bank Be?" in Jeffrey C. Fuhrer, ed.,Goals, Guidelines, and Constraints Facing Monetary Policymakers, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series No. 38. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, pp. 195-221. Dodge, David (2002). "Trust, Transparency, and Financial Markets," speech delivered at the Greater Halifax Partnership, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, June 11. Fatás, Antonio, Ilian Mihov, and Andrew K. Rose (2007). "Quantitative Goals for Monetary Policy,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 39 (August), pp. 1163-76. Forder, James (2000). "Central Bank Independence and Credibility: Is There a Shred of Evidence?"International Finance, vol. 3 (April), pp. 167-85. Goodfriend, Marvin (1993)."Interest Rate Policy and the Inflation Scare Problem: 1979-1992 (636 KB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,Economic Quarterly, vol. 79 (Winter), pp. 1-24. Gürkaynak, Refet S., Andrew Levin, and Eric T. Swanson (2006). "Does Inflation Targeting Anchor Long-Run Inflation Expectations? Evidence from Long-Term Bond Yields in the U.S., U.K., and Sweden," Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper5808. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, August. King, Mervyn (2004). "The New Inflation Target (108 KB PDF)," speech delivered at the Birmingham Forward/CBI Business Luncheon, Birmingham, United Kingdom, January 20. Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott (1977). "Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85 (June), pp. 473-92. Levin, Andrew T., Fabio M. Natalucci, and Jeremy M. Piger (2004). "The Macroeconomic Effects of Inflation Targeting (406 KB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Economic Review, vol. 86 (July/August, Inflation Targeting: Prospects and Problems, Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual Economic Policy Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis), pp. 51-80. Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1972). "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,"Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 4 (April), pp. 103-24. _________ (1973). "Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,"American Economic Review, vol. 63 (June), pp. 326-34. _________ (1976). "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 1, pp. 19-46. Mankiw, N. Gregory, Ricardo Reis, and Justin Wolfers (2003). "Disagreement about Inflation Expectations," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #9796.Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007a). "Inflation Dynamics," speech delivered at the Annual Macro Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 23. __________ (2007b). "Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate," speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10. _________ (2007c). "Will Monetary Policy Become More of a Science?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series2007-44. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. _________ (2007d). "The Federal Reserve's Enhanced Communication Strategy and the Science of Monetary Policy," speech delivered to the Undergraduate Economics Association at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., November 29. _________ (2008a). "Monetary Policy Flexibility, Risk Management, and Financial Disruptions," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, January 11. _________ (2008b). "Does Stabilizing Inflation Contribute to Stabilizing Economic Activity?" speech delivered at East Carolina University, Greenville, N.C., February 25. _________ (2008c). "Comfort Zones, Shmumfort Zones," speech delivered to the Virginia Association of Economists, Washington and Lee University, Lexington, Va., March. Mishkin, Frederic S., and Adam S. Posen (1997). "Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Four Countries," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Economic Policy Review, vol. 3 (August), pp. 9-110. Mishkin, Frederic S., and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel (2001). "One Decade of Inflation Targeting in the World: What Do We Know and What Do We Need to Know?" in Norman Loayza and Raimundo Soto, eds.,Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile, pp. 117-219. _________ (2007). "Does Inflation Targeting Make a Difference?" NBER Working Paper No. W12876. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January. Mishkin, Frederic S., and Niklas J. Westelius (2006). "Inflation Band Targeting and Optimal Inflation Contracts," NBER Working Paper No. 12384. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July. Ricardo, David (1823). "Plan for the Establishment of a National Bank," reproduced in J.R. McCulloch, ed.,The Works of David Ricardo – With a Notice of the Life and Writings of the Author(1888). London: John Murray. Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997). "Optimal Inflation Targets, 'Conservative' Central Banks, and Linear Inflation Contracts,"American Economic Review, vol. 87 (March), pp. 98-114. Footnotes 1.Mishkin (2007c) provides extensive discussion of the modern science of monetary policy and its implications for the design and communication of the policy framework.Return to text 2.I would like to thank Spencer Dale,Christopher Erceg,Etienne Gagnon,Linda Kole,Andrew Levin, and Ricardo Nunes for assistance and helpful comments in preparing this speech.Return to text 3.This change in views occurred as a result of the so-called rational expectations revolution, which was launched by a series of remarkable papers by Nobel Prize-winner Robert Lucas (1972, 1973, 1976).Return to text 4.The time-inconsistency problem was first outlined in papers by Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Calvo (1978).Return to text 5.Barro and Gordon (1983) first described the time-inconsistency problem as it applied to monetary policy.Return to text 6.As described in Mishkin (2008c), a higher average inflation rate tends to generate distortions in relative prices, a reduction in the level of investment in physical capital, and a decline in private-sector holdings of currency and other non-interest-bearing financial assets.Return to text 7.Mishkin (2008c).Return to text 8.Mishkin (2007a).Return to text 9.Goodfriend (1993).Return to text 10.Mishkin (2008b).Return to text 11.Mishkin (2008a).Return to text 12.Dodge (2002).Return to text 13.Mishkin (2008c).Return to text 14.Two cases are worth noting here. First, the New Zealand government raised the upper bound of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand's inflation band by 1 percentage point in 1996 (from 2 percent to 3 percent) and raised the lower bound by 1 percentage point in 2002 (from 0 percent to 1 percent); these changes were consistent with the science of monetary policy, which had reached a consensus that allowing inflation to remain very close to zero could have detrimental consequences for the economy (Mishkin, 2008c). Second, the Bank of England's inflation objective was modified in late 2003, establishing a target of 2 percent for the consumer price index (CPI) that replaced the previous target of 2-1/2 percent for the retail price index excluding mortgage interest (RPIX). In that case, as noted by the Governor of the Bank of England, there were significant conceptual reasons for switching to the RPIX as a measure of U.K. inflation, while the downward adjustment of 1/2 percentage point in the numerical objective reflected the average magnitude of deviations between CPI inflation and RPIX inflation over the previous decade or so (King, 2004).Return to text 15.Mishkin (2007b).Return to text 16.Svensson (1997).Return to text 17.Indeed, the Federal Reserve has published quantitative forecasts for several key macroeconomic variables (output growth, unemployment, and inflation) as part of its semiannual reports to the Congress since 1979. Several months ago, the Federal Reserve enhanced its communications by publishing these forecasts on a quarterly basis, lengthening the horizon of the projections, and providing additional quantitative and qualitative information (Bernanke, 2007; Mishkin, 2007d).Return to text 18.Almost two centuries ago, British economist David Ricardo summarized the argument for granting operational independence to the central bank: "It is said that Government could not be safely entrusted with the power of issuing paper money; that it would most certainly abuse it.…There would, I confess, be great danger of this if Government--that is to say, the Ministers--were themselves to be entrusted with the power of issuing paper money" (Ricardo, 1823).Return to text 19.For an example of how the time-inconsistency problem can be modeled as resulting from political pressure, see Mishkin and Westelius (2006). Independence to set policy instruments also insulates the central bank from the myopia that can be a feature of the political process. Instrument independence thus makes it more likely that the central bank will be forward-looking and adequately allow for the long lags from monetary policy actions to inflation in setting its policy instruments.Return to text 20.I discussed the relative merits of inflation objectives stated as points or ranges in Mishkin (2008c).Return to text 21.Further analysis and discussion is given by Alesina and Summers (1993), Cukierman (1993), and Debelle and Fischer (1994); Forder (2000) and Cukierman (2006) have surveyed the more recent literature on central bank independence.Return to text 22.This debate was triggered by a speech given by the president of the Canadian Economic Association. For further discussion of this episode, see Bernanke and others (1999).Return to text 23.Until May 1997, the setting of the monetary policy instrument had been determined by the government, not by the Bank of England. At that point, the newly appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, announced that the Bank of England would henceforth have the responsibility for setting both the base interest rate and short-term exchange-rate interventions. For more discussion of this episode, see Mishkin and Posen (1997) and Bernanke and others (1999).Return to text 24.The following anecdote provides a measure of the extent to which some policymakers were pleasantly surprised by their central bank's success in keeping inflation in line with its objective. The Governor of the Bank of England must write an open letter to the Chancellor of the Exchequer when inflation deviates from the official target by more than 1 percentage point. About a year after the Bank of England was granted operational independence, the Bank's chief economist wrote that "[even] if inflation shocks were to disappear entirely, the continued presence of demand shocks would imply that [open letters] would still be triggered more than 40 percent of the time" (Bean, 1998). A decade later, inflation has remained within 1 percentage point of the target in all but a single month, or less than 1 percent of the time.Return to text 25.See the empirical analysis and discussion of Fatás, Mihov, and Rose (2007) and Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel (2001, 2007).Return to text 26.I will spare the audience a thorough discussion of the methodological issues involved in the measurement of inflation expectations. Some recent work on the topic was presented at the Conference on Price Measurement for Monetary Policy, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas on May 24-25, 2007.Return to text 27.See Castelnuovo, Altimari, and Rodriguez-Palenzuela (2003); Levin, Natalucci, and Piger (2004); and Gürkaynak, Levin, and Swanson (2006). There is also some evidence that the dispersion of inflation expectations may decrease with adoption of explicit inflation objectives. Mankiw, Reis, and Wolfers (2003) have shown that simple survey statistics, such as the mean or median inflation expectations, can sometimes hide substantial cross-sectional dispersion in survey responses. If a central bank's credibility in meeting the inflation objective truly increases over time, one should then observe less disagreement among inflation forecasters. The international evidence on this aspect is unfortunately scant due to limited data availability. Beechey, Johannsen, and Levin (2007) recently showed that the cross-sectional dispersion of long-run inflation expectations in the European Central Bank (ECB) Survey of Professional Forecasters, as measured by the standard deviation, has more than halved since the ECB, with its explicit inflation objectives, was launched in 1999. Although this evidence cannot be used directly to measure the impact that the adoption of an explicit inflation objective has on the dispersion of inflation expectations, it nevertheless suggests that there are additional benefits to increasing a central bank’s credibility.Return to text 28.Mishkin (2008c).Return to text 29.Bernanke (2007).Return to text
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Madam Chair Maloney, Ranking Member Biggert, members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve Board's ongoing efforts to enhance protections for consumers who use credit cards. In June 2007, the Board proposed substantial revisions to the credit card disclosures required under the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) regulations. Those revisions are focused on ensuring that consumers have the information they need about credit card costs and terms, when they need it, in a form they can use. In addition, as Chairman Bernanke indicated in testimony before the full Committee in February, the Board plans to use authority under the Federal Trade Commission Act (FTC Act) to propose rules prohibiting unfair or deceptive credit card practices. The proposal will be issued this spring. We are working on these rules with the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) and the National Credit Union Association (NCUA) so that consumers would have the same level of protection whether their card issuer was a bank, savings association, or federal credit union. Implications for Consumers of Increased Credit Card ComplexityIn the early 1980s, less than half of American families had a general purpose credit card (43 percent in 1983). Currently close to three-quarters have at least one card (71 percent in 2004). The increase in credit card holdings was sharpest among lower-income families: from 1983 to 2004, the share of families in the lowest income quintile that hold such cards jumped from 11 percent to 37 percent.1In addition, consumers are using their cards more both as a payment device and as a source of credit. Total charges on bank credit cards increased by about five times and total debt outstanding as of year-end by almost four times from 1991 to 2006.2This growth is explained by several factors, including substitution of cards for cash and installment credit and the development of credit scoring and risk-based pricing, which have made credit cards available to more people. As consumers have relied more on credit cards, card plans have become more complex. Once, a card may have allowed the user to make purchases or obtain cash advances and applied a single, unchanging annual percentage rate, or APR, to each feature. Fees were typically limited to an annual fee, a charge for cash advances, and perhaps fees for paying late or exceeding the credit limit. Today's more complex products offer balance transfers and treat different classes of purchases and cash advances as different features, each with its own APR (for example, an APR for purchases generally and a lower APR for certain purchases made during a "promotional" period). In addition, APRs adjust much more frequently to changes in the market, in a borrower's credit risk profile, or in other factors the creditor considers important. The typical card no longer has an annual fee, but it can have many other fees tied to a variety of features, requirements, or services. These more complex plans hold significant potential benefits for consumers. Pricing that is sensitive to consumers' preferences for services likely increases the availability of the services that consumers find most valuable. Pricing that is sensitive to consumers' credit risk profiles can increase the availability of credit and lower its cost for many consumers. Growing complexity, however, has increased the risk that consumers will not understand or notice key terms that affect a plan's cost. With so many rates, fees, and features, it has become more likely that even reasonably diligent consumers make costly mistakes. Moreover, when complexity reaches the point of reducing transparency, it impedes competition and creates inefficiencies. Even when credit card plans were simpler, ensuring that consumers understood the cost of using the plan or of using it for a particular purpose was a challenge. Key variables that affect a consumer's costs, such as the amount of credit the consumer will use or the timing and amount of the consumer's payments, are not known in advance to the card issuer. TILA, therefore, does not require advance disclosure of a single, effective rate. It requires the issuer to disclose a nominal rate and other terms that determine the cost of the plan, such as fees, any grace period, and the balance calculation method. Clear disclosure of these terms and how they determine what the consumer will pay has always been a challenge. The disclosure challenge has grown substantially with the increase in the complexity of credit card plans. The Board has sought to meet this challenge with a systematic and comprehensive review of TILA disclosures based on extensive consumer testing. We believe that our June 2007 proposal will lead to disclosures that are more effective for today's more complex credit plans. Those who have commented on the proposal have generally agreed. At the same time, over two thousand comments from individual consumers, a growing body of behavioral research, and our own consumer testing provide evidence that it is increasingly difficult to use disclosure alone to help reasonably diligent consumers avoid incurring unnecessary costs on their increasingly complex credit card plans. Careful measures that would restrict credit card terms or practices may in some instances be more effective than disclosure to prevent particular consumer injuries. At the same time, such restrictions can have unintended adverse consequences for consumers, such as reducing the availability of credit or increasing its cost. Mindful of the advantages and limitations of both disclosure and stricter approaches, the Board is developing a second set of rules to supplement the June 2007 disclosure proposal with new targeted requirements and restrictions on credit card terms. As Chairman Bernanke recently testified, these rules will be issued later this spring under the FTC Act, in coordination with the OTS and NCUA. In developing proposed rules, we have consulted H.R. 5244, the "Credit Cardholders' Bill of Rights Act of 2008" introduced by Madam Chair Maloney. This comprehensive bill has helped us to identify consumer protection concerns that we should consider addressing by regulation. In the remainder of my testimony, I will review the Board's pending proposal to improve credit card disclosures and discuss the concerns raised and suggestions made about certain credit card practices during the comment period. I will also summarize our ongoing efforts working with the OTS and NCUA to develop joint rules under the FTC Act. The Board's 2007 Proposal to Improve DisclosuresThe potential benefits of disclosure are well-known. More effective disclosures make information about terms and pricing easier for consumers to obtain and understand. Informed consumers are less likely to fall into "traps for the unwary" and more able to choose products that offer the best combination of features and pricing to meet their personal financial needs. Better dissemination of information about credit card terms and pricing also enhances competition among credit card issuers, which, in turn, helps generate products that consumers want. The Board's proposal to improve disclosures seeks to ensure that consumers receive key information about the costs of credit card transactions in ways they can understand, in formats they can use, and at times when it is most helpful. To help us craft a proposal to meet these specific objectives, we considered comment letters, available sources of data and information, and our own long experience implementing TILA. We also considered what consumers themselves had to say by interviewing consumers individually about their use and understanding of different disclosures. Consumers told us what information they find useful when making credit decisions and what information they ignore. We learned which words and formats for presenting information promote understanding and which do not. Lessons from our extensive consumer testing are reflected in a myriad of preliminary judgments made in the proposal about appropriate disclosure content, format, and timing. The proposal includes the following specific elements: Advertisements of introductory rates would more clearly disclose the eventual higher rates and how soon they would be imposed; Advertisements of "fixed" rates would be restricted to rates that are truly not subject to change, either for a clearly disclosed period or for the life of the plan; The "Schumer box" required with credit card solicitations and applications would be updated to more effectively present information about rates and fees. The most critical rate and fee information would be presented in the box; rates and fees would be separated into two sections; and graphic techniques such as minimum font size, judicious bolding, and vertical alignment of key numbers would make it easier to read and use; A summary table similar to the Schumer box would accompany the lengthy, complex credit agreements that consumers receive when they first open an account and would also be provided, later, when account terms are amended; The penalty rate and penalty fees would be highlighted in the Schumer box and the account-opening summary table; and a reminder of late payment penalties would appear on every periodic statement; A consumer would be sent notice 45 days before a penalty rate was imposed or the rate or a critical fee was increased for other reasons; The cumulative cost of fees would be highlighted every month. Fees charged in the previous month would be grouped together on the statement in a prominent location and totaled for the month and year-to-date; The periodic statement's "effective APR," another way of disclosing the total cost of credit, is the subject of two alternative proposals. Under one proposal, the effective APR could be revised to make it simpler for creditors to compute and potentially easier for consumers to understand. Alternatively, if continued consumer testing, public comments, and the Board's analysis indicate that the effective APR does not offer a meaningful consumer benefit, then it could be eliminated, as the statute authorizes; Consumers would be warned on the periodic statement about the higher cost of making only minimum payments, and creditors would be provided incentives to give consumers a more precise estimate of the time it would take to repay the balance and to place that estimate on the periodic statement rather than make it available by telephone; Creditors would receive clearer guidance regarding what charges must be disclosed, when, and how. They would be given increased flexibility to disclose charges at times and by methods more useful to the consumer and more convenient to the creditor. Comments on the 2007 ProposalThe Board received over 2,500 comments on the June 2007 proposal, about 2,100 of them from individual consumers. Many consumers wrote us about their personal experiences with credit cards, providing information that we have found invaluable in our continuing efforts to improve disclosures and in our development of proposed regulations under the FTC Act. Consumer advocacy groups also wrote to us, as did financial institutions or their trade associations. We also heard from members of Congress and other government agencies. Broadly speaking, commenters generally supported the proposed disclosures and the Board's approach to improving disclosure through consumer testing. Some commenters offered specific suggestions to improve the disclosures or reduce unnecessary burden, and we are taking those suggestions into account. As we expected, a few elements of the proposal elicited significantly divided reactions. For example, industry representatives contended that the format requirements we proposed for periodic statements, which are favored by consumer groups, would be overly prescriptive. Consumer groups opposed the proposal to eliminate the effective APR from the periodic statement, a proposal supported by industry representatives. We are carefully evaluating these matters, including through more testing with consumers. Consumers and consumer groups also contended that better disclosures were not sufficient to address certain issuer practices and they urged the Board to regulate these practices more strictly. Among the concerns frequently cited were shortening of the time to submit payments, applying interest rate increases to pre-existing balances, allocating payments first to balances with the lowest interest rate, and computing interest using the so-called double-cycle method. Individual consumers and consumer advocates indicated that consumers are allowed too little time after receiving their bills to submit their payments, thus leading to late fees and interest charges and other adverse consequences such as rate increases. They urged the Board to require that consumers be given more time to pay and to require creditors to show that the consumer, rather than the mail service, was to blame for a late payment. Comments from creditors, however, generally asserted that consumers have ample time to make payments, particularly in light of the increasing number of consumers who receive periodic statements and make payments electronically. These comments also stated that providing longer grace periods to consumers would reduce interest revenue and lead creditors to increase other consumer costs. The Board's proposal to require 45 days' notice before a rate or critical fee is increased was criticized by some commenters for going too far, and by others for not going far enough. This proposed notice was intended primarily to give consumers time to pay off the balance before the rate increase, through then-existing resources or alternative credit sources. Industry representatives contended, however, that the requirement would harm consumers overall. They say it would delay issuers from increasing rates when there is an increase in the consumer's risk of default or the issuer's cost of funds, and that issuers would likely need to respond by raising credit costs or reducing credit availability. On the other side, individual consumers, consumer groups, and members of Congress contended that the proposed 45-day notice did not go far enough to protect consumers from unfair surprise. They argued that many consumers would not be able to avoid the increase by transferring their balances to lower-rate accounts and recommended stricter approaches, such as giving the consumer the right to "opt out" of a rate increase for existing balances, prohibiting issuers from applying increased rates to pre-existing balances, or prohibiting issuers from increasing rates until the card expires. The issue of payment allocation also elicited divided responses. If a card holder's account has two or more balances with different interest rates (for example, a purchase rate and a cash advance rate), issuers typically apply payments to the lowest-rate balance first, so the consumer accumulates interest at the higher rates applicable to other balances. The Board proposed a new disclosure of this practice when issuers advertise promotional rates. Industry representatives generally favored the proposed disclosure and urged that it be applied more broadly, not just to promotional terms. Consumers, consumer groups, and members of Congress, however, commented that a disclosure would not protect consumers sufficiently. These commenters urged the Board to prohibit the practice of allocating payments to the lowest-rate balance first. Industry representatives countered that regulating payment allocation methods could reduce consumers' choice of features and increase their credit costs. Consumer groups urged the Board to prohibit the use of a method sometimes referred to as "two-cycle" or "double-cycle" to compute the balance on which the consumer's interest obligation is determined. The finance charge is computed by most issuers on the balance from the most recent billing cycle. Under the less typical two-cycle method, the finance charge is computed beginning on the date of the transaction, even if that date falls in the prior billing cycle. This method yields higher finance charges whenever a consumer shifts from paying the balance in full each month to carrying a balance on the account. Consumers and consumer groups contended this method is unfair to consumers. Industry representatives generally did not comment on the issue, perhaps because few card issuers currently use the two-cycle method. Regulatory Proposal under the FTC ActThe FTC Act gives the Board authority to prohibit unfair or deceptive practices by banks. The OTS and NCUA have identical authority over savings associations and federal credit unions, respectively. We are working closely with these agencies with the expectation of developing uniform rules to prohibit unfair or deceptive practices with respect to credit cards. In addition, we plan to use our authority under TILA, which applies to all card issuers regardless of regulator, to adopt stronger substantive protections where appropriate. Our work is ongoing. Just last week we received useful information in a forum on credit cards hosted by Governor Kroszner in which card issuers and processors, consumer advocates, counseling agencies, and other regulatory agencies came together at the Board to discuss relevant industry trends and identify areas that may warrant action or further study. Among the topics discussed were the Board's previously announced plan to issue a proposal under the FTC Act and the Board's June 2007 disclosure proposal. Participants provided key insights for us to consider as we develop the FTC Act proposal and work to finalize new disclosures. Our efforts to develop new disclosures continue apace. The public comments identified potential areas for improvement that we are testing through additional in-depth, one-on-one interviews with consumers. Quantitative testing on a statistically valid basis will follow, and we expect to issue a final rule under TILA before year-end. ConclusionMadam Chair, in closing let me emphasize the Federal Reserve's commitment to enhancing consumers' ability to use credit cards to their benefit. Disclosure requirements can help ensure that consumers receive information about credit card terms in ways they can understand, in formats they can use, and at times when it is most helpful. More complex pricing and continuous change in the marketplace, however, make the task of writing rules for effective disclosure increasingly challenging. Consumer testing has proven to be very useful in improving disclosure, but we have also concluded that stricter approaches in some areas may be needed. To that end, we will be proposing regulations under the FTC Act later this spring that would impose new restrictions and requirements on credit card issuers to prevent unfair or deceptive practices. Footnotes 1.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2006),Report to the Congress on Practices of the Consumer Credit Industry in Soliciting and Extending Credit and their Effects on Consumer Debt and Insolvency(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System), table 6.Return to text 2.Board staff calculations from Thomson Financial Media, Cards and Payments: Card Industry Directory, various editions (New York: Thomson Financial Media, pp. 14-16 in each edition).Return to text
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Dedication of the New Seattle Branch Building of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Renton, Washington Good afternoon. It is my honor and pleasure to be here today to help dedicate the new Seattle Branch building, and to speak about how this terrific new facility will assist the Federal Reserve System's efforts to help guide the national economy and serve the payment needs of the Northwest. I would like to express my personal appreciation to the City of Renton for its support and assistance in locating the Seattle Branch at its new home along Naches Avenue. As Chairman of the Committee on Federal Reserve Bank Affairs at the Board of Governors, I have followed this building project closely, and value the city's cooperation in helping ensure its future success. I especially appreciate the city's close cooperation with us in upgrading the utilities and streets serving the site and, essentially, making it a welcome new home for Branch employees. The Seattle Branch, created in 1917, was housed in leased space until a downtown site was built in 1950. Although that building served the Seattle area's needs well for more than fifty years, service demands on the Branch have evolved and outstripped the capabilities of the old building and site. The vault and cash processing areas were no longer adequate for efficient operations, and cash delivery facilities could not accommodate the type and number of delivery vehicles, which had resulted in armored trucks queued along Spring Street. Furthermore, the building's general layout and construction did not meet the post-9/11 security requirements necessary for protecting Federal Reserve System employees and operations. We considered several sites in the Seattle metropolitan area for the new building, initially searching for a suitable site within the city limits. But our site and transportation requirements prompted us to consider options within the broader metropolitan area, and we found that this location's proximity to major roads and highways will improve vehicular access for employees, visitors, and delivery personnel. As you may have noticed, the new site is large--almost 10 acres--and its security is evident. Clearly, the safety of our employees and operations is a high priority that has become a greater focus in the post-9/11 era, but the building is more than just secure: Its design supports our mission, which is to promote a stable and efficient financial system and to conduct a monetary policy that fosters maximum employment and stable prices. In recognition of our responsibilities as a community partner, the architecture of the building reflects both the character of the area as well as environmental concerns. For example, the building site borders a wetlands area that the Bank was careful to consider in situating the structure and tailoring the landscaping. A construction objective was to minimize the project's cost by using materials and methods commonly employed locally. The new building's exterior is a combination of low-maintenance glass, metal, and concrete elements. In all, the designers have produced a handsome design that reflects the Branch's desired utilitarian theme and functional requirements. The natural landscaping around the building reflects the character of the region as well, and it serves as an important feature in the overall design, and helps minimize ongoing maintenance costs. And besides serving as an attractive asset in the City of Renton and in the greater Seattle metropolitan area, the new building should act as a catalyst for further development of the Longacres area by attracting other financial services facilities. It will serve as an ideal location for meetings with the Branch board of directors and as a facility for interacting with a wider public audience to exchange information on economic developments in the Northwest. And these meetings will support our broader monetary policy mission.Monetary policyis directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC, which consists of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Reserve Bank presidents. The FOMC relies on information provided by business people and others and economic intelligence gathered from around the nation. The Seattle Branch assists FOMC policymakers by monitoring indicators of economic conditions at the grassroots level here in the Northwest through liaison with local community groups and businesses. In addition, through community outreach, the Seattle Branch supports the Federal Reserve's aim to provide economic information to the community and offer economic and financial education programs to local groups and schools. Maintaining the effectiveness of the nation's payment system is another important aspect of our work here in the Northwest. The distribution of currency is critical to the local economy, and the Federal Reserve has the responsibility to ensure the reliability and availability of cash. Fortunately, the new Branch building is designed to meet the cash service of Seattle area residents for many years to come. It comes equipped with state-of-the-art cash handling systems, including an automated storage vault to further improve operational efficiency, and its currency operations are designed to be scalable to address changing demands for cash in the Seattle region. Let me conclude by reiterating my great pleasure in participating in this ceremony, which underscores our commitment to serve the growing needs of the Seattle and greater Northwest communities. I appreciate the opportunity you've provided me to speak about our central bank roles and functions and our strong links with the local economic community. I am confident that this building will enable us to continue to meet our own mission objectives and serve as an integral member of the community for many years to come. I congratulate Branch staff and the community for their roles in ushering in this outstanding facility.
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the Community Reinvestment Fund First Annual Forum, Minneapolis, Minnesota Good afternoon. I am pleased to address the inaugural Community Reinvestment Fund (CRF) Annual Community Forum Series. The development of sustainable capital sources through innovation is an important goal for the Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI) industry. Today's host, CRF, has played a pioneering role in the development of a secondary market for community development loans, a topic I spoke on more than a year and a half ago in Washington, D.C. The financial markets have experienced much turbulence since that time. The turmoil in the subprime mortgage market, in particular, has affected liquidity of the larger secondary markets. Given the cautious state of financial markets, how can the CDFI industry enhance the attractiveness of CDFI investments to private capital? The markets have changed, but the core ideas I raised in my previous remarks are more relevant than ever. There is a striking parallel with the challenges for the re-emergence of the subprime mortgage market and the adoption of innovations in the community development investments market. To overcome the unease of the current financial markets and attract a new source of capital, new market entrants must make particular efforts to reduce the uncertainty associated with their investment opportunities. For the CDFI industry, the challenges that need to be addressed are improving information about these products, developing models of risk and pricing, and standardizing these contracts. Addressing these issues will be critical to jump-start sustainable private CDFI investments as well as to revive the subprime mortgage market. Growth of Community Development Finance and Current ChallengesThe Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) was enacted more than 30 years ago in response to deteriorating economic conditions in urban areas, particularly in lower-income and minority communities. The CRA served as a catalyst in attracting innovative public and private investment capital into low- and moderate-income communities. Consider the following: In 1991, 2,000 community development corporations (CDCs) built 300,000 units and 17 million square feet of commercial space. In 2006, 4,600 CDCs built 1.2 million units and 126 million square feet of commercial space. Today, there are more than 600 CDFIs with more than $19 billion in assets and with more than $20 billion of finance activities. The CRF has issued three rated securities within the past six years totaling almost $200 million, opening the door to institutional investors and expanding the marketplace. The migration toward sustainable mainstream capital sources is important in light of budgetary challenges facing governmental and philanthropic funding sources. For CDFIs to expand the scope and volume of their financing activities, they need to develop new products and innovations that tap more predictable sources of funding. Accessing the broad depth of the capital markets as a self-sustaining funding source for community development would yield enhanced benefits, such as more-efficient delivery of capital, greater funding and underwriting discipline, and reduced finance costs. Of course, a real challenge is building a bridge between the two very different worlds of capital markets and community development. The former requires strict market discipline, a rich set of data to assess risk and pricing, and standardization. The latter, community development, however, has a commitment to individuals and communities that have been left out of the economic mainstream and uses products tailored to their unique circumstances. These two worlds, however, can be brought together; and that has begun to happen, particularly around the challenges I will discuss in greater detail. Importance of Data for New Products and Proper Risk ModelingWhen a new product is being developed, there is an initial experimentation phase in which market participants learn a great deal about the product's performance and risk characteristics. This phase involves gathering and processing information and modeling the performance of the product in various scenarios and under different market conditions. It may then take time for market participants to understand what, exactly, they need to know to value a product. During the early phases, a fair amount of due diligence is appropriate, given the greater uncertainty associated with innovative products.1 In the initial experimentation phase, the terms and characteristics of a new product are adjusted in response to market acceptance--or lack thereof. During this period, market participants are seeking and providing information so that they can properly value the product, judge its potential for risk and return, assess its market acceptance and liquidity, and determine the extent to which the risks of the product can be hedged or mitigated. To do this, market participants must perform due diligence, a process to gather and assess relevant sources of information to evaluate that product. Due diligence is critical because market participants musttrust but verifythe market-provided information. Potential purchasers, for example, might engage in various activities, ranging from assessing risk exposures through stress testing to assessing the enforceability of contracts that define the requirements of investors, trustees, guarantors, and originators. We have recently seen how a lack of information and insufficient due diligence have created problems in the market for subprime residential mortgage-backed securities. Many investors appear not to have demanded sufficient information about these investment vehicles, or perhaps did not carefully evaluate the information that was available. Instead, they may have simply accepted or trusted credit ratings as a substitute for their own risk analysis, and not verified enough. As a result, subprime delinquencies and defaults exceeded expectations. Lack of information, a stressed financial environment, and disparate contract obligations led to a general lack of liquidity in the subprime market, which later spread to the broader market for mortgage securities. Investors in new and innovative products have suffered losses before. In the early 1990s, for example, participants engaged in the collateralized mortgage obligation (CMO) market and in certain types of interest rate derivatives that did not have adequate information about the potential volatility and prepayment risk involved. Consequently, market participants did not appropriately model these risks and suffered significant losses when market interest rates rose sharply in the mid-1990s. As in the case of today's market for residential mortgage-backed securities, the general market reaction was a flight away from these instruments. However, over time, the market was restored as market participants came to better understand the risks and as standardized methods were developed to measure the risks and model the value of these instruments under alternative scenarios. Increased information and standardized pricing conventions, such as the use of option-adjusted spreads, moved these instruments from the experimentation and learning phase to broad market acceptance. When market participants realize that they do not have the information necessary for proper valuation of risks, market liquidity can become impaired, such as in the CMO market in the 1990s and in the subprime market recently. A significant investment in information gathering, processing, and evaluation may be necessary to revive markets. This process will likely take time. First, more-detailed data will need to be collected in a more systematic manner in order to better understand the nature and risks of the instruments and their underlying assets. Second, investments will need to be made to warehouse and model data related to these instruments, which will enhance the understanding of risks, particularly under stress conditions. Third, investments in human capital expertise--that is, in people so that they can better understand, interpret, and act appropriately on the results of the modeling and analysis of the information gathered--will also need to be made. Finally, sellers may respond by reducing complexity and by improving the quality of the underlying assets, increasing transparency, or both. Ultimately, the payoff from these activities will be a greater understanding of risks and greater ability to value the instruments. For innovations in the community development investment markets, it will also likely take time for these markets to mature because of the time and cost to systematically collect data and for investors to understand these new instruments. To accelerate the development of these markets, however, some key issues will need to be addressed. First, how will the CDFI industry organize itself to generate and collect this data? Second, who is poised to lead efforts in setting standards for industry data? Finally, who and how will the intellectual capital be developed to model and structure these new instruments? There should also be consideration of existing standards from established products that parallel developing ones, such as the adoption of best practices for both mortgage securitizations and community development securitizations. I do want to acknowledge that there have been many notable accomplishments in pioneering community development investments. For example, there is a growing secondary market for community development loans; community development venture capital has grown 100 percent since 2002 to more than $800 million in assets under management in 2004; since 2002, the New Markets Tax Credit Program has issued $16 billion in allocations, with a growing sophisticated market for investments and trading of the tax credit equity. I am pleased that the Federal Reserve Banks have played an active role as a convener on these topics and in the dissemination of best practices and policy. I enjoyed sharing my thoughts on the topic of the development of the secondary markets for community development loans at a forum that was hosted last year by the Board of Governors and the Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco and New York. For these markets to grow significantly, however, there must be continued dialogue and exchange between market participants to collect these data uniformly from the beginning to the culmination of these deals so that performance data are captured. Standardization in Developing MarketsThese data should be collected with consideration toward improving standardization of many of the aspects of the product, which can help to increase transparency, improve efficiency, and reduce uncertainty. For example, the recovery of the CMO market was aided by improved information and modeling, which increased confidence, especially as products became increasingly standardized. Standardization in the terms and in the contractual rights and obligations of purchasers and sellers of the product reduces, but does not eliminate, the need for market participants to engage in extensive efforts to obtain information and reduces the need to verify the information that is provided in the market through due diligence. Reduced information costs, in turn, lower transaction costs, thereby facilitating price discovery and enhancing market liquidity. Also, standardization can reduce legal risks because litigation over contract terms can result in case law that applies to similar situations, thus reducing uncertainty. The benefits of the development of standardization for enhancing the liquidity of financial markets have a long history. One particularly clear example dates back to the development of exchange-traded commodities futures contracts in the mid-1800s. The standardization of the futures markets improved the flow of information to market participants, reducing transaction costs and fostering the emergence of liquid markets.2 In the mid-1850s, the market for grain did not enjoy the very deep liquidity we see in today's market. At the time, Chicago was facing competition from exchanges in Minneapolis and St. Louis and from some in Europe that had created innovative structures to make markets more liquid. To create a liquid market for grain trading, buyers and sellers of grain needed a way of systematically analyzing the different kinds of grain that came into the exchange from different sources. In other words, the market needed a way to "grade the grain." The market created special silos that combined grain from a number of sources. Buyers no longer bought a silo of grain from one source; a silo, for example, of "Winter Wheat Number 2" would be graded in a way that allowed buyers to know exactly what they were getting. Standardization and related controls reduced traders' information requirements and, thus, their transaction costs. The Board of Trade established minimum quality standards based on the need for market participants to evaluate the reliability of promises of future deliveries of grain to the buyer. In 1865, the Chicago Board of Trade standardized the delivery dates for the contracts, thus fostering the emergence of liquid markets in which traders could readily hedge the risk of price changes in the commodities and contracts. Buyers and sellers of grain ultimately became members of the exchange, supported by an underpinning of standardized measures of grain quality and minimum standards for exchange members. This example of how standardization helped jump-start a marketplace may provide insights regarding the current challenges in the subprime markets as well as the development of the community development investment market. As of January 2008, the most recent month for which data are available, about 24 percent of subprime adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) were 90 or more days delinquent, twice the level one year earlier.3Roughly 190,000 foreclosures were started on these mortgages in the fourth quarter, up 11 percent from the previous quarter.4The cost of foreclosures is high for lenders, investors, communities and causes severe disruption and distress to individuals and families. With the continuing high rates of foreclosure and the high costs associated with foreclosures, it is in the interest of lenders, investors, and borrowers to develop prudent loan modification programs to help borrowers on a larger scale and at sustainable levels. Efforts to streamline or standardize the loan modification process could lower transaction costs, provide timely relief for distressed borrowers, and reduce uncertainties in the market for subprime mortgage-backed securities. Industry and consumer groups are exploring loan modification templates, clarification of accounting rules, automated electronic platforms, and standards to streamline the loan modification process. The Hope Now Alliance--a broad-based coalition of government-sponsored enterprises, industry trade associations, counseling agencies, and mortgage servicers--is making efforts to find ways to help borrowers through loan modification plans. The Board has also sought to ensure clear lending standards through stricter regulations prohibiting abusive and deceptive practices in the mortgage market under the authority of the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA). This proposal is intended to protect consumers and to preserve consumer choice by targeting protections to borrowers who face the most risk. Under HOEPA, the Board is considering changes that would stem abusive practices by addressing the following: a requirement to assess repayment ability, a requirement to escrow taxes and insurance, a ban on prepayment penalties in certain circumstances, a prohibition on a lender paying a broker more than the consumer had expressly agreed that the broker would receive, and a ban on specific advertising practices deemed unfair or deceptive. Clarifying lending standards will increase investor confidence in the mortgage market and help to revive the flow of credit to consumers, particularly those with shorter or weaker credit histories. These lessons learned from standardization challenges facing the subprime market may be helpful as the community development industry considers ways to reduce uncertainty to enhance the attractiveness of CDFI investments. The wide variety of investment activities of the CDFI industry is a formidable challenge to standardization. The industry encompasses rental housing and commercial real estate and small business finance and has disparate origination channels that range from small non-profit intermediaries to large financial institutions. A more recent development in the over-the-counter markets may be informative. Over-the-counter derivative products are multifaceted and designed to be customized to the unique needs of market participants. To standardize these products, while maintaining their unique features, the International Swaps and Derivatives Association created a master agreement that not only provided standard definitions and a general outline for the contract, but also provided latitude to include customized terms. The master agreement also sets forth a template for workout procedures if a counterparty defaults, allowing parties to adjust risk-management strategies based on the work-out arrangements. Ultimately, the standardization provided by the master agreement reduces uncertainty about the instruments, lowers transaction costs, and facilitates price discovery and market liquidity. Similarly, the community development investments field may consider the benefits of standardizing some type of master agreement that captures key structural provisions and that incorporates the flexibility to include customized terms of the underlying transactions. I would also encourage the CDFI industry to explore the possibility of some type of organized marketplace for its investments, whether it is an online platform or an added component of an existing marketplace, or some other similar initiative. ConclusionTo achieve a more dynamic marketplace for community development investments, the CDFI industry should continue to dialogue and to strengthen bridges with mainstream financial market participants. To reduce uncertainty around community development investments, the CDFI industry must collect and provide uniform data so that appropriate risk and pricing models can be developed and must also make efforts to standardize these contracts. Conversely, capital providers must strengthen working relationships with the CDFI industry to develop a richer understanding of the finance activities and unique risks and strengths of these investment opportunities. As these two seemingly disparate worlds of the capital markets and the community development industry address these challenges together, a powerful source of sustainable private capital can be tapped to fund an equally powerful spectrum of community investments. I am confident that the expertise and dedication found in the community development industry can move the industry in the right direction to address these obstacles as well as to expand the flow of capital to low- and moderate-income communities and individuals. Footnotes 1.Randall S. Kroszner (2007), "Innovation, Information, and Regulation in Financial Markets," speech delivered at the Philadelphia Fed Policy Forum, Philadelphia, November 30.Return to text 2.Randall S. Kroszner (1999), "Can the Financial Markets Privately Regulate Risk? The Development of Derivatives Clearing Houses and Recent Over-the-Counter Innovations,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 31(August), p. 600.Return to text 3.Board staff calculation based on data from First American LoanPerformance.Return to text 4.Board staff calculation based on data from the Mortgage Bankers Association.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Chairman Dodd, Senator Shelby, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate this opportunity to discuss current economic and financial conditions and the actions the Federal Reserve has taken to stabilize financial markets and the economy. Although the situation has recently improved somewhat, financial markets remain under considerable stress. Pressures in short-term bank funding markets, which had abated somewhat beginning late last year, have increased once again. Many lenders have been reluctant to provide credit to counterparties, especially leveraged investors, and increased the amount of collateral they required to back short-term security financing agreements. To meet those demands, investors have reduced their leverage and liquidated holdings of securities, putting further downward pressure on security prices. Credit availability has also been restricted because some large financial institutions, including some commercial and investment banks and the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), have reported substantial losses and writedowns, reducing their capital available to support increased lending. Some key securitization markets, including those for nonconforming mortgages, continue to function poorly if at all. These developments in financial markets--which themselves reflect, in part, greater concerns about housing and the economic outlook more generally--have weighed on real economic activity. Notably, in the housing market, sales of both new and existing homes have generally continued weak, partly as a result of the reduced availability of mortgage credit, and home prices have continued to fall. Private payroll employment fell substantially in February, after two months of smaller job losses, with job cuts in construction and closely related industries accounting for a significant share of the decline. But the demand for labor has also moderated recently in other industries. Overall, the near-term economic outlook has weakened relative to the projections released by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) at the end of January. Inflation has also been a source of concern. We expect inflation to moderate in coming quarters, but it will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully. Well-functioning financial markets are essential for the efficacy of monetary policy and, indeed, for economic growth and stability. Consistent with its role as the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve has taken a number of steps in recent weeks to improve market liquidity and market functioning. These actions include reducing the cost and increasing the allowable term of discount window credit to commercial banks; increasing the size of our Term Auction Facility, through which credit is auctioned to depository institutions; initiating a Term Securities Lending Facility, which allows primary dealers to swap less-liquid mortgage backed securities for more-liquid Treasury securities; and creating the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, which is similar to the discount window but accessible to primary dealers. Although these facilities operate through depository institutions and primary dealers, they are designed to support the broader financial markets and the economy by facilitating the provision of liquidity by those institutions to their customers and counterparties. With respect to monetary policy, at its March meeting the FOMC reduced its target for the federal funds rate by 75 basis points to 2-1/4 percent. It was in this context of intensifying financial strains that, on March 13, Bear Stearns advised the Federal Reserve and other government agencies that its liquidity position had significantly deteriorated and that it would have to file for bankruptcy the next day unless alternative sources of funds became available. This news raised difficult questions of public policy. Normally, the market sorts out which companies survive and which fail, and that is as it should be. However, the issues raised here extended well beyond the fate of one company. Our financial system is extremely complex and interconnected, and Bear Stearns participated extensively in a range of critical markets. The sudden failure of Bear Stearns likely would have led to a chaotic unwinding of positions in those markets and could have severely shaken confidence. The company's failure could also have cast doubt on the financial positions of some of Bear Stearns' thousands of counterparties and perhaps of companies with similar businesses. Given the exceptional pressures on the global economy and financial system, the damage caused by a default by Bear Stearns could have been severe and extremely difficult to contain. Moreover, the adverse impact of a default would not have been confined to the financial system but would have been felt broadly in the real economy through its effects on asset values and credit availability. To prevent a disorderly failure of Bear Stearns and the unpredictable but likely severe consequences for market functioning and the broader economy, the Federal Reserve, in close consultation with the Treasury Department, agreed to provide funding to Bear Stearns through JPMorgan Chase. Over the following weekend, JPMorgan Chase agreed to purchase Bear Stearns and assumed Bear's financial obligations. The purpose of our action, as with our other recent actions--including our provision of liquidity to financial firms and our reductions in the federal funds rate target--was, as best as possible, to improve the functioning of financial markets and to limit any adverse effects of financial turmoil on the broader economy. We will remain focused on those objectives. Clearly, the U.S. economy is going through a very difficult period. But among the great strengths of our economy is its ability to adapt and to respond to diverse challenges. Much necessary economic and financial adjustment has already taken place, and monetary and fiscal policies are in train that should support a return to growth in the second half of this year and next year. I remain confident in our economy's long-term prospects. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.
Governor Randall S. Kroszner Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives The Current SituationThe mortgage market has long been a source of strength in the U.S. economy, but it is facing very significant challenges today, especially in the subprime segment that serves consumers who have shorter or weaker credit records. In recent years, slowing home prices and a loosening of underwriting standards have contributed to sharp increases in delinquencies and foreclosures. As of January 2008, the most recent month for which data are available, about 24 percent of subprime adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) were 90 days or more delinquent, twice the fraction that were delinquent by this definition one year ago. For mortgages overall, more than 1.5 million foreclosures were started during 2007, up 53 percent from the previous year. All told, the consensus expectation is that the number of foreclosures in 2008 will likely exceed the number in 2007. Both delinquency and foreclosure are traumatic experiences for the families and communities affected. Recent declines in house prices have eroded the equity that homeowners have in their homes, which has made it difficult or impossible for many of them to refinance their mortgage on more favorable terms compared to their current mortgage, even if interest rates have declined since they took out their loan. Tighter lending standards have also limited opportunities for these families to refinance. When struggling homeowners cannot put themselves on a sustainable financial footing, neighborhoods also suffer--properties are not maintained and foreclosures, particularly when they are clustered together, put further downward pressure on house prices. This is bad news for investors, too, because as property values decline, the substantial costs associated with foreclosure rise even further. Finally, falling home prices can have local and national consequences because of the erosion of both property tax revenue and the support for consumer spending that is provided by household wealth. Ongoing Efforts to Help Struggling BorrowersGiven the high cost of foreclosures to everyone involved--lenders, investors, borrowers and their communities alike--it is in everyone's interest to develop prudent loan modification programs and provide for other assistance to help borrowers avoid preventable foreclosures. Indeed, policymakers and stakeholders have been working hard to find effective responses to the increases in delinquencies and foreclosures. The steps that have been taken so far include initiating programs designed to expand refinancing opportunities and efforts to increase the pace of loan workouts. One example of positive steps being taken is the effort by NeighborWorks America and the Homeownership Preservation Foundation to offer financial counseling services through the Homeowner's HOPE Hotline.1With the encouragement and leadership of the Treasury Department, the national Hope Now Alliance--a broad-based coalition of government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), industry trade associations, counseling agencies, and mortgage servicers--is working to find ways to help troubled borrowers, particularly those facing interest rate resets, through loan modification plans.2Recent actions by the Federal Open Market Committee to lower the target federal funds rate and resulting decreases in short-term interest rates also should help mitigate the problems associated with interest rate resets. Useful steps also are being taken by the FHA, which provides insurance on a variety of fixed- and variable-rate mortgage products that can be used by borrowers who want to refinance their home and who meet specified underwriting and other criteria. For example, the agency recently established the FHASecure plan to help borrowers who are delinquent because of an interest rate reset and who have some equity in their home. FHASecure provides such borrowers the opportunity to refinance into an FHA-insured mortgage. Separately, the FHA's loan limits recently were raised significantly by the Economic Stimulus Act of 2008, further expanding the potential reach of the FHA's mortgage insurance programs. We understand that the FHA is studying additional ways that the agency's insurance programs could be expanded or modified, consistent with existing statutory authorities, to better help troubled borrowers. The Federal Reserve has been working with financial institutions and community groups around the country to address the challenges posed by problem loans. For example, we have been providing community coalitions, counseling agencies, fellow regulators, and others with detailed analyses that identify neighborhoods with especially high concentrations of foreclosures. Last week the Federal Reserve made available to the public aset of dynamic maps and datathat illustrate the regional variation in the condition of securitized, owner-occupied subprime and alt-A mortgage loans across the United States.3Armed with this information, community organizations and leaders can better target their scarce resources toward helping borrowers in the greatest need of counseling and for other interventions that may help prevent foreclosure. Communities also are searching for ways to address the challenges that foreclosed homes can present, such as decreased home values and vacant properties that can deteriorate from neglect. Toward this end, the Federal Reserve has recently engaged in a partnership with NeighborWorks America to identify effective strategies to stabilize neighborhoods that have large clusters of vacant properties due to foreclosures. Working together, we will develop materials and tools as well as convene training sessions to help communities build local capacity for acquiring and managing vacant properties. The ultimate goal is to return these properties to useful purposes, whether it is to provide affordable rental housing or to supply new homeownership opportunities in low- and moderate-income communities. Loss-Mitigation Strategies to Reduce ForeclosuresIn cases where it is not possible for the distressed mortgage borrower to refinance his or her mortgage into a more sustainable mortgage product, the next-best solution may be some type of loss-mitigation arrangement between the lender or servicer and the distressed borrower. The Federal Reserve, in conjunction with the other federal banking agencies (which include the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision), the Conference of State Bank Supervisors and the National Credit Union Administration, has issued guidance urging lenders and servicers to pursue such arrangements, when feasible and prudent, as an alternative to foreclosure. For the lender, servicer, and investor, working out a distressed loan with a struggling borrower makes economic sense if the net present value (NPV) of the payments under a loss-mitigation strategy exceeds the NPV of proceeds that would be received in foreclosure. Loss mitigation can be advantageous to both the borrower and the lender because the costs associated with foreclosure can be very substantial. Historically, the foreclosure process has usually taken from a few months up to a year and a half, depending on state law and whether the borrower files for bankruptcy. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the time to complete a foreclosure has been increasing recently, as the number of foreclosures has risen and the average time that properties remain on the market has lengthened. The losses to lenders and investors from foreclosures include not only the missed mortgage payments during that period, but also the costs of taxes, legal and administrative fees, real estate owned sales commissions, and maintenance expenses. Additional losses arise from the often significant reduction in value when a property is repossessed even in stable housing markets, particularly if the property is unoccupied for some period. In fact, a recent estimate based on subprime mortgages foreclosed in the fourth quarter of 2007 indicated that total losses exceeded 50 percent of the principal balance. Whether the losses are that large in all cases is difficult to know, but what is known is that the foreclosure process itself destroys considerable value. The existence of such costs raises the real prospect that, by restructuring distressed loans in those cases in which the borrower wants to stay in the home, borrowers, lenders, servicers, and investors mayallbe able to achieve a better outcome than is attainable if the foreclosure process is allowed to run its course. Lenders, servicers, and investors have historically relied on repayment plans as their preferred loss-mitigation technique. Under these plans, delinquent borrowers typically repay the mortgage arrears over a few months in addition to making their regularly scheduled mortgage payments. These plans often are most appropriate if the borrower has suffered a reversible setback, such as a temporary illness. However, anecdotal evidence suggests that even in the best-case scenarios, borrowers given repayment plans redefault at a high rate, especially when the arrears are large. Loan modifications, which involve any permanent change to the terms of the mortgage contract, may be preferred when the higher payments associated with a repayment plan do not result in a sustainable solution. In a loan modification, the borrower's monthly payment is reduced through a lower interest rate, an extension of the maturity of the loan, a write-down of the principal balance, or a combination of all three of these measures. The effort by the Hope Now Alliance to freeze interest rates at the introductory rate for five years for eligible borrowers with an adjustable-rate mortgage is an example of a modification, in this case applied to a class of borrowers. To date, permanent modifications in this credit cycle episode, as in the past, have typically involved a reduction in the interest rate or an extension of the loan terms, while reductions of principal balance have been quite rare. But the current housing difficulties differ from those in the past, largely because of the pervasiveness of situations known as negative equity positions in which the amount owed on the mortgage exceeds the current market value of the property. A distressed borrower with a negative equity position may have neither the means nor the incentive to remain in the home. In this environment, servicers and investors may well find principal reductions that restore some equity for at-risk homeowners to be an effective means of avoiding delinquency and foreclosure. Although principal write-downs may be especially germane today given the prevalence of negative equity positions, they are not necessary or appropriate for all borrowers who have negative home equity or who become delinquent on their mortgage. On the contrary, a strategy of targeting write-downs to certain groups of borrowers may provide the best path forward. For example, one possibility would be to limit the availability of write-downs to those borrowers with high debt payment-to-income ratios and loan-to-value ratios significantly in excess of 100 percent before loan modification, but with the capacity to carry a written-down mortgage. In any event, it seems clear that principal reductions should be part of the tool kit that servicers and investors bring to bear as they deal with delinquent loans. Additional Actions That Could Help Reduce Avoidable ForeclosuresSeveral steps could be taken to provide further impetus to loan modifications, including principal write-downs, in appropriate circumstances. One such step that could be taken relatively quickly by the industry is the development of a template that would guide servicers and others as they consider whether, and under what circumstances, to pursue various types of loan modifications, including principal write-downs. Enhanced guidance on loan modifications could help forge a common understanding among servicers and the investor community on when a particular loan modification tool is most appropriate. This guidance would help address the concern expressed by servicers that expanding the rate of principal reductions may expose them to increased litigation risks even in situations where the servicer reasonably determines that such action is beneficial to investors in comparison to other available options. The Hope Now Alliance organized by the industry and the Treasury Department successfully created guidelines dealing with interest rate resets. Leadership also is needed to provide guidance for other loan modification tools and to clarify the "best practices" to be followed by servicers in order to mitigate servicers' litigation risks. The Congress can take another important step to facilitate greater use of loan modifications by moving quickly to reconcile and enact FHA modernization legislation permitting the FHA to increase its scale and improve the management of potential risks borne by the government. Such legislation could improve the FHA's ability to reach a wider range of borrowers while allowing the agency to develop appropriate underwriting and pricing methodologies for any increased risks assumed. Separately, the GSEs--Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac--could be asked to do more. Recently, the Congress has greatly expanded Fannie Mae's and Freddie Mac's role in the mortgage market by temporarily increasing the conforming loan limits for these GSEs. In addition, their federal regulator, the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, has lifted some of the constraints that were imposed on these entities because they have resolved some of their recent accounting and operational problems. Thus, now is an especially appropriate time to ask the GSEs to move quickly to raise more capital, which they will need to take advantage of these new securitization and investment opportunities, to provide assistance to the housing markets in times of stress, and to do so in a safe and sound manner. As the GSEs expand their roles in our mortgage market, there is a strong need for the Congress to move forward on GSE reform legislation, including the creation of a world-class GSE regulator. As the Federal Reserve has testified on many occasions, it is very important for the health and stability of our housing finance system that the Congress provide the GSE regulator with broad authority to set capital standards, establish a clear and credible receivership process, and define and monitor a transparent public purpose--one that transcends just shareholder interests--for the accumulation of assets held in their portfolios. Desirable Characteristics of an Initiative to Encourage Loan WorkoutsGoing beyond the current proposals for FHA modernization and permitting the FHA greater latitude to set underwriting standards and risk-based premiums for mortgage refinancing--in a way that does not increase the expected cost to the taxpayer--would allow the FHA to help more troubled borrowers. For example, an FHA-insured refinancing product with insurance priced to reflect the risks to the taxpayers might encourage servicers to consider providing delinquent, at-risk mortgage borrowers a principal write-down as a loan modification alternative. The draft FHA Housing Stabilization and Homeownership Retention Act of 2008 includes provisions designed to allow the FHA to offer such products, which could be a useful tool in helping reduce preventable foreclosures. As you move forward in considering whether to enact a bill and, if so, what its precise design should be, it will be important to consider a wide range of issues. In many cases, a judgment must be made as to how to strike an appropriate balance among competing considerations. Among the issues you will have to consider are at least the following five: 1.Mitigatingmoral hazard.Homeowners who can afford to pay their current mortgage should not be encouraged to default in order to qualify for a write-down. To discourage borrowers who would otherwise have the ability to continue making their payments from becoming delinquent, a variety of steps could be taken. For example, eligibility for assistance under the program could be restricted to borrowers who had relatively high debt payment-to-income ratios at some specified date before the creation of the program. In addition, steps could be taken to make it costly for homeowners who attempt to quickly cash-in on the equity provided through a principal write-down. For example, participating borrowers could be required to pay an exit fee when the refinancing loan is extinguished. As another example, borrowers could be required to share with the government or with the holder of the borrower's existing mortgage either the equity created through a write-down or the future appreciation in the home price, or both, over some specified time period. In other words, the government or investor would have what is known as a "soft-second." In addition, programs that provide for the voluntary participation of lenders and servicers should provide a natural brake on moral hazard, as lenders and servicers would remain free to pursue other options available to them in situations where they believe the borrower has the ability to repay his or her existing mortgage. 2.Mitigatingadverse selection.A robust defense against adverse selection--the incentive of current servicers or lenders to send only their worst credits to the government-insured mortgage program--is necessary to protect the interests of the taxpayer.Mechanisms that would discourage adverse selection include: (i) a loan seasoning requirement (for example, a period duringwhich the new loan could be sent back to the original servicer/lender if it redefaults)and (ii) a fee structure that imposes costs on the servicer/lender ifthe new government-insured loan goes bad within a specified period or pays a bonus if the loan continues to perform over the whole of that period. 3.Turning the FHA into a world-class mortgage insurer. With modernization and expansion, the FHA could play an important role in relieving stress in the mortgage and housing markets as well as in restarting securitization markets. Securitization markets are needed to help relieve capital stresses on banks and to provide more affordable mortgages to borrowers. To this end, more consideration needs to be given to how the FHA can scale up quickly and improve its processes and underwriting systems so that they are comparable in quality with those currently being used by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. In addition, providing the FHA with broad authority to offer innovative products that meet market needs and to outsource loan underwriting and other program elements to private-sector providers could allow the FHA to insure more mortgage borrowers and to do so more quickly. The FHA needs to be better able to compete in today's marketplace and it needs access to the best risk-management tools available when managing the risks to the government. 4.Protecting the taxpayer. Any government-insured mortgage offered under a refinancing program needs to be prudently underwritten, regardless of whether a principal write-down is part of the deal. First and foremost, this means establishing a meaningful amount of homeowner equity. Second, it means using sound underwriting criteria to ensure that borrowers are reasonably likely to be able to repay the government-insured loan on a sustained basis. Third, it means allowing the FHA to engage in sensible risk-based pricing of its mortgage insurance products, including substantial flexibility in setting its initial premium and annual premiums. 5.Negotiating junior liens.From one-third to one-half of all subprime mortgages pertain to properties that also have junior liens. When held by an entity other than the first lien holder, these junior liens present a variety of serious obstacles to a successful refinancing, especially one involving a principal write-down. Typically, the junior lien holder must agree either to remove his lien in return for a portion of the proceeds from the refinancing or re-subordinate his claim to the new loan. The valuation of the junior lien holder's claim on the property is often difficult to negotiate. One way of dealing with this problem in the case of a restructuring with an FHA-insured mortgage is to offer a junior lien holder a specified share of the government's or investor's "soft second." Another way of dealing with junior liens is to provide the servicer with financial incentives to aggressively negotiate with the junior lien holder while capping any potential payout available to the junior lien holder from the government program. Elements of these considerations are already reflected in the discussion draft. For example, Title I of the discussion draft includes exit fees and shared appreciation mortgages to address concerns about borrower moral hazard. It also contains features to protect the taxpayer, such as widening the range of insurance premiums and creating a meaningful amount of borrower home equity. As for adverse selection, risk-based insurance premiums paid by the servicer are crucial, and Title I could be clearer about the FHA's authority to use risk-based premiums. Other steps to guard against adverse selection could include a loan seasoning requirement or other forms of warranties given by the lender to the government about loan performance. Given the magnitude of the potential foreclosures on the horizon, more steps should be taken to modernize the FHA and to deal with the junior lien holders. The FHA needs the resources and the incentives to manage the risks to the government well and to offer mortgage insurance products that will be attractive to servicers. As for junior lien holders, despite the government's best efforts, it may be difficult for servicers or lenders to negotiate with junior lien holders on the borrowers' behalf. The FHA needs substantial flexibility to provide incentives to servicers to negotiate with junior lien holders to address this difficult problem. The Congress may be concerned that the loan-by-loan approach could prove insufficient. Title II of the discussion draft would permit substantial flexibility to expand the program if needed by introducing a bulk-refinance mechanism if economic conditions warrant such action. This mechanism would rely on an auction-based process to price and deliver mortgages for refinancing. Note that an auction-based approach would still have to contend with some of the problems mentioned above, including moral hazard, adverse selection and the resolution of junior liens. Title II would grant authority to the implementing agencies to build in features needed to address these and other issues. If you move forward with this legislation, it will be important that the implementing agencies have full latitude to exercise such authority. In the design and details of a principal write-down program based on a government-insured refinancing, it is critical to strike the right balance between the interests of borrowers, servicers, investors, and taxpayers. For example, the larger the required principal reduction on a troubled loan, the fewer loans that lenders or servicers will offer voluntarily for refinancing into an FHA-insured product, thereby reducing the "take up" rate for the program. However, a larger principal write-down better protects taxpayers from future losses and gives the borrower a greater incentive to stay current on the refinanced mortgage. As another example, the more incentives given to servicers to use an FHA refinancing program, either through direct payments or through shared appreciation agreements, the more they would be willing to incur the costs of refinancing borrowers. Such incentives might increase the number of borrowers who might be considered for a government-backed program. But such incentives also would raise the cost of the program for the borrower and possibly for the government as well. As a final example, providing investors with some of the benefits of any shared-appreciation agreements might encourage them to allow servicers to write down principal and refinance borrowers into a government-backed program. However, providing the government with such agreements could be one means of compensating taxpayers for shouldering the risks associated with the program. Even if the right balance for the program can be struck, obstacles remain to the successful implementation of a government program designed to forestall preventable foreclosures. For example, even though workouts may often be the best economic alternative, mortgage securitization and the constraints faced by servicers may make such workouts less likely. Trusts vary in the type and scope of modifications that are explicitly permitted, and these differences raise operational compliance costs and litigation risks for the servicer. So that servicers do not try to unduly avoid litigation risks, leadership is needed to clarify their duties. ConclusionFHA modernization and GSE reform are needed to address the ongoing shortcomings of current mortgage-oriented government initiatives. In addition, the GSEs should be strongly encouraged to raise additional capital so that they can fulfill the expanded role that the Congress has recently extended to them. Separately, the Congress should carefully evaluate whether to take additional actions to reduce the rate of preventable foreclosures. Properly designed, such steps could promote economic stability for households, neighborhoods, and the nation as a whole. Although lenders and servicers have scaled up their efforts and have adopted a wider variety of loss-mitigation techniques, more can, and should, be done. The fact that many troubled borrowers have properties that are now worth less than the principal amounts remaining on their mortgages suggests that lenders and servicers should give greater consideration to the use of principal reductions as one of the loan modification options in their tool kit. Principal write-downs would be facilitated by providing the FHA the flexibility to insure a broad range of refinancing products for a larger number of at-risk borrowers, including products that offer borrowers an affordable, restructured mortgage if their lender voluntarily agrees to write-down the principal amount of the borrower's mortgage. The voluntary nature of the program assures that only borrowers who the servicer or lender believes cannot successfully carry their current mortgage contract would be considered for such a program. If the Congress decides to move down this road, it should carefully consider the steps that should be taken to mitigate moral hazard, avoid adverse selection, and ensure that the financial interests of the taxpayer are adequately safeguarded. Footnotes 1.The telephone number for the nationwide Homeowner’s HOPE Hotline is 888-995-HOPE.Return to text 2.Hope Nowis an alliance between counselors, mortgage market participants, and mortgage servicers to create a unified, coordinated plan to reach and help as many homeowners as possible. For more information see: www.hopenow.com.Return to text 3.The maps show data for each state and for most counties and zip codes. They are available on thewebsiteof the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.Return to text
On April 21, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $50 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Stop-out rate:2.870 percentTotal propositions submitted:$88.288 billionTotal propositions accepted:$50.000 billionBid/cover ratio:1.77Number of bidders:83 Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 75.28% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on April 24, 2008, and will mature on May 22, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by noon EDT on April 22, 2008. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on April 22, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On April 7, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $50 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Stop-out rate:2.820 percentTotal propositions submitted:$91.569 billionTotal propositions accepted:$50.000 billionBid/cover ratio:1.83Number of bidders:79 Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 67.70% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on April 10, 2008, and will mature on May 8, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by noon EDT on April 8, 2008. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on April 8, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday extended to April 15 the deadline for the submission of requests to testify at public meetings to be held next month in Los Angeles, California, and Chicago, Illinois, on the notice by Bank of America Corporation to acquire Countrywide Financial Corporation. The purpose of these meetings is to collect information relating to factors the Board is required to consider under the Bank Holding Company Act. The specific dates, times, and locations of the meetings are:Los Angeles--Monday, April 28, 2008, and Tuesday, April 29, 2008, beginning at 8:30 a.m. PDT, at the Los Angeles Branch of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 950 South Grand Avenue, Los Angeles, California.Chicago--Tuesday, April 22, 2008, beginning at 8:30 a.m. CDT, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 230 South LaSalle Street, Chicago, Illinois.All persons wishing to testify at the public meeting to be held in Los Angeles must submit a written request to Scott Turner, Community Affairs Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 101 Market Street, San Francisco, California 94105 (facsimile: 415/393-1920) no later than 5:00 p.m. PDT on April 15, 2008. All persons wishing to testify at the public meeting to be held in Chicago must submit a written request to Alicia Williams, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 230 South LaSalle Street, Chicago, Illinois 60604 (facsimile: 312/913-2626) no later than 5:00 p.m. CDT on April 15, 2008.The request to testify must include the following information: (i) identification of which meeting (and which day for the Los Angeles meeting) the participant wishes to attend; (ii) a brief statement of the nature of the expected testimony (including whether the testimony will support or oppose the proposed transaction or provide other comment on the proposal) and the estimated time required for the presentation; (iii) the address and telephone number (and e-mail address and facsimile number, if available) of the individual testifying; and (iv) identification of any special needs, such as individuals needing translation services, individuals with a physical disability who may need assistance, or individuals requiring visual aids for their presentation.Copies of testimony may, but need not, be filed with the Presiding Officer before a participant's presentation. All persons wishing to testify at the public meeting to be held in Los Angeles must submit a written request to Scott Turner, Community Affairs Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 101 Market Street, San Francisco, California 94105 (facsimile: 415/393-1920) no later than 5:00 p.m. PDT on April 15, 2008. All persons wishing to testify at the public meeting to be held in Chicago must submit a written request to Alicia Williams, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 230 South LaSalle Street, Chicago, Illinois 60604 (facsimile: 312/913-2626) no later than 5:00 p.m. CDT on April 15, 2008. The request to testify must include the following information: (i) identification of which meeting (and which day for the Los Angeles meeting) the participant wishes to attend; (ii) a brief statement of the nature of the expected testimony (including whether the testimony will support or oppose the proposed transaction or provide other comment on the proposal) and the estimated time required for the presentation; (iii) the address and telephone number (and e-mail address and facsimile number, if available) of the individual testifying; and (iv) identification of any special needs, such as individuals needing translation services, individuals with a physical disability who may need assistance, or individuals requiring visual aids for their presentation. Copies of testimony may, but need not, be filed with the Presiding Officer before a participant's presentation.
The Federal Reserve System on Tuesday announced the availability of a set of dynamic maps and data that illustrate subprime and alt-A mortgage loan conditions across the United States.The maps, which are maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, will display regional variation in the condition of securitized, owner-occupied subprime, and alt-A mortgage loans. The maps and data can be used to assist in the identification of existing and potential foreclosure hotspots. This may assist community groups, which can mobilize resources to bring financial counseling and other resources to at-risk homeowners. Policymakers can also use the maps and data to develop plans to lessen the direct and spillover impacts that delinquencies and foreclosures may have on local economies. Local governments may use the data and maps to prioritize the expenditure of their resources for these efforts.To access the data visit:www.newyorkfed.org/mortgagemaps/. Monthly updates are planned.The maps show the following information for subprime and alt-A loans for each state and most of the counties and zip codes in the United States:• Loans per 1,000 housing units• Loans in foreclosure per 1,000 housing units• Loans real estate owned (REO) per 1,000 housing units• Share of loans that are adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs)• Share of loans for which payments are current• Share of loans that are 90-plus days delinquent• Share of loans in foreclosure• Median combined loan-to-value ratio (LTV) at origination• Share of loans with low credit score (FICO) and high LTV at origination• Share of loans with low- or no documentation• Share of ARMs with initial reset in the next 12 months• Share of loans with a late payment in the past 12 monthsAccompanying data tables report further statistics for states. The maps and data are drawn from the FirstAmerican CoreLogic, LoanPerformance Loan Level Data Set. For more details, see the website's technical appendices to the map and the data tables.Additional mortgage foreclosure resources, including helpful information and links to agencies and organizations that may provide assistance to consumers experiencing difficulty making their mortgage payments, are available on the Board's website at:http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/foreclosure/default.htm
On April 7, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $50 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction Parameters Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
On April 21, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $50 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm).Description of Offering and Auction ParametersOffering Amount:$50 billionTerm:28-day loanBid Submission Date:April 21, 2008Opening Time:11 a.m. EDTClosing Time:1 p.m. EDTNotification Date:April 22, 2008Settlement Date:April 24, 2008Maturity Date:May 22, 2008Minimum Bid Amount (per bid):$5 millionBid Increment:$100,000Maximum Bid Amount(per institution):$5 billion (10% of Offering Amount)Minimum Bid Rate:2.05 percentIncremental Bid Rate:0.001 percentMinimum Award:$10,000Maximum Award:$5 billion (10% of Offering Amount) Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives The Current Financial Services MarketplaceAs we all know, today's financial services industry is extremely diverse and complex. The application of new technologies, policies, and financial innovations has contributed to the development of a robust and highly competitive consumer finance marketplace. Consumers can choose among a wide variety of services and providers when conducting financial transactions that were once primarily offered through depository institutions, whether it is cashing a check or obtaining a mortgage loan. These forces have also dramatically changed how financial services are marketed and delivered. Consumers no longer have to make a trip to a bank and wait a few weeks for a decision regarding a loan. Direct mail campaigns bring offers of credit to consumers' doors, and in some cases, credit can be applied for and granted by telephone or via the Internet. Credit scoring technologies have greatly streamlined consumer underwriting processes that have improved efficiencies in evaluating credit requests, from mortgage underwriting to credit granted immediately at retail registers. In addition, credit scoring technologies have changed the way credit is priced, with the cost of credit correlated with the risk a borrower represents as quantified by their credit score. This process of pricing has enabled lenders and investors to more closely align their risk tolerance with return requirements, which has resulted in the development of new credit markets for higher-risk borrowers. Certainly, these developments have increased access to credit, particularly for those consumers who may not have been considered creditworthy 20 years ago. With these advancements, consumers can more readily establish a credit history. However, the rapid growth in the availability of credit has also brought increased responsibilities and risk to consumers, which makes it critical that consumers are well-informed about their personal financial circumstances and the products they contract for. Consumers must also be vigilant in shopping for their financial services. And, to be effective in evaluating products, they must be equipped with the knowledge required to ask the right questions, and to turn down a product that is not well-suited to their needs, especially a credit product. Consequently, the level of competition and complexity in today's consumer financial marketplace highlights the need for effective financial education to help consumers evaluate and choose products that advance their financial well-being, not impede it. The magnitude of mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures in recent months has underscored the importance of consumer understanding of financial products. A variety of factors contributed to the problems in the subprime mortgage market that financial education alone cannot address, and the need to assist homeowners in financial distress has clearly mobilized efforts to mitigate the devastating impact that mortgage delinquency has on consumers. Government agencies at the local, state, and national levels, financial institutions, and nonprofit organizations are collaborating to develop strategies to assist troubled borrowers and minimize foreclosures. The focus of these efforts range from raising consumers' awareness of the resources that are available to them to working with servicers, lenders, and community organizations to restructure borrowers' mortgages into sustainable loans. Significantly, many of these initiatives have financial counseling and education as a core component. This fundamental element is critical to helping borrowers understand their financial situation and identifying the most viable solution for each borrower's circumstances. Current market conditions make us attuned to the importance of financial counseling and education as they relate to managing mortgage credit, but mortgage delinquency is only one of the many scenarios that can precipitate a personal financial crisis. More often, households experience financial distress as the result of the loss of a job, a medical crisis, or a natural disaster. Financial education is an important tool for helping consumers to manage their personal finances and reduce their vulnerability to such unanticipated financial shocks. Challenges of Designing and Delivering Financial EducationAs policymakers and educators know, designing and delivering effective financial education presents numerous challenges. Among the most significant is that financial counseling and education are very resource-and-time intensive because of the individual nature of personal finances and the differing base of knowledge of consumers. In addition, there is a very broad range of potential audiences, and their educational and informational needs vary greatly, a challenge that is compounded by the rapid development of products targeted to specific market segments. This often requires the development of specialized programs to reach targeted audiences based on demographics, such as youth, young adults, or immigrant populations, or based on a consumer's stage in the financial lifecycle, such as preparing to fund higher education, buy a home, or prepare for retirement. Oftentimes, individuals in need of financial education may not have a fundamental understanding of financial management concepts, such as budgeting, saving, and credit. Financial education efforts may also be constrained by gaps in math and reading literacy, which impede comprehension of fundamental financial concepts. Another challenge to delivering financial education is identifying the venue and delivery channels that facilitate consumers' participation in a program, as the demands of work and home often leave little time to give to such training programs. Language and cultural differences can also present challenges in reaching consumers who can benefit from financial education, particularly immigrant communities. Financial educators have worked diligently to design curricula to overcome these challenges and to present materials in a manner that suits a broad range of learning styles and preferences, from traditional classroom-style courses to telephone counseling and computer-based modules. As technologies and access continue to improve, financial educators have the opportunity to develop new strategies for delivering more effective programs. The challenge of delivering financial education to youth can be as vexing as providing training programs to adults. One obvious solution would be to incorporate financial education into school curricula, which eight states have done by requiring that a course in personal finance be taken before graduating from high school. However, primary and secondary school teachers confront limited time and great demands in meeting current teaching requirements. And teachers themselves have expressed concern about their qualifications for providing financial education. To help address these challenges, many of the Federal Reserve Banks offer teaching materials on financial and economic education targeted to youth, as well as offer training sessions to teachers. The workplace is another venue that offers promise for improving financial education. The Federal Reserve Board recognizes this opportunity. We regularly host seminars during the work day and encourage staff to take advantage of these sessions to learn more about benefits and retirement investment options. Clearly, to be effective, counseling and education programs require trained instructors who have an understanding of the range of financial products and providers, and, in today's dynamic financial services marketplace, curricula must be regularly updated to remain relevant. Ideally, financial counseling would be available to consumers near the time at which they are making an important financial decision, such as whether to buy a home. Despite these and the many other challenges, informed financial decisionmaking is vital for the healthy functioning of financial markets, in part because it stimulates competition that leads to improved products at better prices for consumers. In addition, research has demonstrated that financial literacy can lead to better outcomes for individual consumers. For example, a study of 14,000 recipients of credit counseling found that counseling had a positive effect on creditworthiness, especially for individuals with the lowest credit scores.1Another paper determined that new or recently delinquent credit cardholders were more likely to pay on time and to have lower revolving balancesafter receiving on-line instruction in credit management.2A study on consumer creditworthiness and consumer literacy concluded that financial knowledge is the single best predictor of behaviors, such as budgeting, saving, and shopping responsibly, which translated into positive outcomes on credit bureau reports.3With these benefits and the implications they have for the broader economy, continued efforts in financial literacy are highly desirable. As a result, policymakers, regulators, researchers, and nonprofit organizations have examined their roles in financial education efforts and have worked to expand their contributions to helping consumers become better informed about managing their personal finances. Now let me talk briefly about the Federal Reserve's efforts in the financial education arena. Federal Reserve System's Financial Education EffortsThe Federal Reserve has a long-standing commitment to providing information and education to help consumers make informed financial decisions.4Financial educational products and programs are offered by the Board and each of the twelve regional Federal Reserve Banks. Our services range from providing consumer educational resources to engaging in financial education collaborations at the national, regional, and local levels. We also conduct and promote research into consumer behavior and the efficacy of financial education programs to help inform policy and program design. We have established a centralized, dedicated website to improve accessibility to the financial and economic education resources offered by the Federal Reserve System athttp://www.federalreserveeducation.org/. I will provide examples of ways in which we have strategically contributed to financial education in each of these areas. Consumer Education Information ResourcesThe Federal Reserve has a long track record of providing consumer education publications that offer consumers accurate and objective information about financial products, as well as their rights under consumer protection laws and regulations. Our publications offer comprehensive information on the terminology of various products and questions to ask when shopping for financial services. For example, in relation to mortgage loans, we offer educational materials that address virtually all aspects of a mortgage transaction, from choosing a mortgage to understanding settlement costs to mortgage refinancing. To further help consumers in choosing a mortgage loan, we have developed a mortgage comparison calculator that is accessible on our website. This interactive tool allows consumers to compare the monthly payments and the equity accrual for several kinds of fixed and adjustable-rate mortgages. Most recently, we have posted a list of agencies and nonprofit organizations that provide foreclosure resources to homeowners struggling with their mortgages. We also offer a full range of resources on credit cards, deposit accounts, and other financial services. All of our consumer education resources are available on our website, and most are available in Spanish. Similarly, each of the Federal Reserve Banks develops financial education materials that are responsive to their local and regional markets' information needs. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta offers "Katrina's Classroom: Financial Lessons from a Hurricane," an on-line curriculum for high-school students on the importance of financial planning and preparedness. The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston has established a dedicated website athttp://www.theinformedhomebuyer.org/to help consumers access regional and national resources related to mortgage delinquency and foreclosures. Leadership in Financial Education CollaborationsThe Federal Reserve System also commits significant resources to providing leadership and technical assistance to financial education initiatives. Here in Washington, Board staff serve in advisory positions to the Jump$tart Coalition, America Saves campaign, and National Council on Economic Education. In addition, the Federal Reserve is a member of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, with staff serving on two of the commission's three working groups--the National Strategy Working Group and the Mymoney.gov Website Working Group. Similarly, the Federal Reserve Banks work with educators and community organizations in their Districts to further financial education. Many of the Reserve Banks partner with organizations to provide "teach the teacher" and "train the trainer" programs to help ensure that financial and economic educators have the knowledge and information resources they need to be effective in their roles. The Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis is an active partner in the Gateway to Financial Fitness program, a 12-week general financial education program targeted at lower-income consumers. In addition, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston provides training and volunteers to work with Volunteer Income Tax Assistance sites in the region to help lower-income individuals file their taxes and apply for tax refunds through the Earned Income Tax Credit program. In San Francisco, the Reserve Bank is engaged in a broad-based collaboration that provides financial education and other support to help bring the city's unbanked into the financial mainstream. The Federal Reserve System also works to increase awareness of the importance of financial literacy. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago hosts a "MoneySmart Week" throughout its District for each week of April. The Reserve Bank collaborates with local organizations to host a series of free classes and activities designed to help consumers better manage their personal finances. The Federal Reserve System also works to improve the infrastructure for financial education networks and resources. In recent years, staff of the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis and Kansas City were integral to establishing statewide chapters of Jump$tart in Montana and Nebraska, while the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland has led efforts to establish regional financial education coalitions to leverage resources and share best practices. Over the last year, the Federal Reserve System has leveraged its numerous financial education partnerships to sponsor conferences and roundtables about financial education and counseling for communities working to support borrowers experiencing distress from their mortgage situations. These forums have been instrumental in sharing information resources and understanding and responding to borrowers' needs. Research on Financial Education ProgramsGiven the scarce resources available to provide financial education, it is important to ensure that they are being used effectively. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve is committed to conducting and promoting research on the efficacy of financial education programs. Our biennial Community Affairs Research Conference is a regular source for generating and presenting the most recent research on financial education programs. In addition, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia is engaged in a research collaboration to conduct a long-term study of the effectiveness of pre-purchase homeownership counseling and its effect on consumer credit behavior and homeownership. In recent months, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston has published the results of a study examining the characteristics of individuals who self-select into financial education programs.5 In addition to our various research efforts, we have also gained valuable insight into consumers' information needs and shopping behaviors directly from consumers. Over the last several years, the Board has engaged in extensive consumer testing of disclosures for privacy notices, credit cards, and mortgages in conjunction with our rule-writing efforts for these products. The information we have gained from these sessions has helped us to better understand how consumers shop for financial products and services and what information they need to make their decisions. Our experiences with consumer testing underscore the importance of providing content that consumers need and of refraining from emphasizing form over substance. For example, focusing on the length of disclosures could limit the ability to provide information essential to consumers' decisionmaking process. Such feedback gained through consumer testing can also inform the design of financial education programs. ConclusionIn closing, I would like to emphasize that the Federal Reserve will continue to maintain its commitment to financial education. Financial education is essential to helping consumers make well-informed and beneficial decisions that enhance their financial positions and enhance efficiencies in the consumer financial marketplace. Financially educated consumers are an important first line of defense in well-functioning markets. At the same time, it is important to recognize that financial education is not a panacea, and that there remains a need for effective regulation that is responsive to market evolutions to ensure that consumers are protected against abusive and fraudulent practices by unscrupulous players. Interest in consumer financial education continues to grow, at both the national and international level. This brings the promise of new resources and ideas that can help overcome the challenges of developing and delivering effective financial education to diverse audiences with diverse needs. This increased commitment can also help to improve coordination and to leverage resources that will improve efficiencies and spur innovation in the field. I remain optimistic that this dedication will lead to improved financial literacy outcomes that will benefit consumers, communities, and the broader economy. Footnotes 1.Gregory Elliehausen, E. Christopher Lundquist, Michael Staten (2003), "The Impact of Credit Counseling on Subsequent Borrower Credit Usage and Payment Behavior (304 KB PDF)" (January).Return to text 2.Kimberly Gartner and Richard Todd (2005), "Effectiveness of Online 'Early Intervention' Financial Education for Credit Cardholders (189 KB PDF)" (July).Return to text 3.Marsha Courchane and Peter Zorn (2005), "Consumer Literacy and Creditworthiness (1.18 MB PDF)".Return to text 4.For a comprehensive listing of financial and economic education resources offered by the Federal Reserve System, seetestimonyon financial literacy by Chairman Ben Bernanke before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the United States Senate May 23, 2006.Return to text 5.Stephan Meier and Charles Sprenger, (2007) "Selection into Financial Literacy Programs: Evidence from a Field Study (373 KB PDF)," (No. 07-05), November 2007.Return to text
Governor Kevin Warsh At the New York University School of Law Global Economic Policy Forum, New York, New York What's past is prologue; what to come, in yours and my discharge.Shakespeare,The Tempest, Act 2, Scene 1 Thank you to the New York University School of Law for inviting me to participate in today's Global Economic Policy Forum.1 PrologueA little more than a year ago, I began to recount a story--already long-in-the-making--of the transformation of financial institutions driven by abundant liquidity in global financial markets.2In those early chapters, one could not help but worry about the inherent risks to financial markets and the economy when the gloss of confidence wears thin, causing me to wonder aloud: "What happens when liquidity falters?"3Let me briefly try to recount this tale over the last few quarters before offering some rough plot lines from which the balance of the story can be divined. The sleepy complacency of a bygone era seemed rudely interrupted by a liquidity shock last August.4A global margin call on virtually all leveraged positions began. As you know, the Federal Reserve found it necessary to begin to exercise its monetary muscles in unprecedented ways. The seasons darkened, and the plot thickened. New structured products and old financial institutions evidenced increasing signs of weakness. Some central banks, including the Federal Reserve, helped supply liquidity to where it was most in need. Financial market turmoil, partly as a result, was periodically placed in abeyance. Casualties of the liquidity contraction nonetheless appeared; some remained in the narrative for awhile, others were removed with great dispatch. The narrative continued to morph through the first quarter of 2008. Central banks, while generally more comfortable remaining behind the scenes, took center stage with new tools and policy prescriptions. The script was rewritten so that product innovation flowed, but this time from the public authorities. Many private market participants receded to the shadows of the stage, some anxiously anticipating intermission. What some originally read as a short story punctuated by a liquidity shock evolved into a longer narrative. Credit is threatening to displace liquidity as the primary antagonist. A credit crunch, particularly for small businesses and consumers, poses meaningful downside risks to the real economy. And market participants are struggling to assess the possibility that the narrative turns into a multi-act, macroeconomic drama. In the remainder of my remarks, let me explore three of the most trenchant and overlapping plot lines, none of which seem to avail themselves readily to a speedy resolution. First, a striking loss of confidence is affecting financial market functioning. Second, the business models of many large financial institutions are in the process of significant re-examination and repair. Third, the Federal Reserve is exercising its powers to mitigate the effects of financial turmoil on the real economy. This third plot line, however necessary, will not, in and of itself, ensure a more durable return of trust to our financial architecture. In my view, public liquidity is an imperfect substitute for private liquidity. That is, only when the other plot lines advance apace--meaning that significant, private financial actors return to their proper role at center stage--will credit market functioning and support for economic growth be fully restored. And for that to happen, as I am confident it will, we will find that the financial markets and financial firms are outfitted quite differently. Plot Line 1: Liquidity in Financial MarketsAs I advanced in prior remarks, liquidity is confidence. Liquidity expands with confidence in the efficacy of our financial architecture. When information, securities, markets, and institutions work in a seamless fashion to intermediate the flow of funds between investors and borrowers, liquidity flourishes. When the confidence in the financial architecture is meaningfully impaired, liquidity flounders. A couple of examples highlight the dramatic change in liquidity that is gripping financial markets. First, consider structured product markets. Recall the explosive growth in securitization markets in recent years.5The loss in confidence in structured products was first evidenced last year in securities backed by subprime mortgages. Actual and projected credit losses began to mount across many housing-related assets.6Participants also lost confidence in the value provided through the securitization process itself. Some highly structured products, such as collateralized debt obligations squared, vanished. Yields on non-agency mortgage-backed securities and commercial mortgage-backed securities skyrocketed; and, in some cases, securitization markets simply shut down. All in all, this decline in confidence, while painful, is understandable. Investors and financial institutions became complacent in their abilities--and the ability of credit rating agencies--to evaluate credit risks of complex structured products. And while the originate-to-distribute model entails legitimate principal-agent problems, investors did not demand or enforce safeguards. Even many large, sophisticated financial institutions chose to retain super senior and AAA-rated tranches for their own accounts. In so doing, they systematically erred in assessing the assets' risk profile. Moreover, these products--born in times of massive liquidity--were often not well designed to ensure efficient workout arrangements should the abundant pools of liquidity retreat or should unexpected defaults emerge. Next, consider short-term credit markets. Many financial products, such as asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP), auction rate securities (ARS), interbank funding products, and repurchase agreements (RPs), were intended to be steady, supportive credit facilitators in a liquidity-rich environment. In reality, these products involved a good deal of maturity mismatching and rollover risk. So, when liquidity retrenched, these markets experienced substantial disruptions. ABCP outstanding fell by a staggering $300 billion this past summer. Issuance of ARS--long-term bonds that reissue and reprice at very short intervals--came to an abrupt halt. And, the interbank funding and RP markets showed significant signs of strain. Credit quality concerns alone do not appear, even now, sufficiently widespread to induce the depth of problems witnessed in financial markets during the past several months. Some ARS that failed, for example, funded pools of federally guaranteed student loans. I do not mean to suggest that counterparties themselves are blameless--many had been less than fully transparent. Unclear disclosure by some financial institutions with respect to their off-balance-sheet commitments and liquidity support accentuated the uncertainty that is responsible for some of the poor market functioning. More fundamentally, in my view, funding market disruptions reflect a striking decline in confidence in the financial architecture itself. Perhaps an analogue to banking systems without deposit insurance is appropriate: Depositors withdraw funds if they believe others will act similarly. In short-term credit markets with minimal liquidity support, investors balk if they lose confidence in other investors' willingness to roll maturing paper. Even when liquidity support exists, it may well prove insufficient to address market-wide concerns. Many dealers of ARS, for example, withdrew their implicit liquidity support when failures became more frequent. Even those ABCP programs purportedly with full explicit liquidity support were implicated in the turmoil. I hesitate to ascribe this loss in confidence simply to a change in animal spirits or to dismiss this occurrence as some kind of contagion. After all, a loss in confidence can be completely rational: Illiquidity forces issuers to sell assets into distressed markets. So, I argue, the functioning of short-term credit markets is invariably tied to changes in confidence of our financial architecture--on the way up and on the way down. The arc of this narrative, thus, necessarily began some years ago. Increasingly abundant confidence when things were advancing apace--unsustainably so, it turns out--gave rise to levels of liquidity that engendered complacency among investors and counterparties. The financial architecture grew increasingly impervious to skeptics and dissenters, perpetuating insufficient transparency and under-informed risk-taking. It was commonly believed that short-term, secured credit markets would perpetually remain open to finance high-quality assets. And the notion of liquidity risk management was anachronistic, or so it seemed. Market participants now seem to be questioning the financial architecture itself. The fragility of short-term credit markets is a powerful manifestation of that loss of confidence. There are some encouraging, early signs of repair, but regaining the confidence that markets require will take time, and perhaps uncomfortably to some, patience. It may also require new forms of credit intermediation. Plot Line 2: Transformation of Financial InstitutionsThe rise and fall of liquidity is not only changing fund flows in financial markets. It may also be transforming the business models of financial institutions themselves--no matter their size, regulatory structure, peer group, funding status, or geography. The period that preceded the recent turmoil was marked by abundant liquidity, high transaction volumes, and remarkably low volatility. That environment proved exceptionally hospitable to significant profits across classes of financial institutions. It also was supportive of high leverage, and correspondingly high returns on equity for financial intermediaries. Of no less consequence, it drove a conflation of roles among commercial banks, investment banks, and asset managers. The core functions of credit intermediation--creating, distributing, and owning risk--remained constant, but more institutions came to believe that there were inescapable synergies by operating across all three primary functions. From 2002 to mid-2007, many large financial institutions did just that, and to great effect--creating products by aggregating and reconstituting assets, distributing bespoke risks across institutional and retail channels, and retaining certain preferred positions for proprietary accounts. A changing paradigm of financial intermediation may well be on the horizon. From the market's perspective, financial institutions overproduced goods and services that now have to be warehoused or liquidated. From the perspective of financial institutions themselves, the old business models may be in the process of being upended. And from the perspective of a dispassionate central banker, the contemporaneous changes in balance sheets and income statements by incumbent financial institutions--most notably, deleveraging and paring of business lines--are likely to prove highly consequential to the near-term outlook for the real economy. Changing forms of financial intermediation are expected, given higher volatility and less leverage, in some cases building on old-fashioned banking products. Commercial and thrift deposits, for example, backed by a loyal customer base, may offer greater franchise value. Investment banks may reconfigure capital structures and core trading businesses to maximize benefits in a higher volatility environment. Asset-gatherers, whether in the form of traditional money-management firms or hedge funds, that survive this time of testing may rely more on term funding and seek equity returns across beaten-down classes of structured and debt products. And dependable, recurring revenues, even at lower levels, may warrant a premium valuation in the public markets. The case for opportunistic capital is improving. Some curative steps by incumbent financial institutions are in the offing. Financial institutions should continue to reassess their sources and uses of funding, their risk-management systems, risk tolerance, and human capital. Generally, they should not hesitate to pare their dividend and share repurchase programs. And, they should raise new capital to strengthen their balance sheets. These actions, in my view, are important signs of strength, and will ensure that financial institutions thrive in the emerging financial architecture replete with new opportunities. These actions will have concomitant benefits on real economic activity. Plot Line 3: Federal Reserve's Policy FormulationThe central bank's responsibility is not to individual firms but to financial markets, and only then, to the extent that financial market stresses affect the real economy. Given the fragility evidenced in financial markets, and the toll it is taking on real activity, the Federal Reserve agreed to take center stage. This is a role for which we did not volunteer, but one in which we are prepared to serve. The role has been thrust upon us by a loss of confidence in our existing financial architecture. Hence, we should remain at center stage as long as is necessary, but no longer. The Fed responded aggressively to mitigate spillovers to the real economy, exercising some authorities for the first time in decades. To prevent more serious financial fallout, the Fed established and expanded various lending facilities to depository institutions and primary dealers.7Some facilities allow daily access to variable amounts of funding, and others provide access to a fixed amount of longer-term funding at pre-announced auction dates. Still other facilities target action involving repurchase transactions with primary dealers. These recently implemented measures appear to have reduced, to some extent, strains in the financial situation. In particular, conditions in the RP market have improved. And, while Libor and commercial-paper spreads have remained elevated, they are below their year-end highs. In the corporate bond market, risk spreads have narrowed a bit in recent weeks and measures of secondary-market functioning are improved. While the adjustment process by financial intermediaries is showing signs of promise, the healing process is not likely to be linear. More consequentially, we should recognize that Fed-supplied liquidity is a poor substitute for private-sector-supplied liquidity. When liquidity flows among private-sector participants, the players can more judiciously assess risk and reward, more adroitly learn from the recent turmoil to strengthen the resiliency of credit intermediation, and more ably allocate capital to its most productive uses in the real economy. Moreover, Fed-provided liquidity should not be mistaken for capital. Volatility is generally a friend, not a foe, of market functioning. It should not be treated as an externality from which we suffer. Volatility, absent destabilizing moves, should be allowed to effectuate change in the financial architecture of private markets. Only then, I suspect, will a more robust recovery in market liquidity, investor confidence, and real economic activity be achieved. Of course, monetary policy continues to play an important role in the Federal Reserve's policy formulation. We have reduced the policy target rate by a cumulative 3 percentage points since August. These actions, together with significant actions to support liquidity, are intended to promote growth and mitigate downside risks to economic activity. Consistent with our dual mandate of promoting maximum employment and stable prices, we also need to be alert to risks to price stability. Increases in food and energy prices have pushed up overall consumer prices and are putting upward pressure on core inflation and inflation expectations. We will continue to monitor the inflation situation closely. And, more broadly, in my view, as financial intermediation channels reset, monetary policy will become still more efficacious. Fed policy--both with respect to liquidity tools and monetary policy--is partially offsetting the consequences of the liquidity and credit pullback on real activity. But we must be careful to not ask policy to do more than it is rightly capable of accomplishing. The problems afflicting our financial markets are indeed long-in-the-making. Correspondingly, the curative process is unlikely to be swift or smooth. Time is an oft-forgotten, yet equally essential, tool of our policy response. EpilogueSome believe the story of the current market turmoil began in August, and will end when the housing market stabilizes. But, in my view, the narrative actually began in a seemingly more benign time with underpinnings more fundamental than the value of the housing stock. Financial institutions and other market participants grew increasingly dependent on the extraordinary liquidity around them. When liquidity faltered, the weaknesses of the existing architecture abruptly revealed itself. A metaphor, perhaps, is instructive:Fish don't know they are wet. And they don't learn unless their memories are long or the water is gone.A new financial architecture, born of the forces of creative destruction, is early in the process of construction with the aid of the Federal Reserve and other public authorities. But for the new paradigmatic architecture to be enduring, market-supplied liquidity must come to predominate. To that end, I remain confident that financial institutions and financial markets will evolve to meet these challenges. Footnotes 1.The opinions I express are my own and do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. Dan Covitz and Nellie Liang, of the Federal Reserve Board’s staff, provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text 2.Kevin Warsh (2007), "Market Liquidity: Definitions and Implications," speech delivered at the Institute of International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington, March 5, 2007.Return to text 3.Kevin Warsh (2007), "Financial Intermediation and Complete Markets," speech delivered at the European Economics and Financial Centre, London, June 5, 2007.Return to text 4.Earlier in 2007, there were already concerns about the repayment of certain types and vintages of mortgages, and about loans to leveraged borrowers more generally.Return to text 5.Securitization volumes peaked in 2006, accounting for more than $1 trillion of net borrowing in U.S. credit markets, or more than one-fourth of the total.Return to text 6.In the more popular version of the narrative, housing was, and is, the dominant character on the stage. In my view, as I have discussed previously, these housing-related losses are consequential, but they were the spark, not the cause, of the turmoil. Kevin Warsh (2007), "Financial Market Developments," speech delivered at the State University of New York at Albany’s School of Business, Albany, N.Y.,September 21, 2007. In the housing-only version of the narrative, the establishment of a housing bottom is thesine qua nonof an economic recovery. In my remarks today, I maintain that reestablishing effective credit intermediation is critical to economic recovery.Return to text 7.Primary dealers are banks and securities broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. On behalf of the Federal Reserve System, the New York Fed's Open Market Desk engages in the trades to implement monetary policy.Return to text
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate 25 basis points to 2 percent. Recent information indicates that economic activity remains weak. Household and business spending has been subdued and labor markets have softened further. Financial markets remain under considerable stress, and tight credit conditions and the deepening housing contraction are likely to weigh on economic growth over the next few quarters. Although readings on core inflation have improved somewhat, energy and other commodity prices have increased, and some indicators of inflation expectations have risen in recent months. The Committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters, reflecting a projected leveling-out of energy and other commodity prices and an easing of pressures on resource utilization. Still, uncertainty about the inflation outlook remains high. It will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully. The substantial easing of monetary policy to date, combined with ongoing measures to foster market liquidity, should help to promote moderate growth over time and to mitigate risks to economic activity. The Committee will continue to monitor economic and financial developments and will act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Frederic S. Mishkin; Sandra Pianalto; Gary H. Stern; and Kevin M. Warsh. Voting against were Richard W. Fisher and Charles I. Plosser, who preferred no change in the target for the federal funds rate at this meeting. In a related action, the Board of Governors unanimously approved a 25-basis-point decrease in the discount rate to 2-1/4 percent. In taking this action, the Board approved the requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Cleveland, Atlanta, and San Francisco.
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the Annual Meeting of the Board of Governors of the Inter-American Development Bank, Miami, Florida Strains in global financial markets first became manifest last summer, when sharply rising delinquency rates on subprime mortgages in the United States caused investors to become concerned about the credit quality of home mortgages more broadly and about the exposures of major financial institutions to credit losses. These strains have persisted and, indeed, spread during the winter. In the United States, the continued poor functioning of securitization markets, particularly those for private mortgage-backed securities and other structured finance products, as well as pressures on balance sheet capacity at some large banks and a deterioration in loan performance, have led to tighter credit conditions for many households and businesses. The tightening of credit, along with information suggesting that the housing correction was likely to be deeper and more prolonged than initially thought and that the labor market was weakening, led many analysts to revise down their outlook for economic activity. In turn, the deterioration in the economic outlook seems to have fed back into financial markets, contributing to lower prices for a range of securities and to trading conditions that are more volatile and less liquid. Aspects of the U.S. experience have also been felt in other advanced economies, although generally to a lesser degree. The origination of mortgages to borrowers with less-than-prime credit profiles fell sharply over the second half of last year in the United States, and this segment of the market has continued to function poorly. In addition, the origination of jumbo mortgages to prime-rated homeowners has fallen since last summer, as lenders tightened their underwriting standards and raised the cost of those loans. In contrast, mortgages that qualify for backing by the housing government-sponsored enterprises continue to be readily available to households. For other types of consumer credit, such as auto loans and credit cards, access has diminished somewhat in recent months as lending standards have been tightened and securitization of consumer loans has become more difficult. In corporate markets, highly rated firms have continued to issue a sizable volume of bonds, but issuance of speculative-grade debt has been sluggish recently. In the leveraged loan market, banks have found it difficult to syndicate loans previously underwritten to finance large leveraged buyout deals, and the still-large pipeline of leveraged loans has led to an unplanned expansion of some large banks' balance sheets. In addition, some banks have taken onto their balance sheets assets for which they provided liquidity backstops or other forms of support. These balance sheet pressures have come at a time when asset write-downs were already weighing on capital. As I will discuss later, this episode underscores the important connection for banks between capital adequacy and liquidity, particularly in times of financial market stress. Despite the adverse developments in recent months, large U.S. banking organizations, in the aggregate and individually, have maintained capital ratios in excess of regulatory requirements, in part because of steps taken by many to replenish equity positions. Indeed, since last fall, large U.S. bank holding companies have raised more than $50 billion in capital. Although the U.S. banking system will continue to face a challenging environment, it remains in sound overall condition, having entered the period of recent financial turmoil with solid capital and strong earnings. Federal Reserve ActionsTo improve market liquidity and market functioning, and consistent with its role as the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve has supplemented its longstanding discount window by establishing new facilities to depository institutions and primary dealers. The first of these actions was initiated in August, when the Federal Reserve modified the terms for borrowing from the discount window. Then, in December, the Fed introduced a term lending facility that provided funding to depository institutions without the potential stigma of discount window borrowing. At the same time, the Federal Reserve, in conjunction with other central banks, established reciprocal currency swap arrangements to provide dollars to address elevated pressures in foreign interbank funding markets. Last month, the Fed announced a series of initiatives to address additional stresses that emerged more recently. Taken as a group, these actions have had a threefold purpose: to expand the range of institutions with access to collateralized loans from the Federal Reserve, to broaden the types of securities that can be pledged as collateral, and to lengthen the terms of the loans obtained from the Fed. To date, these liquidity measures seem to have been helpful, as funding pressures on some financial institutions appear to have eased somewhat and as liquidity seems to have improved in several financial markets. To the extent that these measures improve market functioning, they will have favorable effects on the availability of credit to the broader economy. More-liquid markets also increase the efficacy of monetary policy. In response to the weakening of economic conditions, the Federal Reserve has eased the stance of monetary policy substantially. The Federal Open Market Committee last month lowered the target for the federal funds rate to 2-1/4 percent--3 percentage points below its level last summer. The Committee anticipates that these actions, together with the steps we have taken to foster market liquidity, will help to promote growth over time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity. The remainder of my remarks this morning will cover the implications of these financial market strains for Latin America, focusing on the linkages between the U.S. and Latin economies and how they have evolved over time. Although there have been major structural improvements in Latin American economies, the region is also benefiting from favorable global conditions that are helping to offset potential adverse spillovers from the financial strains. Nevertheless, those strains highlight some challenges going forward in Latin America, particularly in the area of the regulation of financial institutions. This is no time for policymakers anywhere to feel complacent. Developments inLatin AmericaThe recent financial turbulence has been evident in Latin America, but not as strongly as in the United States and Europe. Spreads on Latin American dollar-denominated sovereign bonds over U.S. Treasury securities are up noticeably since early last year, but they remain low from a historical perspective. In the relatively new Latin markets for long-term local-currency bonds, yields have edged up in a few countries but have remained essentially flat in others. Equity prices in Latin America are down relatively little compared with their very large increases in 2006 and early 2007. The pace of economic growth has edged down in many (but not all) Latin countries from high rates in 2006 and early 2007. The latest International Monetary Fund (IMF) forecast, however, continues to project solid rates of growth this year and next in most Latin American countries. With a few notable exceptions, inflation has remained relatively well under control; in most countries, rising commodity prices have led to only modest increases in headline inflation rates. In light of the recent indications of a weakening U.S. economy, is there any historical precedent for Latin America to avoid spillovers? In the past, U.S. slowdowns have typically been associated with slowdowns in Latin America. Indeed, often the slowdowns in Latin America were much sharper than in the United States. One of the most famous examples of this effect occurred during the U.S. economic downturn of the early 1980s, which was associated with high U.S. interest rates. The increased pressures on financing flows and the reduced demand for exports contributed to widespread slowdowns in Latin American economies that in many cases were more severe than the U.S. slowdown. A milder version of such a synchronized slowdown occurred in 2001. There have been exceptions to this pattern, however. For example, many Latin countries experienced solid expansions during the U.S. contraction of 1990-91. A variety of factors, some unique to individual countries, contributed to this good outcome. Perhaps most notable was the launch of the Brady Plan in 1989 to restructure the sovereign external debts of a number of developing countries. This restructuring, along with previous fiscal and financial sector reforms in the wake of the debt crisis of the early 1980s, encouraged renewed capital flows to much of Latin America just around the time that the U.S. economy was slowing down. Linkages between theUnited StatesandLatin AmericaTo better assess the prospects and lessons for Latin America from the recent financial strains, it may be useful to review the various linkages between the two regions. These linkages include trade flows, capital flows of various types, and shared global shocks such as the recent run-ups in commodity prices. Trade has been growing faster than the gross domestic product in many Latin economies. An economic slowdown in a key trading partner generally reduces demand for a country's exports, putting downward pressure on overall activity. However, with the exception of Mexico, most Latin American countries are not particularly exposed to U.S. demand for their exports. A more important linkage for many Latin American countries has been capital flows from the United States and other advanced economies. Differences in the environment for capital flows, for example, appeared to be a key factor behind the much better outcome in 1990-91 compared with 1981-83. Bank lending to Latin America has not regained the leading role it held in the 1970s, but it has grown significantly in recent years after a long period of quiescence. Local-currency bond markets are an important recent development that is attracting some interest from foreign investors, but so far, most of the local-currency issues have been purchased by local investors such as pension funds.1Foreign capital has surged into Latin American equity markets in recent years, helping to push market capitalizations to new heights. Finally, foreign direct investment into Latin America is substantial and has continued to grow. The IMF estimates that total private capital inflows to Latin America jumped to $173 billion last year, compared with an average of $79 billion per year over the previous ten years.2An important factor fostering these flows has been improvements in macroeconomic and microeconomic policies. An interesting and potentially important development in the past five to ten years has been the decline of current account deficits throughout Latin America and the rise of current account surpluses in many countries in the region. External debt burdens also have fallen substantially. In part, these developments reflect greatly improved fiscal discipline. Whereas bond issuance in international markets was an important source of capital in the 1990s, the improving fiscal situation led to negative net international bond issuance for Latin America, on balance, during much of the current decade. Indeed, Brazil recently announced that its foreign assets exceeded its foreign liabilities for the first time ever, reflecting increases in international reserves, buybacks of global bonds, and the retirement of its IMF loans. Large holdings of foreign exchange reserves provide a valuable cushion against fluctuations in foreign demand for a nation's exports or financial assets. It is important, however, to recognize that the decline of net capital flows to Latin America has not been accompanied by an equivalent decline in gross flows. Indeed, globalization has led to increasing gross holdings of both assets and liabilities with the rest of the world. Thus, to a great extent, all countries have become linked by a common global market for capital in a way that we have never seen before. Global shocks constitute a third set of linkages between the United States and Latin America. The recent global increases in commodity prices have generally had negative implications for U.S. growth and positive implications for Latin American growth, as the United States is a net commodity importer and Latin America is a net commodity exporter. High commodity prices have also encouraged foreign investment, and thus capital flows, to help develop the commodity resources of Latin America. Of course, commodity prices themselves are influenced by global economic activity; a U.S. slowdown could put downward pressure on commodity prices, providing an indirect but potentially significant link between the two regions. The Inter-American Development Bank background paper for this session argues forcefully that recent strong global growth and high commodity prices provide a very supportive environment for Latin American economies.3These developments have helped to mitigate the effects on Latin America of financial market strains and the slowdown in U.S. economic activity. It is important not to lose sight of the fact that linkages through trade and capital flows continue to be important and, indeed, have even increased over the past decade or so. Lessons Going ForwardWhat are the lessons that Latin America should draw from the recent financial strains in light of the growing linkages between Latin America and the rest of the world? I think it is extremely important to bolster the great progress that has been made in many countries in the framework of macroeconomic and microeconomic policies and to extend these improvements to those countries that have experienced little improvement so far. The current attractive conditions for commodity exporters should not deceive us into thinking that Latin America has permanently escaped international business cycles. On the macro front, the good economic outcomes in most of Latin America that I described earlier reflect greater discipline in both monetary and fiscal policy. Although there have been some exceptions, central banks in Latin America have demonstrated their resolve to prevent inflation pressures from becoming entrenched. Governments generally have not allowed spending to absorb all of the increased fiscal revenue from rapid growth. In terms of microeconomics, bank regulation has been strengthened, and local equity and bond markets have been developed and are growing in a number of Latin American countries. Financial fragility from currency and maturity mismatches in the structure of debt has been pared back. Together, these structural improvements reduce the vulnerability of the financial system to external and internal shocks. Not only do better macro policy frameworks help to strengthen local financial systems, but they provide confidence to investors that prudent policies will be taken in the face of external shocks. Better microeconomic regulatory policies help markets to operate more efficiently, thereby increasing economic growth, which makes continued monetary and fiscal discipline easier to achieve. Continuing this virtuous circle should be a priority. The recent financial strains and the potential for spillovers to Latin America only heighten the need for policymakers in the region to avoid complacency. Among potential microeconomic improvements, developing markets for residential mortgage securities is obviously an important priority for Latin American countries going forward. Key elements of such markets in any country are solid underwriting standards, meaningful credit disclosure policies, and strong protections for consumers from abusive and deceptive practices. Toward that end, in the United States, the Federal Reserve has recently proposed stricter regulations for mortgage lenders to protect consumers from abusive practices while maintaining the viability of a market for responsible mortgage lending. The proposed rules would tighten standards on higher-priced mortgage loans, which we have defined broadly so as to cover substantially all of the subprime market. The proposed rules also cover a range of practices. For example, the rules would prohibit a lender from engaging in a pattern or practice of making higher-priced loans that borrowers cannot reasonably be expected to repay from income or from assets other than the house. Lenders also would be required to verify the income or assets on which they rely to make credit decisions for higher-priced loans. The Federal Reserve is also working to improve mortgage disclosures through consumer testing so they are more effective. These rules are particularly valuable for households that have little experience with homeownership and short credit histories. Careful underwriting standards and good transparency for borrowers are important building blocks for a healthy market in mortgage-backed securities, which can help to foster the flow of credit to the housing sector in Latin America. Risk Management around the GlobeSound banking regulations are another high priority for Latin America and the rest of the world. In particular, I'd like to emphasize how recent market events underscore that financial institutions around the globe face important risk management challenges. One of the most basic risk-management challenges relates to concentration of risk. As banks have extended their range of activities and involvement in new markets, including the markets for securitized assets, they must, for a number of reasons, be particularly mindful of the potential for concentrations of risk to arise. First, there is simply less information available to evaluate risks on new activities. Second, risk concentrations can be hidden during normal times and may manifest themselves only during times of stress, such as the recent marketwide increase in the demand for liquidity. Third, there is an important linkage between risk concentrations and capital: The concentration of risk of a given portfolio markedly affects the amount of capital that should be held against it. I would like to elaborate on these themes by briefly describing how they can be used to improve the practice of risk management in three fundamental areas: risk identification and measurement, liquidity risk management, and governance and risk control. Risk Identification and MeasurementThe first fundamental of sound risk management relates to risk identification and measurement. Timely and accurate information is the lifeblood of sound risk management. A good risk-management structure is designed to identify the full spectrum of risks across the entire firm, gathering and processing information on an enterprisewide basis in real time. In short, you cannot manage your risks if you do not know what they are. Gathering information should be done with appropriate care and with adequate resources for checking timeliness and veracity. Risk managers should live by the adage, "Trust but verify," being careful not to rely on assessments or data from others without conducting proper due diligence. It is also worth noting that financial institutions should gather information before they see market troubles brewing. In other words, scrambling for information once turbulence sets in is not a good practice. Thus, even if Latin America has not experienced the strains that other markets are experiencing, it is nonetheless important to be proactive about stress testing and scenario analysis. Understanding a firm's true risk exposures requires examining not just risks on the balance sheet, but also off-balance-sheet risks that are sometimes more difficult to identify and often not so easy to quantify. Latent risks from certain complex products and certain risky activities are particularly problematic, because they can manifest themselves when market turbulence sets in. Careful analysis is particularly important for new financial products that have not been fully "road-tested"; this caveat also applies when products with a track record in one country are introduced to another country for the first time or markets develop rapidly in a country. Stress testing and scenario analysis are essential tools in the analysis of risk, because they can reveal potential concentrations of risk that may not be apparent when using information gleaned from normal times. Liquidity Risk ManagementNext, I wish to consider the second fundamental, liquidity risk management. Because of its central role in the business of banking, liquidity risk requires rigorous and effective management. This is a fundamental truth that may have even greater relevance in Latin American markets, where securities tend to be less liquid than in the United States and where banks rarely have the luxury of selling their loans. Recent events have shown that during times of systemwide stress, liquidity shocks can become correlated so that the same factors that can lead to liquidity problems for the bank's assets or off-balance-sheet vehicles can simultaneously put pressure on a bank's own funding liquidity. Again, we see the trouble that risk concentrations can cause if an institution has not tried to identify them in advance and has not taken steps to mitigate their effects. As I mentioned earlier, we also have noticed the potential for liquidity risk to have an impact on capital adequacy. In a few cases, unplanned increases in a bank's balance sheet led some banks to take measures to bolster their capital. Because risk concentrations have the potential to manifest themselves during times of stress and at that time adversely affect capital positions, it is particularly important that firms assess how liquidity events could place pressure on capital levels. In a nutshell, liquidity problems always have the potential to affect bank balance sheets and, in doing so, bank capital adequacy. Governance and Risk ControlThe third fundamental, governance and risk control, has been a key factor that differentiated performance across financial institutions during recent events.4Clearly, senior management of financial institutions must take on a very active and involved role in risk management. In some cases, it appears that managers were not fully aware of the extent to which the risks of the different activities undertaken by the firm could, first, become correlated in times of stress and, second, result in high concentrations of risk exposures. For example, those in senior management may not have been cognizant of a firm's overall concentration to U.S. subprime mortgages, because they did not realize that in addition to the subprime mortgages on their books, they had exposure through off-balance-sheet vehicles holding such mortgages, through claims on counterparties exposed to subprime, and through certain complex securities. Senior managers should encourage risk managers to dig deep to uncover not only risks within each business unit, but also risk concentrations that can arise from the set of activities undertaken by the firm as a whole as well as latent risks--such as hidden risk concentrations that can arise from correlation of risk in times of stress. It can be very difficult to challenge one's colleagues by pointing out business activities that may be creating too much risk, and that is why it is crucial for the risk manager to be known both inside and outside the firm as an independent voice who is influential with top management. Executives also must set the appropriate tone at the top with respect to the importance of independent and unbiased risk evaluation. ConclusionWhile improvements in both macroeconomic and microeconomic policies have helped to make some Latin American countries less vulnerable to outside shocks, the region is not decoupled from the United States and the rest of the world. As globalization has proceeded, Latin America is increasingly connected to the world through global capital flows and capital markets. Further improvements in both macroeconomic and microeconomic policies are imperative to maintain those flows and economic health, particularly in the face of global financial turbulence. One area that merits particular attention is enhancing the management of risk in financial institutions and markets in Latin America as well as emerging markets more generally. Footnotes 1.Committee on the Global Financial System (2007),Financial Stability and Local Currency Bond Markets, CGFS Publications No. 28 (Basel, Bank for International Settlements, June).Return to text 2.International Monetary Fund (2007),World Economic Outlook: Globalization and Inequality, World Economic and Financial Surveys (Washington: International Monetary Fund, October), p. 239.Return to text 3.Inter-American Development Bank Research Department (2008), "All That Glitters May Not Be Gold: Assessing Latin America's Recent Macroeconomic Performance" (Washington: Inter-American Development Bank, April).Return to text 4.See, for example: Senior Supervisors Group (2008), "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Most Recent Market Turbulence (373 KB PDF)" (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March 6).Return to text
Louise L. Roseman, Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems Before the Subcommittee on Domestic and International Monetary Policy, Trade, and Technology, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Gutierrez, Ranking Member Paul, and members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to appear before you to discuss the implementation of the Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act of 2006. I will provide an overview of the Act and of the proposed rule to implement the Act that the Federal Reserve Board and the Secretary of the Treasury (the Agencies) published for comment. I will also highlight the major issues raised in the comments we received. Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act of 2006The Act prohibits gambling businesses from accepting payments in connection with unlawful Internet gambling. Such payments are termed "restricted transactions." The Act also requires the Board and the Secretary of Treasury, in consultation with the Attorney General, to prescribe regulations requiring designated payment systems and their participants to establish policies and procedures reasonably designed to identify and block or otherwise prevent or prohibit the acceptance of restricted transactions. The Act does not spell out which gambling activities are lawful and which are unlawful, but rather relies on the underlying substantive Federal and State laws. The Act does, however, exclude certain intrastate and intratribal wagers from the definition of "unlawful Internet gambling," and also excludes any activity that is allowed under the Interstate Horseracing Act of 1978. The activities that are permissible under the various Federal and State gambling laws are not well-settled and can be subject to varying interpretations. Congress recognized this fact when it included in the Act a "sense of Congress" provision that states that the Interstate Horseracing Act exclusion "is not intended to resolve any existing disagreements over how to interpret the relationship between the Interstate Horseracing Act and other Federal statutes." The Act directs the Agencies to designate payment systems that could be used to facilitate restricted transactions. A designated payment system and its participants must comply with the rule. Congress recognized, however, that it may be difficult to block restricted transactions made in certain payment systems, and directed the Agencies to exempt transactions or designated payment systems from the rule's requirements in those cases where it is not reasonably practical to block restricted transactions. By including this requirement, Congress recognized the importance of an efficient payment system to a well-functioning economy and of ensuring that the Agencies' rule does not have a material adverse effect on payment system efficiency. In addition, the Act requires that the regulations identify the types of policies and procedures, including non-exclusive examples, that the Agencies would deem reasonably designed to prevent or prohibit restricted transactions. The Act also requires the Agencies to ensure that their regulations do not block or otherwise prevent or prohibit transactions related to activity that is explicitly excluded from the definition of unlawful Internet gambling. The Proposed Rule and Comments ReceivedOverview of the proposed rule. Over the course of this rulemaking, the Agencies have done a considerable amount of outreach to payment system representatives, gaming interests, Federal and State regulators, and others. These consultations enabled the Agencies to gain a better understanding of gaming and its regulatory structure, and the role the various payment systems play in facilitating gaming. Although Board staff is quite familiar with the operations of many types of payment systems, this consultation provided a deeper understanding of certain payment systems, such as money transmitting businesses (for example, Western Union, MoneyGram, and PayPal), and allowed the Agencies to better focus on formulating options for policies and procedures that would be practical for those systems to comply with the Act. In October 2007, the Agencies published for comment a proposed rule to implement the Act. The proposed rule (1) designates payment systems that could be used by participants in connection with a restricted transaction, (2) exempts certain participants in certain designated payment systems from the requirements of the regulation, and (3) requires non-exempt participants to establish and implement policies and procedures reasonably designed to prevent or prohibit restricted transactions. For each designated payment system, the proposed rule sets out non-exclusive examples of policies and procedures for non-exempt participants in the system that the Agencies believe are reasonably designed to prevent or prohibit restricted transactions. These examples are tailored to the particular roles participants play in each payment system. The examples include policies and procedures that address methods for conducting due diligence in establishing and maintaining a customer relationship designed to ensure that the customer does not originate or receive restricted transactions through the customer relationship. The examples also include policies and procedures that address remedial actions with respect to a customer if the participant becomes aware that the customer has originated or received restricted transactions through the customer relationship. Examples applicable to card systems and money transmitting businesses include procedures to address ongoing monitoring or testing to detect possible restricted transactions and, in the case of card systems, establishing transaction codes and merchant category codes that enable the card system or card issuer to identify and deny authorization for a restricted transaction. More than 200 organizations and consumers submitted comments on the proposal. Many of the comments were directed toward the Act itself. Most consumers who commented indicated that the Act represents an inappropriate governmental intrusion into citizens' private affairs. Other commenters expressed concern that the Act will exacerbate the U.S.'s difficulties with the World Trade Organization related to Internet gambling. Some banks warned that the cumulative effect of the increased compliance burden of this and other laws will adversely affect the competitiveness of the U.S. payment system. In contrast, some commenters supported the Act's goals, noting the problems that Internet gambling causes for individuals who gamble beyond their means. I will now highlight certain aspects of the proposed rule and the associated comments that the Agencies received. Determination of what constitutes unlawful Internet gambling. Like the Act, the proposed rule did not specify what constitutes unlawful Internet gambling. Lack of clarity on this topic in both the Act and the proposed regulation was the most prominent concern raised by the commenters. Commenters that represent payment systems and their participants stressed that uncertainty about what constitutes unlawful Internet gambling would make compliance with the rule very difficult and burdensome. Commenters generally supported bright-line mechanisms for determining which transactions they should block. Clarity on this point would permit them to design policies and procedures that they could be assured would meet the rule's requirements. A number of commenters recommended that the Agencies develop a list of gambling businesses whose transactions should be blocked. While some of these commenters acknowledged the limited effectiveness of such a list, they desired the certainty and efficiency that it would provide. Other commenters suggested that the rule should place the onus on the Internet gambling business to demonstrate to its bank the legality of its transactions. Still others, including some gambling businesses and many consumers, asked that the rule clarify that certain types of gambling, such as pari-mutuel betting or poker, are lawful. Designated payment systems. The Agencies proposed designating a broad range of payment systems that could be used in connection with Internet gambling. Designated payment systems include automated clearinghouse (ACH) systems, card systems (including credit card, debit card, and prepaid or stored-value systems), check collection systems, money transmitting businesses, and wire transfer systems (such as Fedwire and CHIPS). Commenters generally concurred with the scope of the payment system designations. Exemptions. The Agencies considered instances when it would not be reasonably practical to identify and block, or otherwise prevent or prohibit, restricted transactions. The proposed rule did not exempt from compliance any designated payment system in its entirety, but rather exempted certain participants in the ACH, check collection, and wire transfer systems. With respect todomestictransactions, the proposed rule exempts all participants in these systems except for a participant that would have a customer relationship with an Internet gambling business. The institution that has the customer relationship with that business is in the best position to determine the nature of the customer’s business and whether the customer is likely to receive restricted transactions for credit to its account. The Agencies believe it is not reasonably practical for other parties to transactions in these systems to identify restricted transactions because these systems do not have the functional capabilities in place for identifying and blocking payments made for specific purposes or initiated in specific ways, such as on the Internet. For that reason, some banks recommended that these systems be exempt from the rule altogether. The proposed rule did not include exemptions for any participant in a card system or money transmitting business; rather, the Agencies tailored the examples of policies and procedures to the functional capabilities of those systems and their participants. Due diligence. As I noted earlier, the proposed rule contained examples of policies and procedures that would comply with the rule. Those examples included procedures to conduct due diligence in establishing and maintaining commercial customer relationships to ensure that commercial customers do not originate or receive restricted transactions. Bank commenters generally believed that such due diligence could be performed at the time of account opening for accounts established following the effective date of the regulation if they had a mechanism to readily determine which Internet gambling activity was unlawful. They indicated it would be very difficult and burdensome, however, to ascertain which existing business customers conduct Internet gambling activity, because they have not maintained records on their accounts in a manner that would readily permit identification of such accounts. This requirement would be particularly challenging for the largest banks, which have millions of commercial account relationships. Cross-border transactions. Most unlawful Internet gambling businesses are based outside the United States and therefore do not have account relationships with U.S. financial institutions. Instead, their accounts are held at foreign institutions, and restricted transactions enter the U.S. payment system through cross-border relationships between those foreign institutions and U.S. financial institutions or payment systems. The proposed rule, therefore, places responsibility on U.S. payment system participants that send transactions to, or receive transactions from, foreign institutions to establish policies and procedures reasonably designed to prevent these restricted transactions. For example, a U.S. correspondent bank could require in its account agreement that foreign institutions have policies and procedures in place to avoid sending restricted transactions to the U.S. participant. Commenters stated that measures to prevent foreign institutions from sending restricted transactions to the United States would likely be unworkable. They believed that most foreign banks would not agree to modify their contracts with U.S. banks, particularly if Internet gambling is legal in a foreign institution's home country. Detecting and preventing cross-border Internet gambling transactions presents challenges that differ from other criminal financial transactions, such as money laundering or terrorist financing. Laws in many other jurisdictions impose compliance obligations upon financial institutions with respect to those types of financial crime; there are, however, few comparable compliance requirements with respect to Internet gambling. Given that Internet gambling is lawful in many countries where U.S. banks have correspondent relationships, it may be particularly difficult to craft workable procedures to prevent individuals in the United States from making payments to a foreign Internet gambling company's account at a foreign bank. Moreover, commenters noted that, given the complexity of U.S. gambling law, it is unrealistic for foreign institutions to ascertain which forms of Internet gambling are unlawful and therefore should be prevented. Many of these cross-border correspondent relationships support large volumes of daily payments that are wholly unrelated to gambling. It seems impractical to require U.S. banks to end these relationships because some small percentage of their overall payments may be directed toward unlawful Internet gambling. Therefore, there may be limited options for dealing with the international banking relationships through which most unlawful Internet gambling transactions are processed without causing significant disruption to international payment flows. Overblocking. The proposed rule implements the Act's overblocking provision by stating that nothing in the regulation is intended to suggest that payment systems or their participants must or should block transactions explicitly excluded from the definition of unlawful Internet gambling. Banks and other payment system participants supported the proposed rule's implementation of the Act's overblocking provision, stating that the Act does not require that these gambling transactions, or any other transactions, be processed, but, instead, simply requires that the regulation itself not mandate that these gambling transactions be blocked. Some of these commenters indicated that, even before the Act's passage, they had decided to avoid processing any gambling transactions, even if lawful, because these transactions were not sufficiently profitable to warrant the higher risk they posed. In contrast, some organizations representing gaming interests commented that the rule shouldrequirepayment system participants to process transactions excluded from the Act's definition of unlawful Internet gambling. Certain gaming interests recommended that the rule's policies and procedures for card systems at a minimum include the establishment of separate merchant category codes for the types of gambling that are not defined as unlawful under the Act. As noted in the proposal, the Agencies believe that the Act does not provide the Agencies with the authority to require designated payment systems or participants in these systems to process any gambling transactions, including those transactions excluded from the Act's definition of unlawful Internet gambling, if a system or participant decides for business reasons not to process such transactions. Nor do we possess any other authority that would allow us to do so. ConclusionIn recent years, funding Internet gambling through the U.S. payment system has become more difficult, due in large part to steps card issuers and money transmitting businesses have already taken on their own initiative to prevent these transactions. Board and Treasury staffs are currently focused on developing a final rule that leverages existing practices to prevent unlawful Internet gambling transactions and provides additional and reasonably practical examples of actions that U.S. payment system participants can take to further impede the flow of restricted transactions through the U.S. payment system. As the comments to the proposed rule make clear, this is a challenging task, and the ability of the final rule to achieve a substantial further reduction in the use of the U.S. payment system for unlawful Internet gambling is uncertain. As part of this effort, we are carefully considering all comments received on the proposed rule and determining what modifications may be appropriate in light of the issues raised by those comments. Our objective is to craft a rule to implement the Act as effectively as possible in a manner that does not have a substantial adverse effect on the efficiency of the nation's payment system. I would welcome any questions that the Committee members may have.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from February 19 through March 18, 2008. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Tuesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on March 18, 2008, and of the conference call held on March 10, 2008. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc.htm#calendars. Minutes of Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 10 and 18, 2008:280 KB PDF|HTML
No content found
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin Before the Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship, U.S. Senate Chairman Kerry, Ranking Member Snowe, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to appear before you on behalf of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to discuss the availability of credit to small businesses. Small businesses are critical to the health of the U.S. economy. They employ more than half of private-sector workers, generated well over half of net new jobs annually over the past decade, and create more than half of nonfarm business gross domestic product. Moreover, larger firms often begin as smaller firms that prosper and grow. If small businesses are to continue to provide major benefits to the economy, their access to credit is clearly a high priority. My testimony today will address the unusual stress imposed on credit markets in recent months and how that stress appears to be affecting small businesses. Small Business Access to Credit and the Current Financial Market TurmoilAs we all know, financial market conditions began to deteriorate quite rapidly in the middle of last August. In response to these and subsequent events, and in recognition that growth of the U.S. economy was slowing, the Federal Reserve has, since last fall, taken a number of strong actions aimed at both restoring the normal functioning of financial markets and at stimulating the real economy. Although our actions appear to have helped stabilize the situation, financial markets remain under considerable stress. For example, many lenders have been reluctant to provide credit to counterparties, especially leveraged investors, and have increased the amount of collateral they require to back short-term security financing agreements. Credit availability has also been restricted because some large financial institutions, including some large commercial and investment banks, have reported substantial losses and asset write-downs, which reduced their available capital. The capacity and willingness of some large banks and other financial institutions to extend new credit has also been limited by the reduced availability of external funding from the capital markets for originated assets. The resulting unplanned increases in their balance sheets have strained their capital, thus reducing lending capacity. The good news is that several of these firms have been able to raise new capital, and others are in the process of doing so. However, market stresses are likely to continue to weigh on lending activity in the near future. With this general background in mind, let me now address how the financial market turmoil of the past several months appears to have affected access to credit by small businesses. As you may recall, in my testimony before the House Committee on Small Business in November, I concluded that while credit conditions had no doubt tightened since mid-August, small businesses generally seemed to have been able to retain access to credit.1However, I emphasized that the uncertainty surrounding that conclusion was unusually high, and it was far too early to draw any firm conclusions. To some extent that is still the case, although we clearly have more information to work with now in assessing the effects of financial market turmoil on small business access to credit. In its initial stages, the current financial market turmoil and associated problems in the housing market were focused on markets for securitized assets and affected primarily large financial organizations. In large part because only a small share of small business loans are securitized and because it is the relatively smaller banks that tend to specialize in providing "relationship finance" to small businesses, credit supply to small businesses held up rather well. Still, even in November it was clear that credit conditions had begun to tighten for small businesses. The trend toward tighter credit supply conditions for small businesses has continued since last fall. For example, in the Board's most recent Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, conducted in January, a net one-third of the domestic banks surveyed--a larger net fraction than in the October survey--reported that they had tightened their lending standards on commercial loans to small firms over the previous three months.2Significant net fractions of banks also indicated that they had tightened price terms on commercial loans to both small and large firms. The net fractions of banks reporting tighter lending standards and pricing terms on commercial loans in the January survey were relatively high by historical standards going back to 1990. Actual loan pricing data from our quarterly Survey of Terms of Business Lending are broadly consistent with the qualitative data from the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey. For example, data from our most recent survey, taken in February, indicate that the average interest rate on commercial loans relative to the bank's cost of funds (the bank's spread) rose modestly from the corresponding survey week of three months earlier. Of particular importance for small businesses, however, are the facts that these spreads jumped significantly both on loans originated by smaller U.S. banks and on smaller commercial loans--that is, those loans below $100,000. Despite tighter credit standards and loan terms, growth in the dollar amount of commercial loans at U.S. banks was quite well maintained in the first quarter of 2008. Particularly noteworthy from the point of view of small businesses is the fact that after growing almost 20 percent in the fourth quarter of 2007, commercial loans at small banks continued to expand at a rate of almost 12 percent in this year's first quarter.3Thus, although slowing somewhat, commercial loan growth has held up in recent months even though banks' terms have tightened and economic growth has slowed, the latter driving down the demand for small business and other commercial loans. On balance, this suggests that credit is generally available, albeit at a higher cost. Another source of information about small business credit supply conditions is the monthly survey of the National Federation of Independent Businesses (NFIB). The results of the most recent NFIB survey, conducted in March, suggest that credit supply conditions for small businesses have held up fairly well over the past several months. For example, over the past few quarters only about 3 percent of survey respondents have reported that financing conditions and interest rates were their main business concern, and for March that number was only 2 percent.4In addition, according to the NFIB survey, the average short-term interest rate paid by borrowers has remained at the low end of its historical range. On a less positive note, in recent months the net percentage of NFIB survey respondents that reported credit was harder to obtain over the previous three months and the net percentage that expected credit conditions to tighten over the next three months have been at the upper end of their ranges observed over the past few years. Still, these percentages have remained well below their highs reached in the early 1990s and are below their levels from last September's survey when they temporarily spiked up. On the demand side, the NFIB survey's results are quite pessimistic. For example, the survey's index of small business optimism has dropped to its lowest level since the monthly surveys began in 1986, as the net percentage of borrowers that believe it is a good time to expand their business has fallen to the bottom of its range over the past two decades. This contrasts sharply with survey responses last September which indicated that the NFIB's index of small business optimism and the fraction of firms that considered the next three months "a good time to expand" had remained at levels similar to those seen in the first half of 2007. If demand conditions continue to deteriorate, reduced demand for loans could lead to future declines in small business loans even if credit supply conditions remain about the same. A less comforting picture of small business credit supply conditions is provided by the Duke University/CFO Magazine Global Business Outlook survey, conducted most recently in March. About one-third of the chief financial officers (CFOs) of small businesses who responded said credit was more costly, less available, or both as a result of the credit market turmoil. This proportion is up slightly from last September, when that sentiment was reported by about one-fourth of responding small business CFOs. This survey also asks respondents to rank their top three concerns, with the (changing) options given in the survey. "Credit markets/interest rates" was ranked as the second top concern among small business CFOs in both the March 2008 and the September 2007 surveys.5 Perhaps one of the most important concerns about the future prospects for small business access to credit is that many small businesses use real estate assets to secure their loans. For example, data from our 2003 Survey of Small Business Finances (SSBF) indicate that 45 percent of the total dollar amount of small business loans outstanding in 2003 was collateralized by some type of real estate asset.6About 37 percent was collateralized by business real estate assets, and 15 percent was secured with "personal" real estate.7Looking forward, continuing declines in the value of their real estate assets clearly have the potential to substantially affect the ability of those small businesses to borrow. Indeed, anecdotal stories to this effect have already appeared in the press. Similarly, declines in the value of real estate assets held by banks and other lenders could affect their willingness and ability to supply loans, as real estate losses use up capital that could otherwise be used for making new loans. Indeed, there are reasons to believe that these forces are currently at work not only at large banks, where the initial problems were observed, but across the full size spectrum of banking organizations. As noted previously, more stringent loan terms are already in place. In addition, banks across all size groups, including community banks, have recently experienced a sharp deterioration in credit quality, mostly within loans secured by real estate. Moreover, if banks continue to place on their balance sheets some assets that they had expected instead to place in conduits or otherwise sell to investors, the move could crowd out loans to small businesses and other borrowers. On a more positive note, the vast majority of U.S. banks remain well capitalized. Going forward, this should help these banks to maintain their lending capacity. In addition, lender constraints on small business loans may be mitigated somewhat by loan guarantees provided by the Small Business Administration (SBA). The interdependencies between small business and household finance are among the most interesting and least understood aspects of small business access to credit. In addition to personal real estate assets, other household assets such as automobiles may be used as collateral for small business loans, and personal credit cards and savings accounts are sometimes used to help finance a small business. For example, our SSBF documents that, in 2003, almost 47 percent of small businesses used personal credit cards in the conduct of their business. At that time, most of this use appeared to have been for convenience rather than for longer-term borrowing. However, to the extent that small businesses become more reliant on credit cards as a source of funding, perhaps because of a decline in their own financial condition or because of a tightening in other aspects of credit supply, they may end up facing higher interest rates than would otherwise be the case. ConclusionIn conclusion, the health of the U.S. economy depends importantly on the vitality of the small business sector, and continued access to credit on competitive terms is necessary for that vitality. On balance, since last fall credit supply conditions have almost surely tightened for the vast majority of small businesses. Credit appears to be generally available, but at a higher cost. Only a small fraction of small business owners report that credit is their main business concern. Demand for their products is much more problematic. Looking forward, continuing declines in the value of small businesses' real estate assets have the potential to substantially affect the ability of those small businesses to borrow. Similarly, declines in the value of real estate may affect the ability and willingness of banks and other lenders to supply loans. Indeed, this is likely already occurring to some extent at some banks across the full spectrum of bank sizes. Lastly, because of interdependencies between small business and household finance, declines in the financial condition of households can also affect both the terms of those households' small businesses loans and their ability to borrow. For all of these reasons, the Federal Reserve will continue to monitor closely the effects of financial market conditions on small business access to credit. More generally, I assure you that the good health of the small business sector is an important consideration for the Federal Reserve as we strive to fulfill the dual mandate given to us by the Congress to promote both price stability and sustainable economic growth. Footnotes 1.Frederic S. Mishkin (2007), "Availability of Credit to Small Businesses," statement before the Committee on Small Business, U.S. House of Representatives, November 7.Return to text 2.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), "The January 2008 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices" (January). In October, a net 10 percent of banks reported tightening lending standards to smaller firms. The net percent of banks is defined as the percent tightening less the percent easing standards.Return to text 3.The first quarter's numbers have been adjusted for some statistical anomalies in February.Return to text 4.These levels are far below their peaks of the early 1980s, when more than one-third of respondents reported that financing conditions were their main concern.Return to text 5.The top concern in March was customer demand, whereas the top concern in September was the cost of labor.Return to text 6.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2003), "2003 Survey of Small Business Finances"; Traci L. MachandJohn D. Wolken (2006),"Financial Services Used by Small Businesses: Evidence from the 2003 Survey of Small Business Finances (185 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 92 (October), pp. A167-A195.Return to text 7.The two components sum to more than 45 percent because some loans are collateralized by both business and personal real estate.Return to text
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Chairman Dodd, Senator Shelby, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to appear today to provide the Committee with information on the regulatory framework that applies to investments by sovereign wealth funds in U.S. banks and bank holding companies. The Board commends the Committee for holding this hearing and for considering the important public policy issues raised by these investments. As requested, I intend to focus my testimony on the recent sovereign wealth fund investments in U.S. financial institutions and their financial implications, the regulations applicable to investments by these funds in U.S. banking organizations and in foreign banking organizations with U.S. banking operations, and the tools available to the federal banking agencies to ensure that these investments comply with U.S. law. I will begin with some general information about sovereign wealth funds and U.S. banking organizations and a summary of recent investments by sovereign wealth funds in U.S. banks and bank holding companies. Then I will describe the relevant U.S. banking laws applicable to investments by sovereign wealth funds in banks and bank holding companies and the treatment under those laws of these funds by the Federal Reserve. Sovereign Wealth FundsBroadly speaking, a sovereign wealth fund is an investment fund that is owned by a national or state government. Globally, there are about 30 to 40 sovereign wealth funds at this time. Many sovereign wealth funds were originally set up to help stabilize revenues from the sale of a commodity, such as oil, natural gas or other commodities. They also provide a way to preserve and grow wealth for future generations. Chile, Botswana and Kiribati have established sovereign wealth funds based on their revenues from the sales of copper, diamonds, and phosphate. Examples of governments that have established funds using oil revenues include Norway, Kuwait, Qatar, and the state of Alaska. Some developed nations have established sovereign wealth funds using social security or government pension fund surpluses and contributions from taxes and other government revenues. These types of funds invest in a wide range of domestic and foreign assets with the aim of supplementing the financing of social security or government pension programs. Countries with this type of fund include France, Australia, and New Zealand. Other sovereign wealth funds have been established to make profitable use of foreign exchange accumulated as the result of trade imbalances or foreign exchange intervention. Countries with this type of fund include Singapore, Korea, and China. To achieve their objective of preserving and growing wealth for future generations or of profiting from often temporary surpluses of foreign exchange, sovereign wealth funds--like any investment fund--seek to earn an appropriate risk-adjusted return on the funds that they invest. Sovereign wealth funds apply many of the same kinds of strategies that other investment funds apply. Some funds, such as Norway's, engage solely in making small portfolio investments--i.e., their equity investments are typically below 10 percent of the voting shares of a firm. Others, such as Singapore's Temasek Holdings (Temasek), take substantial stakes in firms in selected domestic and foreign industries. One of the reasons that sovereign wealth funds have attracted more attention in the past year is their size. The largest funds are very large. For example, Norway's sovereign wealth fund reports total assets of over $350 billion; China's fund and Singapore's two funds each manage assets of at least $100 billion. This places sovereign wealth funds among the largest investment funds worldwide. However, while the estimated $2 to $3 trillion sovereign wealth funds manage exceeds the $1.4 trillion managed by hedge funds, it is much less than the over $15 trillion managed by pension funds, the $16 trillion managed by insurance companies, or the $21 trillion managed by investment companies.1It is an even smaller fraction of global debt and equity securities, which exceed $100 trillion. Another factor that has made sovereign wealth funds stand out in recent years has been their rapid growth. Estimates suggest that sovereign wealth funds have been growing at a remarkable pace in recent years, possibly quadrupling in size between 2003 and 2007. This rapid growth arises from the growth in revenues from the sale of oil and other commodities, following significant increases in commodities prices. It also arises from the rapid accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and persistent current account imbalances. A third reason that sovereign wealth funds have attracted attention in the United States recently has been their investments in U.S. financial institutions, which is what I will talk about today. Investments of Sovereign Wealth Funds inU.S.Financial Services CompaniesThe U.S. banking system is being challenged by current market conditions. Insured commercial banks have experienced deterioration in asset quality and earnings, much attributable to the effect of the slowing residential housing market on the quality of residential mortgage and construction loans. Fortunately, banks encountered these conditions after a sustained period of strong earnings and capital accumulation that strengthened the financial condition of the industry, and should reduce potential threats to their solvency from current market conditions. Several large U.S. banking organizations have also recently raised new capital. That capital has come from a broad range of sources, including public offerings, private investors, private and public equity firms and sovereign wealth funds. The ability of U.S. financial institutions to raise large amounts of capital from a diverse domestic and international investor base under stress conditions evidences market confidence in the transparency and ultimate resiliency of these institutions. The Federal Reserve has welcomed and encouraged capital raising initiatives that buttress the financial strength of U.S. financial institutions and better positions these institutions to weather the current financial turmoil. Since August 2007, U.S. banking organizations have raised approximately $100 billion in new capital. During this period, sovereign wealth funds have been an important source of capital for U.S. financial institutions. Sovereign wealth funds made direct investments totaling more than $30 billion in U.S. financial firms, including approximately $17 billion in commercial banking organizations. The recent wave of sovereign wealth fund investments in U.S. financial institutions consists of noncontrolling investments below 10 percent (and often below 5 percent) of voting equity. For example, Citigroup recently received a capital infusion from the Kuwait Investment Authority (KIA), the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority (ADIA), and the Government of Singapore Investment Corporation (GIC), one of Singapore's two sovereign investment funds. None of these funds acquired more than 5 percent of Citigroup's total equity. Three sovereign wealth funds, the Korea Investment Corporation (KIC), Temasek, and KIA, each made similar noncontrolling investments in convertible preferred stock in Merrill Lynch and Co. These are all passive investments that have not triggered formal review under U.S. banking law, as I will explain in a moment. The press releases from the financial institutions announcing each of these recent investments have generally emphasized that these sovereign investors will not seek to exercise control over the target company and will not have representation on the target company's board of directors or take part in its management. Thresholds for Federal Reserve ReviewAs a general matter, the same statutory and regulatory thresholds for review by the federal banking agencies apply to investments by sovereign wealth funds as apply to investments by other domestic and foreign investors in U.S. banks and bank holding companies. These requirements are established in two federal statutes, the Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act) and the Change in Bank Control Act (CIBC Act).2The BHC Act requires any company to obtain approval from the Federal Reserve before making a direct or indirect investment in a U.S. bank or bank holding company if the investment meets certain thresholds. In particular, the BHC Act requires Board review when a company acquires: (1) ownership or control of 25 percent or more of any class of voting securities of the bank or bank holding company, (2) control of the election of a majority of the board of directors of the bank or bank holding company, or (3) the ability to exercise a controlling influence over the management or policies of the bank or bank holding company. A formal determination that a company exercises a controlling influence over the management or policies of a bank or bank holding company may only be made after the Board has provided notice to the company and offered an opportunity for a hearing. In determining whether an investor may exercise a controlling influence over the management or policies of a U.S. bank or bank holding company for purposes of the BHC Act, the Board considers the size of the investment, the involvement of the investor in the management of the bank or bank holding company, any business relationships between the investor and the bank or bank holding company, and other relevant factors indicating an intent or ability to significantly influence the management or operations of the bank or bank holding company. The BHC Act presumes that an investor that controls less than 5 percent of the voting shares of a U.S. bank or bank holding company does not have a controlling influence over that bank or bank holding company, and the Board generally has not found that a controlling influence exists if the investment represents less than 10 percent of the bank or bank holding company's voting shares. A company that meets any of these thresholds is called a "bank holding company" and, in addition to the prior approval process, is subject by statute to supervision by the Federal Reserve, including examination, reporting, and capital requirements, as well as to the Act's restrictions on the mixing of banking and commerce. Moreover, a company that makes an investment that causes it to be a bank holding company is subject to a prior review requirement at a lower threshold for any investments in additional banks or bank holding companies. If a company already controls one U.S. bank, the company is required by statute to obtain approval from the Federal Reserve prior to acquiring more than 5 percent of the voting shares of another U.S. bank or bank holding company. There is one additional requirement governing the applicability of the BHC Act that is noteworthy. The BHC Act applies only to investments in banks and bank holding companies that are made by "companies." The definition of "company" in the Act specifies a number of types of entities that fall within the definition, including corporations, partnerships, and trusts. However, the definition of a company does not reference governments. On this basis, the Board has long held that the provisions of the BHC Act do not apply to direct investments made by the U.S. government or by any state or foreign government. The BHC Act specifically excludes from its coverage a corporation controlled by the United States or by a state government. Thus, investment companies controlled by the states of Alaska and New Jersey, for example, are specifically excluded from the requirements of the BHC Act. The exclusion does not, on its face, apply to companies controlled by foreign governments and, as I will discuss in more detail below, the Board has not extended this exclusion to companies controlled by foreign governments that make investments in U.S. banks and bank holding companies. Foreign governments to date have primarily invested through sovereign wealth funds that are companies controlled by the foreign government. The effect of the Board's long-standing interpretation is that a sovereign wealth fund that seeks to make an investment in a U.S. bank or bank holding company that exceeds the thresholds in the BHC Act would be required to obtain Board approval prior to making the investment and would become subject to the other provisions of the BHC Act, but its parent foreign government would not. Investments by sovereign wealth funds that do not trigger the requirements of the BHC Act may nevertheless require approval from a federal banking agency under the CIBC Act. Prior approval from the Federal Reserve under the CIBC Act generally is required for any acquisition of 10 percent or more of any class of voting securities of a state member bank or bank holding company. Unlike the BHC Act, which imposes ongoing restrictions on the nonbanking activities of corporate owners of banks as well as ongoing reporting, examination, capital, and other requirements, the CIBC Act does not impose any activity limitations or any ongoing supervisory requirements on owners of banks. When an investor applies for the prior approval of the Federal Reserve to make an investment in a bank or bank holding company that triggers the review thresholds under the BHC Act or the CIBC Act, the Federal Reserve evaluates the application under the statutory requirements of those Acts. The BHC Act mandates that the Federal Reserve consider a number of factors when acting on BHC Act applications, including competitive, supervisory, financial and managerial factors (the last includes consideration of the competence, experience, and integrity of the officers, directors, and principal shareholders of the company or bank). The CIBC Act also requires the federal banking agency to consider specific factors, including competitive and informational standards as well as whether the transaction would jeopardize the financial stability of the bank, prejudice the interests of the depositors of the bank, or result in an adverse effect on the Deposit Insurance Fund. Most sovereign wealth funds, like many other investors including U.S. investment banking firms, hedge funds, and private equity pools, have structured their investments so as not to trigger the thresholds for review and approval under either the BHC Act or the CIBC Act. Instead, sovereign wealth funds have limited their investments to amounts that represent less than 10 percent of the voting shares of the banking organization and have designed their investments to be passive and without the connections or relationships that might allow the sovereign wealth funds to control the U.S. banking organization. Investments of Sovereign Wealth Funds in Foreign Banking OrganizationsSeveral sovereign wealth funds, including some that have attracted attention with their recent investments in U.S. financial institutions, also have interests in foreign banks with U.S. operations. The levels of ownership range from well below 10 percent to, in some cases, interests that indicate control of the foreign bank. These foreign banks generally conduct their U.S. banking operations through direct offices--branches and agencies; none controlled by a sovereign wealth fund currently controls a U.S. bank subsidiary. U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks do not have all of the powers of U.S. bank branches. Specifically, U.S. branches of foreign banks are not permitted to accept retail deposits (i.e., deposits less than $100,000), except for a small number of grandfathered cases. Agencies operated by foreign banks cannot accept deposits from citizens or residents of the United States. Sovereign wealth funds with interests in foreign banks that operate U.S. branches and agencies include Temasek, GIC, China Investment Corporation (CIC), Central Huijin Investment Company (Huijin),3KIA, and ADIA. After 1991, the International Banking Act (IBA) provided that any foreign bank seeking to establish a U.S. branch or agency must apply to the Federal Reserve for prior approval. All foreign banks controlled by sovereign wealth funds that have U.S. branches or agencies established those branches or agencies before the IBA was amended in 1991 to require Federal Reserve approval of the establishment by foreign banks of new U.S. branches and agencies.4Any future applications by foreign banks controlled by sovereign wealth funds to establish U.S. branches and agencies would be evaluated by the Federal Reserve pursuant to the standards in the IBA. An important factor the Federal Reserve is required to consider under the IBA is whether the foreign bank is supervised on a comprehensive consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The Federal Reserve also examines how the supervisor monitors relationships and transactions between the foreign bank and any related party, including controlling sovereign wealth funds and other controlling shareholders. A number of additional factors are also considered, including the anti-money laundering regime of the foreign bank and its supervisor, the consent of the appropriate home country authorities, the financial and managerial resources of the foreign bank, and whether the foreign bank and any controlling company (including any controlling sovereign wealth fund) have made adequate assurances concerning provision of information to the Federal Reserve about its operations and activities. The Federal Reserve's Approach to Foreign Government OwnershipAs I noted above, the Federal Reserve has drawn a distinction between foreign governments themselves, which are not treated as "companies" subject to the BHC Act, and government-owned entities such as sovereign wealth funds, which are treated as companies and are subject to the BHC Act. The position that the BHC Act does not apply to foreign governments themselves is long held by the Board.5It noted this view and revisited the reasons for this position in 1982 in connection with an application by an Italian government-owned bank to acquire a controlling interest in a U.S. bank.6At that time, the Board reiterated its view that the BHC Act should not be applied to the Italian government. At the same time, the Board noted that significant policy issues were raised by foreign government ownership of a U.S. bank, including in particular issues related to the mixing of banking and commerce and to interstate banking in the United States (which was largely prohibited at the time). The Board invited Congress to address the issue and noted that the concept of national treatment could justify applying the BHC Act to foreign government-owned entities.7 In 1988, an Italian bank controlled by the Italian government again applied to the Federal Reserve to acquire a U.S. bank. The Board carefully considered the applicability of the BHC Act to foreign governments and foreign government-owned entities and reiterated its earlier conclusion that, as a legal matter, foreign governments were not themselves "companies" for purposes of the BHC Act and were therefore not covered by the Act. The Board found, however, that the investment fund controlled by the Italian Government, the Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale (IRI), was structured as a corporate vehicle and was therefore a company under the Act and subject to the Act.8 At the same time, the Board indicated its willingness to grant exemptions from the nonbanking restrictions in the BHC Act to IRI for its commercial investments, citing IRI's status as a nonoperating instrumentality for holding government interests. The Board also expressed its willingness to apply exemptions available under the BHC Act to the nonbanking investments of other foreign government-owned companies of a character similar to that of IRI, as long as their foreign bank subsidiaries conducted banking in the United States only through branches and agencies and not through U.S. subsidiary banks. This approach limited the extraterritorial effects of U.S. economic regulation on foreign companies in recognition of the fact that foreign countries may choose to organize their economies differently from the United States. It also kept the United States open to a significant number of foreign banking organizations whose U.S. banking activities might otherwise have been severely curtailed. Notwithstanding the availability of this exemption for government-owned companies (including sovereign wealth funds) that control foreign banks with U.S. banking operations, the U.S. operations of foreign banks controlled by government-owned companies are subject to the same degree of U.S. regulation and supervision as the U.S. operations of other foreign banks. Regulation of Bank Holding CompaniesSince a sovereign wealth fund is a company for purposes of the BHC Act, if a fund were to acquire control of a U.S. bank or bank holding company, it would be treated as a bank holding company and would be subject to the U.S. regulatory regime applicable to such companies. If a foreign bank that is owned by a sovereign wealth fund were to acquire control of a U.S. bank, that foreign bank would also be subject to the regulatory regime applicable to other bank holding companies. This regime is designed in significant part to help ensure the safety and soundness of U.S. bank subsidiaries of bank holding companies. Under the BHC Act, the Board has broad authority to prevent bank holding companies from engaging in unsafe or unsound practices. As part of the regulatory and supervisory process, the Board may examine bank holding companies and their subsidiaries where necessary or appropriate to protect the U.S. bank affiliates and has the authority to require periodic and annual reporting in many areas, including on ownership, risk management and financial condition. Among the most important tools that U.S. bank regulators have to protect the safety and soundness of U.S. banks are the legal restrictions that limit the ability of a bank to lend to affiliates. Section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act provides that a bank may not lend more than 10 percent of its capital to any one affiliate or more than 20 percent of its capital to all affiliates combined. Of equal importance, any loan to an affiliate must be either fully collateralized by cash or U.S. Treasury securities or overcollateralized by other assets in an amount of 10 to 30 percent, depending on the type of asset or instrument used to secure the loan. Section 23A also prohibits the purchase of low-quality assets by a U.S. bank from its affiliates. Section 23B of the Federal Reserve Act requires that all transactions between a bank and its affiliates be conducted only on an arms-length basis. These restrictions are designed to limit the ability of an owner of a bank to exploit the bank for the benefit of the rest of the organization. With respect to a U.S. bank or bank holding company that might be owned by a sovereign wealth fund, these restrictions on transactions with affiliates would apply to transactions by the bank with the sovereign wealth fund itself as well as to transactions with companies controlled by the sovereign wealth fund. Moreover, the restrictions would apply to companies controlled by the same government through other sovereign wealth funds of that government. Thus, a U.S. bank controlled by a sovereign wealth fund would not be permitted to fund substantially the operations of other companies controlled by the same sovereign wealth fund or its government owner, or provide any uncollateralized loans to such companies, or purchase low-quality assets from those companies. In this regard, it would be important for any U.S. bank that might come to be controlled by a sovereign wealth fund to have information on which companies are controlled by the fund and by the government that owns the fund. This type of transparency would be necessary to allow the bank to comply with the affiliate transaction restrictions of sections 23A and 23B. ConclusionSovereign wealth funds have recently made significant investments in U.S. financial institutions, thereby improving the capital position of these firms and demonstrating confidence in the viability of these U.S. firms. These investments have also attracted much attention and there is no doubt that sovereign wealth funds are growing in size and number and are making increasingly significant investments in financial services organizations worldwide. But foreign government-owned entities, including sovereign wealth funds, have owned foreign banks with U.S. operations for many years. The Board has long taken the position that while foreign governments themselves are not companies subject to the BHC Act, foreign government-owned corporations such as sovereign wealth funds are companies. Thus any proposed controlling investment in a U.S. bank or bank holding company by a sovereign wealth fund would be subject to Federal Reserve approval. Sovereign wealth funds, like private investment funds, U.S. state investment vehicles, hedge funds, private equity firms, and many other investors, have generally made investments at levels that are not large enough to trigger the thresholds for review and approval by the federal banking agencies under the federal banking laws. If a sovereign wealth fund were to make an investment in a U.S. banking organization that triggers one of these thresholds, the application would be evaluated by the Federal Reserve or other appropriate federal banking agency under the relevant statutes with no preference or handicap relative to other investors. Any sovereign wealth fund controlling a U.S. bank or bank holding company would be required to operate subject to the limitations on affiliate transactions in sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act and the bank or bank holding company would be subject to the full range of regulatory and supervisory tools available to the Board. I appreciate the opportunity to explain these issues to the Committee. Footnotes 1.The figures for assets managed by pension funds, insurance companies, and investment companies are for OECD countries only.Return to text 2.A third federal statute, the Savings and Loan Holding Company Act, governs investments in companies that control savings associations. The thresholds and standards for review of investments in savings associations established in that act are administered by the Office of Thrift Supervision and are nearly identical to those established by the BHC Act.Return to text 3.Huijin, a Chinese company with a mandate to improve corporate governance and initiate reforms in the state-owned financial sector, was created to act as a government holding company for Chinese state-owned banks acquired as a result of capital injections by the Chinese government. Huijin is expected to be acquired by CIC in the near future.Return to text 4.Huijin acquired its controlling interest in one foreign bank, Bank of China, after the IBA was amended, but also after the establishment of Bank of China’s U.S. branches. When a company makes a controlling investment in a foreign bank that already has U.S. branches or agencies, under Federal Reserve regulations the foreign bank is required to notify the Federal Reserve within ten days of the investment and report the shareholding in annual filings with the Federal Reserve.Return to text 5.Governor John P. LaWare discussed this position and other issues related to foreign government ownership of foreign banks operating in the United States in testimony before the House Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs in 1992. 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 495 (1992).Return to text 6.Banca Commerciale Italiana, 68 Federal Reserve Bulletin 423 (1982).Return to text 7.Later in 1982, a subcommittee of the House Committee on Government Operations held hearings on foreign government and foreign investor control of U.S. banks.Hearing on Foreign Government and Foreign Investor Control ofU.S.Banks, before the Commerce, Consumer, and Monetary Affairs Subcommittee of the House Committee on Government Operations, 97 Cong. 2 Sess. (Government Printing Office, 1982). No legislation, however, was proposed.Return to text 8.Letter from William W. Wiles, Secretary of the Board, to Patricia S. Skigen (August 19, 1988).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public website,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur.Sella Holding Banca, S.p.A., Biella, ItalySella Holding Banca, S.p.A. d/b/a Banca Sella, S.p.A., Miami Agency, Miami, FloridaWritten Agreement dated April 12, 2006Terminated March 26, 2008
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public website,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur. Traders Bank, Spencer, West VirginiaWritten Agreement dated July 13, 2004Terminated April 4, 2008
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond's Credit Market Symposium, Charlotte, North Carolina The recent market turmoil certainly has underscored how banking and financial intermediation have been changing, and it has taught some important lessons about the implications for financial stability that I don't believe were previously well understood. Commercial banks and other financial market participants need to incorporate those lessons into their risk-management practices. Bank supervisors need to encourage and monitor banks' efforts to strengthen their practices and we need to consider how regulatory and supervisory policies should be modified to reinforce incentives for sound practices. Finally, changes in the ways savings are channeled to borrowers have also affected the role of the nonbank sector. Central banks and other policymakers need to think carefully about the implications of these changes for financial stability and the appropriate prudential regulation of nonbank financial institutions.1 The Changing Business of BankingEven before the recent market turmoil, it was abundantly clear that the business of banking has changed quite significantly over the past several decades. The primary impetus for change has been intensified competitive pressures from the securities markets. Changes in technology (for example, the development and expansion of credit-scoring techniques) have allowed a larger share of credit extensions to households and businesses to be packaged in securities and sold to entities that often can fund the securities more cheaply than banks can fund loans. The effects probably have been greatest for the U.S. household sector. Securitization of residential mortgages began in the 1970s; the share of outstanding mortgages that have been securitized grew fairly steadily throughout the 1980s and 1990s and has fluctuated between 50 and 60 percent since then. Nonmortgage consumer credit (credit card and installment debt) began to be securitized in the late 1980s, and in recent years more than 20 percent of the outstanding stock has been securitized. Until the summer of 2007, there was very strong demand for securitized credit from mutual funds, pension funds, and other institutional investors. Throughout that period, household wealth was rising rapidly, and, directly or indirectly, households were allocating an increasing share of their wealth to vehicles that were managed or advised by professional asset managers. At the same time, advances in the technology of modeling, pricing, and trading of risk over the past several decades gave added impetus to the migration of credit to securities markets. Competition from the securities market has significantly affected all segments of banking, but the most dramatic changes have occurred at the very largest banks. One could say that their strategic response was, "If you can't beat them, join them." Freed from the constraints of the Glass-Steagall Act by incremental regulatory changes that were expanded and codified in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999, the very largest banking organizations have significantly increased their capital markets businesses, including arranging and underwriting securitizations, securities custody, prime brokerage, and both over-the-counter and exchange-traded derivatives. They have also made significant inroads into both traditional asset management and the management of hedge funds. Indeed, the largest commercial banks are now major competitors in many of the business lines that were historically viewed as the province of investment banks. Together, the very large commercial and investment banks have become indispensable to the efficiency and stability of the securities markets. For example, the $2 trillion hedge fund sector is critically dependent on a relatively small number of commercial and investment banks that serve as secured creditors and derivatives counterparties. And, as the financial market turmoil has revealed, banks provide liquidity support to various short-term financial markets, including the commercial paper market and markets for various types of tax-exempt debt. Competition from securities markets has also affected smaller banks significantly, though less dramatically than larger banks. For example, the portfolio share of commercial real estate loans, which are not amenable to standardization and therefore are difficult to securitize, has increased markedly. Setting aside the 100 largest banks, the share of commercial real estate loans in bank loan portfolios nearly doubled over the past 10 years and is approaching 50 percent. The portfolio share at these banks of residential mortgage and other consumer loans, which are more readily securitized, fell by 20 percentage points over the same period. The Implications for Financial Stability from the Recent Market TurmoilThe changing business of the largest commercial banks means that threats to financial stability do not necessarily come from traditional sources such as a deposit run or a deterioration in a bank's portfolio of business loans. The largest banks' capital markets businesses have given rise to new threats to financial stability. These threats stem from banks' securitization activity, from the complexity of banks' capital markets activity, and from the services that banks provide to the asset-management industry, including hedge funds. And risks that are more traditional to banking, such as liquidity risk and concentration risk, have appeared in new forms. The securitization activity of the largest banks is often described as following an originate-to-distribute model. Chairman Bernanke described this model in some detail in a speech he gave last week in Richmond.2In an originate-to-distribute model of banking, assets are originated to be packaged into securities, which are distributed broadly. However, in the recent market turmoil, problems arose at both ends of the originate-to-distribute chain as it was being applied to subprime mortgages. The quality of subprime origination declined because of a serious erosion in underwriting standards at banks and especially at nonbanks. Underwriting standards for subprime mortgages fell as loans were increasingly made on the basis of expected increases in collateral value, without a careful evaluation of the borrower's ability to repay. Several years of rapidly rising house prices had reduced the delinquency rates on mortgages with historically high loan-to-value ratios, making these mortgages look less risky than they, in fact, turned out to be. As loan amounts rose relative to the value of properties, the performance of the subprime mortgage sector as a whole became sensitive to even small declines in house prices, with the distressing results that we have seen since house price growth decelerated beginning in 2006. A similar decline in underwriting standards occurred in other market segments, such as the market for leveraged loans, where banks increasingly originated loans with less-stringent covenants through the first half of last year. More generally, insufficient appreciation that economic conditions might not always be benign and that trading conditions in markets might not always be highly liquid led to an underpricing of both credit and liquidity risks. At the other end of the originate-to-distribute chain, a good part of the risk associated with the securitization of subprime mortgages was not distributed into the market but was retained by banks. The most glaring example is their exposures to super senior tranches of collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) that had invested in subprime mortgage-backed securities. Super senior CDO tranches--the last to bear the costs of defaults on the underlying mortgages--were considered to be extremely safe investments, and little of the risk of these instruments was truly distributed into the market. Three things hindered the distribution of super senior CDO risk. First, underwriters sold some of the risk to off-balance-sheet vehicles, but they also provided explicit or implicit liquidity backstops to the vehicles. Much of this risk came back onto banks' balance sheets when liquidity pressures emerged in the second half of last year. Second, underwriters chose to retain some of the super senior exposure, in some cases reportedly because they met some resistance when they attempted to sell them at very slim spreads. The underwriters evidently misjudged the risk of those positions, in some cases because they relied too heavily on external triple-A ratings. Third, underwriters hedged some of the risk with monoline financial guarantors. But some of the guarantors took on so much subprime-related risk that their financial condition had become highly correlated with the performance of the subprime mortgage sector, which has called into question the effectiveness of those hedges. As I mentioned earlier, the growth of securitization is in large part a response to the growing demands of institutional investors for fixed-income securities. These investors clearly had a financial incentive to do better due diligence on the subprime risks they were taking on, but they largely failed to do so. We can only speculate as to why this was the case. I see three possibilities: First, they underestimated the potential for a nationwide decline in house prices; second, they relied on credit-rating agency analyses that have proven to be inadequate; or third, they simply misunderstood the risk of these often very complex securities. The complexity of CDOs is one example of a widespread increase in the complexity of the capital market activities in which the largest banks now engage. Some banks' failure to adequately manage this complexity has weakened financial stability in the current market turmoil. CDOs and other structured credit products can be very complicated. Among the CDOs that invested in subprime mortgage-backed securities, it was common for a single CDO to own hundreds of different mortgage-backed securities, each with its own pool of underlying mortgage loans. Clearly, the valuation of such products and the measurement and hedging of the risks they entail are very complicated. Securities pools reduce idiosyncratic risk--the potential for problems particular to individual borrowers to have a material effect on overall values--but they are quite subject to systematic risk from broad-based macroeconomic developments that affect all loans at the same time. I believe it is fair to say that the creation of new, innovative financial products outstripped banks' risk-management capabilities. As I noted earlier, some banks that chose to hold super senior CDO securities did so because they trusted in an external triple-A credit rating. Because some banks did not fully understand all aspects of these exposures, once the risks crystallized last year in a weak house price environment, compounded by widespread liquidity pressures in many markets, banks had to scramble to measure and hedge these risks. Another aspect of the changing business of banking with possible implications for financial stability is the growth of services that banks provide, including running their own asset-management businesses and providing prime brokerage services to hedge funds. Banks with asset-management businesses must manage the reputation risk that such businesses entail. Because institutional investors are naturally sensitive to the reputation of their asset managers, losses elsewhere in the bank can be compounded if they leave the bank's asset-management business exposed to a flight of business and a sharp reduction in fee income. An increase in the business that banks do with highly leveraged investors, like some hedge funds, leads to an increase in the attention that banks must pay to counterparty risk management. Liquidity risk is a familiar risk to banks, but it has appeared in somewhat new forms recently. While the originate-to-distribute model aims to move exposures off of banks' balance sheets, the risk remains that a sudden closing of securitization markets can force a bank to hold and fund exposures that it had originated with the intent to distribute. And in many cases when banks did distribute exposures, they did so to various off-balance-sheet financing vehicles in which they retained contractual and reputational liquidity exposures. These vehicles, like banks themselves, were funding longer-term assets with short-term liabilities, and, like banks, they were subject to a run when their lenders became concerned about the quality of the assets. Some banks wound up using their own liquidity to support financing vehicles that were no longer able to fund themselves on anything like the same terms and conditions as before the market turmoil began. And as banks made good on the implicit or explicit liquidity insurance they sold, they found themselves with larger balance sheets and less-robust capital cushions than they anticipated. As the banks' capital and liquidity cushions unexpectedly eroded, they became quite cautious about extending credit, a dramatic change from the more complacent attitudes of previous years. Concentration risk is another familiar risk that is appearing in a new form. Banks have always had to worry about lending too much to one borrower, one industry, or one geographic region. But as smaller banks hold more of their balance sheet in types of loans that are difficult to securitize, concentration risks can develop. Concentrations of commercial real estate exposures are currently quite high at some smaller banks. This has the potential to make the banking sector much more sensitive to a downturn in the commercial real estate market. The Private Sector Needs to RespondTo protect their capital and liquidity, banks and other financial market participants are addressing the weaknesses revealed by market developments by becoming much more careful about the risks they are taking. This is a necessary process, but it has been a difficult one as well; it is reducing the values of some assets and tightening credit cost and availability across a wide range of instruments and counterparties, despite considerable easing in the stance of monetary policy. It is this tightening that is accentuating the downside risks for the economy as a whole. And in some sectors, as lenders seek protection against perceived downside risks, it is probably going further than is necessary to foster financial stability in the long run. But we will end up with a safer, more robust financial system. For banks, a safer and more robust financial system will be characterized by improved risk management that incorporates the lessons from the recent turmoil. Successful risk management looks comprehensively across business lines and is fully integrated into the decisionmaking of senior management. It identifies stresses and scenarios that might seem remote, but that could threaten safety and soundness. Banks' own self-interest clearly provides a strong incentive to improve risk management, but better risk management at the largest banks would benefit the broader financial system, too. A more resilient financial system will also require banks to strengthen all aspects of the originate-to-distribute model. They need to pay more attention to origination, including when they are distributing credits they have not originated. And they need to ensure that when they distribute risks into the market with securitization, the risks really are distributed and will not come back onto their balance sheet later. If the credits end up in off-balance-sheet entities, banks need to pay more attention to the capital and liquidity impact of any residual claim these entities may have on the banks, even where that claim may arise through a desire to protect the bank's reputation rather than through any contractual obligation. The structured credit products that are part of a safer banking system are likely to be simpler and more transparent. Recent experience has shown that more readily understood products would be in banks' own self-interest. Banks and investors must devote more effort to due diligence when investing in structured products, and they must avoid relying so heavily on credit rating agencies to do all their homework for them. Banks must continue to focus on improving their management of counterparty risks. During the financial market disruptions surrounding the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management almost 10 years ago, counterparty risk was a central concern. Subsequently, a private-sector group called the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group developed a set of best practices for counterparty risk that greatly helped to set the tone for the needed improvements. These efforts do not appear to have been wasted, as attested to by the lack of serious losses from defaults of hedge fund counterparties in the recent turmoil. However, banks do not appear to have followed those best practices for their counterparty relationships with monoline financial guarantors, where counterparty risk has crystallized into large losses. Banks must come to grips with the implications that their capital markets businesses have for liquidity risk management. While securitization can transform illiquid assets into more-liquid securities, risk managers must be more aware of the ways that securitization can become a drain on a bank's liquidity position in times of stress. Smaller banks, too, need to improve aspects of their risk management. They should take steps to manage any portfolio concentrations that may arise because competition from securitization is less intense in certain market segments. When they do increase the share of their portfolio in a given market segment above historical levels, they must ensure that their risk-management processes and controls are commensurate with the level and complexity of their exposures. All banks--large and small--need to consider whether they need greater capital cushions. The largest banks should consider whether their changing business model means that they need to hold more capital against some of the newer risks I discussed earlier. It is especially concerning that so many of these newer risks have arisen at the same time. Smaller banks must make sure their capital is sufficient to protect against the risk associated with the greater concentrations that have seemed to accompany the increased competition from securities markets. Banks might find the current circumstances to be especially favorable for raising new capital. Not only would more capital provide a cushion against the sorts of unexpected declines in creditworthiness and asset values that have marked recent months, it would also position banks well for expansion. The safer, more resilient financial system that will emerge from this episode is likely to be characterized by a greater reliance on bank financing, as borrowers and lenders take on board the weaknesses that have become evident in securities markets. It also is likely to offer more generous compensation for risk-bearing. For banks with plenty of capital, that adjustment process is likely to present a chance to pick up business that, appropriately managed, will prove quite profitable over time. I acknowledge that this is a formidable "to do" list for banks. But it has been a formidable episode of financial turbulence that has revealed major weaknesses in our financial system, including the business practices of many banks. And this episode has also left the regulators with many issues to consider. The Federal Reserve and Other Regulators Need to RespondAt the Federal Reserve and at other bank regulatory agencies, our job is to reinforce the incentives and actions that are building a more resilient financial system. We need to make sure that regulatory minimum capital requirements and liquidity management plans protect reasonably well against shocks becoming systemic. Our supervisory guidance needs to be in place to prevent backsliding when, over the coming years, the memories and lessons of the current market turmoil fade, as they certainly will. To these ends, we are reexamining a host of things ranging from Basel II to liquidity to transparency. Working with our domestic and international colleagues, we are looking to raise the Basel II capital requirements on specific exposures that have been troublesome, such as super senior CDOs of asset-backed securities and off-balance-sheet commitments. We are looking to the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to update its guidance on liquidity management in light of the recent experience. And we and our supervisory colleagues are looking to require better disclosures of off-balance-sheet commitments and of valuations of complex structured products. Threats to Financial Stability from Outside the Banking SystemIn the past, commercial banks and securities markets could be considered as separate channels for credit intermediation. One important implication of this was that if one channel for credit provision became impaired, the other would usually be functioning and able to insulate, to a degree, overall credit provision and the economy from financial sector shocks. For example, when the depository credit channel became impaired in the late 1980s and early 1990s, many borrowers were able to turn to liquid securities markets to meet a substantial portion of their needs for credit. That isn't working in the current period of turmoil, and for the reasons inherent in our discussion so far. First, securities markets have become so large that commercial banks simply lack sufficient capital and balance sheet capacity to readily fill the gap when markets are impaired. We saw this initially in mortgage markets when the securitization of nonconforming mortgages seized up; banks stepped up to make more jumbo prime mortgages and hold them on their books, but the cost of such credit rose substantially, and the amount of lending was reduced. Second, banks themselves are more dependent on well-functioning securities markets, and as that dependence and the important role of banks as ultimate providers of funding to those markets became clearer, pressures on banks mounted. So, in August, the turmoil crossed into the banking system when banks were challenged to backstop asset-backed commercial paper conduits and structured investment vehicles; under these circumstances, they were no longer comfortable fulfilling their traditional lending roles, and they tightened lending terms substantially, becoming part of the problem of credit availability, rather than a solution to it. In our more security-oriented intermediation systems, both commercial banks and security markets seem to be critical to the stability of the financial system and the economy. Third, large commercial banks and investment banks have increasingly similar risk profiles, so that all are subject to the same risk-management challenges under the same circumstances. As the activities and risk profiles of large banks and securities firms have become increasingly similar, and as financial intermediation has run more through securities markets, we've certainly learned in the past month or so that it is not only commercial banks that can threaten financial stability. So we must worry about excessive leverage and susceptibility to runs not only at banks but also at securities firms. To be sure, investment banks are still different in many ways from commercial banks. Among other things, their assets are mostly marketable and their borrowing mostly secured. Ordinarily, this should protect them from liquidity concerns. But we learned that short-term securities markets can suddenly seize up because of a loss of investor confidence, such as in the unusual circumstances building over the past six months or so. And investment banks had no safety net to discourage runs or to fall back on if runs occurred. Securities firms have been traditionally managed to a standard of surviving for one year without access to unsecured funding. The recent market turmoil has taught us that this is not adequate, because short-term secured funding, which these firms heavily rely upon, also can become impaired. With many securities markets not functioning well, with the funding of investment banks threatened, and with commercial banks unable and unwilling to fill the gap, the Federal Reserve exercised emergency powers to extend the liquidity safety net of the discount window to the primary dealers.3Our goal was to forestall substantial damage to the financial markets and the economy. Given the changes to financial markets and banking that we've been discussing this morning, a pressing public policy issue is what kind of liquidity backstop the central bank ought to supply to these institutions. And, assuming that some backstop is considered necessary because under some circumstances a run on an investment bank can threaten financial and economic stability, an associated issue is what sorts of regulations are required to make the financial system more resilient and to avoid excessive reliance on any such facility and the erosion of private-sector discipline. I don't have ready answers to these difficult questions. It is evident that the balance of market discipline and regulation is in the process of being adjusted to the reality of how our financial system has evolved. In my remarks, I've stressed the need for both private and public actions to build a more resilient financial system. But we need to make adjustments in such a way as to preserve the benefits of highly innovative financial markets where many advances have enabled risks to be better diversified and credit more readily available to more people. Whatever type of backstop is put in place, in my view greater regulatory attention will need to be devoted to the liquidity risk-management policies and practices of major investment banks. In particular, these firms will need to have robust contingency plans for situations in which their access to short-term secured funding also becomes impaired. Commercial banks should meet the same requirement. Implementation of such plans is likely to entail substitution of longer-term secured or unsecured financing for overnight secured financing. Because those longer-term funding sources will tend to be more costly, both investment banks and commercial banks are likely to conclude that it is more profitable to operate with less leverage than heretofore. No doubt their internalization of the costs of potential liquidity shocks will be costly to their shareholders, and a portion of the costs likely will be passed on to other borrowers and lenders. But a financial system with less leverage at its core will be a more stable and resilient system, and recent experience has driven home the very real costs of financial instability. Footnotes 1.Michael Gibsonand Patrick Parkinson, of the Board's staff, contributed to these remarks. The views expressed in these remarks are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors.Return to text 2.Ben S. Bernanke (2008), "Addressing Weaknesses in the Global Financial Markets: The Report of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Greater Richmond's Virginia Global Ambassador Award Luncheon, Richmond, Va., April 10.Return to text 3.Primary dealers are banks and securities broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. On behalf of the Federal Reserve System, the New York Fed's Open Market Desk engages in the trades to implement monetary policy.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress Chairman Schumer, Vice Chairman Maloney, Representative Saxton, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to appear before the Joint Economic Committee. In response to deterioration in the near-term outlook for the economy and intensified strains in financial markets, in recent months the Federal Reserve has eased monetary policy substantially further and taken strong actions to increase market liquidity. In my remarks today, I will first offer my views on conditions in financial markets and the outlook for the U.S. economy, then discuss recent actions taken by the Federal Reserve. Although our recent actions appear to have helped stabilize the situation somewhat, financial markets remain under considerable stress. Pressures in short-term bank funding markets, which had abated somewhat beginning late last year, have increased once again. Many lenders have been reluctant to provide credit to counterparties, especially leveraged investors, and have increased the amount of collateral they require to back short-term security financing agreements. To meet those demands, investors have reduced their leverage and liquidated holdings of securities, putting further downward pressure on security prices. Credit availability has also been restricted because some large financial institutions, including some commercial and investment banks and the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), have reported substantial losses and writedowns, reducing their available capital. Several of these firms have been able to raise fresh capital to offset at least some of those losses, and others are in the process of doing so. However, financial institutions’ balance sheets have also expanded, as banks and other institutions have taken on their balance sheets various assets that can no longer be financed on a standalone basis. Thus, the capacity and willingness of some large institutions to extend new credit remains limited. The effects of the financial strains on credit cost and availability have become increasingly evident, with some portions of the system that had previously escaped the worst of the turmoil--such as the markets for municipal bonds and student loans--having been affected. Another market that had previously been largely exempt from disruptions was that for mortgage-backed securities (MBS) issued by government agencies. However, beginning in mid-February, worsening liquidity conditions and reports of losses at the GSEs, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, caused the spread of agency MBS yields over the yields on comparable Treasury securities to rise sharply. Together with the increased fees imposed by the GSEs, the rise in this spread resulted in higher interest rates on conforming mortgages. More recently, agency MBS spreads and conforming mortgage rates have retraced part of this increase, and conforming mortgages continue to be readily available to households. However, for the most part, the nonconforming segment of the mortgage market continues to function poorly. In corporate debt markets, yields and spreads on both investment-grade and speculative-grade corporate bonds rose through mid-March before falling more recently. Issuance of investment-grade bonds by both financial and nonfinancial corporations has been quite robust so far this year, but issuance of new high-yield debt has stalled. Strains continue to be evident in the commercial paper market as well, where risk spreads remain elevated and the quantity of commercial paper outstanding, particularly asset-backed paper, has decreased. Commercial and industrial loans at banks grew in January and February, but at a considerably slower pace than in previous months. These developments in financial markets--which themselves reflect, in part, greater concerns about housing and the economic outlook more generally--have weighed on real economic activity. Notably, in the housing market, sales of both new and existing homes have generally continued weak, partly as a result of the reduced availability of mortgage credit, and home prices have continued to fall.1Starts of new single-family homes declined an additional 7 percent in February, bringing the cumulative decline since the early 2006 peak in single-family starts to more than 60 percent. Residential construction is likely to contract somewhat further in coming quarters as builders try to reduce their high inventories of unsold new homes. Private payroll employment fell 101,000 in February, after two months of smaller job losses, with job cuts in construction and closely related industries accounting for a significant share of the decline. But the demand for labor has also moderated recently in other industries, such as business services and retail trade, and manufacturing employment has continued on its downward trend. Meanwhile, claims for unemployment insurance have risen somewhat on balance, and surveys indicate that employers have scaled back hiring plans and that jobseekers are experiencing greater difficulties finding work. The unemployment rate edged down in February and remains at a relatively low level; however, in light of the sluggishness of economic activity and other indicators of a softer labor market, I expect it to move somewhat higher in coming months. After rising at an annual rate of about 3 percent over the first three quarters of last year, real disposable income has since increased at only about a 1 percent annual rate, reflecting weaker employment conditions and higher prices for energy and food. Concerns about employment and income prospects, together with declining home values and tighter credit conditions, have caused consumer spending to decelerate considerably from the solid pace seen during the first three quarters of last year. I expect the tax rebates associated with the fiscal stimulus package recently passed by the Congress to provide some support to consumer spending in coming quarters. In the business sector, the pullback in hiring that I noted earlier has been accompanied by some reduction in capital spending plans, as weaker sales prospects, tighter credit, and heightened uncertainty have made business leaders more cautious. On a more positive note, the nonfinancial business sector remains financially sound, with liquid balance sheets and low leverage ratios, and most firms have been able to avoid unwanted buildups in inventories. In addition, many businesses are enjoying strong demand from abroad. Although the prospects for foreign economic growth have diminished somewhat in recent months, net exports should continue to provide considerable support to U.S. economic activity in coming quarters. Overall, the near-term economic outlook has weakened relative to the projections released by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) at the end of January. It now appears likely that real gross domestic product (GDP) will not grow much, if at all, over the first half of 2008 and could even contract slightly. We expect economic activity to strengthen in the second half of the year, in part as the result of stimulative monetary and fiscal policies; and growth is expected to proceed at or a little above its sustainable pace in 2009, bolstered by a stabilization of housing activity, albeit at low levels, and gradually improving financial conditions. However, in light of the recent turbulence in financial markets, the uncertainty attending this forecast is quite high and the risks remain to the downside. Inflation has also been a source of concern. The price index for personal consumption expenditures rose 3.4 percent over the twelve months ending in February, up from 2.3 percent over the preceding twelve-month period. To a large extent, this pickup in inflation has been the result of sharp increases in the prices of crude oil, agricultural products, and other globally traded commodities. Additionally, the decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar has boosted some non-commodity import prices and thus contributed to inflation. However, the so-called core rate of inflation--that is, inflation excluding food and energy prices--has edged down recently after firming somewhat late last year. We expect inflation to moderate in coming quarters. That expectation is based, in part, on futures markets’ indications of a leveling out of prices for oil and other commodities, and it is consistent with our projection that global growth--and thus the demand for commodities--will slow somewhat during this period. And, as I noted, we project an easing of pressures on resource utilization. However, some indicators of inflation expectations have risen, and, overall, uncertainty about the inflation outlook has increased. It will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully in the months ahead. * * * I turn now to the Federal Reserve’s policy responses to these financial and economic developments. Well-functioning financial markets are essential for the efficacy of monetary policy and, indeed, for economic growth and stability. To improve market liquidity and market functioning, and consistent with its role as the nation’s central bank, the Federal Reserve has supplemented its longstanding discount window by establishing three new facilities for lending to depository institutions and primary dealers. The lending facilities now in place offer depository institutions and primary dealers two complementary alternatives for meeting funding needs. One pair of facilities--the discount window for depository institutions and the Primary Dealer Credit Facility for primary dealers--offers daily access to variable amounts of funding at the initiative of the borrowing institution. A second pair of facilities--the Term Auction Facility for depository institutions and the Term Securities Lending Facility for primary dealers--makes available predetermined aggregate amounts of longer-term funding on pre-announced dates, with the interest rate and the distribution of the awards across institutions being determined by competitive auction. Although these facilities operate through depository institutions and primary dealers, they are designed to support the broad financial markets and the economy by facilitating the provision of liquidity by those institutions to their customers and counterparties. The Primary Dealer Credit Facility was put in place in the wake of the near-failure of Bear Stearns, a large investment bank. On March 13, Bear Stearns advised the Federal Reserve and other government agencies that its liquidity position had significantly deteriorated and that it would have to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy the next day unless alternative sources of funds became available. This news raised difficult questions of public policy. Normally, the market sorts out which companies survive and which fail, and that is as it should be. However, the issues raised here extended well beyond the fate of one company. Our financial system is extremely complex and interconnected, and Bear Stearns participated extensively in a range of critical markets. With financial conditions fragile, the sudden failure of Bear Stearns likely would have led to a chaotic unwinding of positions in those markets and could have severely shaken confidence. The company’s failure could also have cast doubt on the financial positions of some of Bear Stearns’ thousands of counterparties and perhaps of companies with similar businesses. Given the current exceptional pressures on the global economy and financial system, the damage caused by a default by Bear Stearns could have been severe and extremely difficult to contain. Moreover, the adverse effects would not have been confined to the financial system but would have been felt broadly in the real economy through its effects on asset values and credit availability. To prevent a disorderly failure of Bear Stearns and the unpredictable but likely severe consequences of such a failure for market functioning and the broader economy, the Federal Reserve, in close consultation with the Treasury Department, agreed to provide funding to Bear Stearns through JPMorgan Chase. Over the following weekend, JPMorgan Chase agreed to purchase Bear Stearns and assumed Bear’s financial obligations. The Federal Reserve has taken additional measures to improve market liquidity. We have initiated a series of twenty-eight-day single-tranche term repurchase transactions with primary dealers, expected to cumulate to $100 billion outstanding, in which dealers may offer any of the types of collateral that are eligible for conventional open market operations. We have also expanded and extended reciprocal currency arrangements (“swap lines”) with the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank. Using these swap lines, the participating central banks are providing dollar liquidity to financial institutions in their jurisdictions, which should improve the functioning of the global market for dollar funding. These facilities and programs will be kept in place as long as conditions warrant their ongoing use. We are working closely with the Securities Exchange Commission to monitor the financial conditions and funding positions of primary dealers who might seek Federal Reserve credit. To date, the recent liquidity measures implemented by the Federal Reserve seem to have been helpful in addressing some of the strains in financial markets. Funding pressures on primary dealers appear to have eased somewhat, and liquidity seems to have improved in several markets, including--as noted earlier--the market for agency mortgage-backed securities. To the extent that these measures improve market functioning, they will have favorable effects on the ability and willingness to make credit available to the broader economy. More-liquid markets also increase the efficacy of monetary policy, which in turn improves our ability to meet the goals set for us by the Congress--namely, to promote maximum employment and price stability. As you know, in response to the further weakening of economic conditions, the Federal Reserve has continued to ease the stance of monetary policy. The FOMC reduced its target for the federal funds rate by a total of 125 basis points in January and by an additional 75 basis points at its March meeting, leaving the current target at 2-1/4 percent--3 percentage points below its level last summer. As the Committee noted in its most recent post-meeting statement, we anticipate that these actions, together with the steps we have taken to foster market liquidity, will help to promote growth over time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity. Clearly, the U.S. economy is going through a very difficult period. But among the great strengths of our economy is its ability to adapt and to respond to diverse challenges. Much necessary economic and financial adjustment has already taken place, and monetary and fiscal policies are in train that should support a return to growth in the second half of this year and next year. I remain confident in our economy’s long-term prospects. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. Footnotes 1.In February, sales of existing homes are reported to have turned up slightly, but sales of new homes continued to move down.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy and Federal Reserve Board Joint News Conference, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. The financial preparedness of our nation's youth is essential to their well-being and of vital importance to our economic future. In light of the problems that have arisen in the subprime mortgage market, we are reminded of how critically important it is for individuals to become financially literate at an early age so that they are better prepared to make decisions and navigate an increasingly complex financial marketplace. Choosing a credit card, saving for retirement or for a child's education, or buying a home now requires more financial savvy than ever before. Financial literacy and consumer education--coupled with robust consumer protection--makes the financial marketplace effective and efficient, and better equips consumers to make tough yet smart financial decisions. Today, only eight states across the U.S. require personal finance before middle or high school graduation. I believe more states should consider making personal finance a requirement for all students who seek a high school diploma. I am personally convinced that improving education is vital to the future of our economy and all its citizens, and I strongly believe that promoting financial literacy, in particular, must be a high priority. I know that those of you here today join me in this conviction. The Jump$tart Coalition is a leader among organizations seeking to improve the personal financial literacy of students from kindergarten to the university level. In particular, through its biennial survey of high school seniors--the results of which you will hear about shortly--Jump$tart has brought increased attention to the need for greater financial literacy among the youth of our nation. During the Jump$tart survey's 12-year history, the data gathered have served as the basis for useful measures of what young adults do and don't understand about finances. Undoubtedly, we will soon learn that there is plenty of work to be done and that our students have much to learn. The Federal Reserve is strongly committed to Jump$tart's mission to better educate America's youth about personal finance. On the regional level, many Federal Reserve Banks work closely with the state coalitions to help achieve this worthy mission. In fact, there is at least one economic education specialist at each of the Reserve Banks and their branches. Many of these specialists offer training seminars to help educators teach vital economic and personal finance topics in their classrooms. The Federal Reserve also continues to support a variety of programs and initiatives to increase financial literacy. These include: In addition to these and many other Federal Reserve resources, we will continue to work to expand the resources and programs devoted to the important public policy challenge of improving financial literacy. I want to take this opportunity to thank the Jump$tart Coalition and their partners for their continued support and commitment to furthering the financial education of our youth. Now, it is with great pleasure that I introduce Laura Levine, executive director of Jump$tart and appointed member of President Bush's recently formed Council on Financial Literacy, who will give a report on the status of financial education of youth in this country.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between First Pryority Bank, Pryor, Oklahoma, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, and the Oklahoma State Banking Department.A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between WSB Financial Group, Inc., Bremerton, Washington, a registered bank holding company that owns and controls Westsound Bank, Bremerton, Washington, a state nonmember bank, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Agreement is attached.