The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application filed by eBANK Corporation, Tokyo, Japan, to establish a representative office in San Francisco, California. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application by The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc., Pittsburgh, to merge with Sterling Financial Corporation, Lancaster, both of Pennsylvania, and the application by PNC Bank Delaware, Wilmington, to merge with Delaware Sterling Bank & Trust Company, Christiana, both of Delaware. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday approved the application by State Bank of India, Mumbai, India, to establish a branch in Jackson Heights, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and Kansas City, decreasing the discount rate at the Banks from 4-3/4 percent to 4 percent, effective immediately.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Dallas, and San Francisco, decreasing the discount rate at the Banks from 4-3/4 percent to 4 percent, effective immediately. The Board also approved an action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, decreasing the discount rate at the Bank from 4-3/4 percent to 4 percent, effective January 23, 2008.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Minneapolis, and Dallas, decreasing the discount rate at the Banks from 4 percent to 3-1/2 percent, effective immediately.
The Federal Reserve Board named ten new members to its Consumer Advisory Council for three-year terms and designated a new Chair and Vice Chair of the Council for 2008. The Council advises the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under the Consumer Credit Protection Act and on other matters in the area of consumer financial services. The Council meets three times a year in Washington, D.C. Tony Brown was designated Chair; his term runs through December 2008. Mr. Brown is President and Chief Executive Officer of Uptown Consortium, Inc. Edna Sawady was designated Vice Chair; her term on the Council ends in December 2009. Ms. Sawady is Managing Director of Market Innovations, Inc. The ten new members are: Michael D. CalhounDurham, North Carolina Mr. Calhoun serves as President of the Center for Responsible Lending (CRL), a nonprofit, non-partisan research and policy organization focusing on consumer lending issues. CRL has produced ground-breaking research on the subprime mortgage market and has been a key advocate for state and federal protections that reasonably balance consumer interests with the goal of increasing sustainable homeownership with affordable loans. Mr. Calhoun offers more than twenty-five years of experience in consumer finance, law, and policy. He was a principal drafter of several key predatory lending bills, including AARP's model bill as well as North Carolina's pioneering lending law of 1999 and an updated law that passed in 2007. He has provided technical assistance on lending regulation to many policymakers and has testified before numerous Congressional and state legislative committees. For ten years, Mr. Calhoun served as General Counsel to CRL and the affiliated Self-Help, a nonprofit community development lender based in North Carolina. He previously managed Self-Help's secondary market program, an innovative partnership with national banks in which Self-Help facilitates lending to first-time homebuyers by buying and securitizing pools of loans that are not eligible for sale to the Government-Sponsored Enterprises. He also directed Self-Help's real estate and commercial loan divisions. Alan D. CameronBoise, Idaho Mr. Cameron is President and CEO of the Idaho Credit Union League, the trade association for Idaho's credit unions. In this role, he has been active in national credit union organizations, serving as Chair of the Consumer Protection Subcommittee of the Credit Union National Association and as Chair of the State Issues Advocacy Committee of the American Association of Credit Union Leagues. Previously, he was an attorney in private practice, during which he focused on the representation of credit unions in state and federal courts. Mr. Cameron has also been involved in a variety of community affairs related to consumer financial services. He serves as Treasurer of the Hispanic Financial Education Coalition, a Jump$tart Coalition partner, as well as Treasurer of the Consumer Information Council, an industry partnership dedicated to educating the public about identity theft and financial privacy issues. He was also on the board of the Consumer Credit Counseling Service of Idaho for more than twenty years. Kathleen EngelCleveland, Ohio Ms. Engel is the Leon M. and Gloria PlevinAssociate Professor at the Cleveland-Marshall College of Law at Cleveland State University. Her expertise encompasses a wide range of consumer law issues. She is a national authority on mortgage finance and regulation, subprime andpredatory lending, community reinvestment issues, and housing discrimination. Her many publications, some of which she wrote with her frequent co-author, former CAC member Patricia McCoy, include articles inTexas Law Review, Fordham Law Review, Washington University Law Quarterly, andHousing Policy Debate. Ms. Engel presents her research in academic, banking, and policy forums throughout the country and around the world. She has consulted with several state attorneys general on legal theories in predatory lending litigation. Ms. Engel is a board member of Americans for Fairness in Lending and previously was a member of the Research Working Group of the National Consumer Law Center. Greta J. HarrisRichmond, Virginia For the past decade, Ms. Harris has worked for the Local Initiatives Support Corporation (LISC), a national community and economic development nonprofit corporation. In 2006, she was named Vice President-Southeast Region, with responsibility for supporting local leadership in nine offices. Previously, she managed the day-to-day operations of LISC's Virginia office for nine years, leading its programmatic and geographical expansion from the city of Richmond to the entire Commonwealth of Virginia. Ms. Harris secured more than $10 million in philanthropic donations and below-market investment capital to further LISC's mission of community rebuilding. She also brokered key collaborative public/private relationships that helped to yield nationally recognized community development initiatives such as Neighborhoods in Bloom, the Richmond Neighborhood Indicators Project (a GIS-based impact measurement tool), and the first 501(c)(3) bond issuance for LISC. She previously served as Executive Director of Richmond Neighborhood Housing Services and worked as a project developer for a housing development corporation and as an architect. Ms. Harris has been a member and chair of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond's Community Development Advisory Council and is a board member and former president of the Virginia Housing Coalition. Lorenzo S. LittlesDallas, Texas Mr. Littles serves as the Director of the Dallas office of Enterprise Community Partners, leading the group's operations and policy efforts. Since joining the Dallas office of the Enterprise Foundation in 1997, Mr. Littles has become a leader of community housing development initiatives. He oversees the administration of the city of Dallas' Mortgage Assistance Program (MAP), which provides zero-interest, soft-second subsidies to first-time homebuyers. In the past sixteen years, the city has invested more than $59 million in the MAP program, resulting in more than 6,200 first-time homeowners and leveraging more than $427 million in private mortgage financing. Mr. Littles also serves as President of EHOP-Dallas, Inc., an Enterprise supporting organization that has acquired, rehabilitated, and sold more than 135 HUD-foreclosed properties since October 2005. An active real estate attorney, Mr. Littles has more than twenty-nine years' experience in public policy, legal analysis, project management, and administration and is an expert on affordable housing, community and economic development, and the power of homeownership. He is a frequent speaker at economic development forums throughout the Dallas-Fort Worth area. Saurabh NarainChicago, Illinois Mr. Narain is Chief Fund Advisor to National Community Investment Fund (NCIF), a nonprofit private equity fund, and Senior Managing Director at ShoreBank Corporation. As Chief Fund Advisor, he leads all activities of NCIF including creating a strategy; investing in community development banks, thrifts, and credit unions; and building the community development finance industry. Industry building is done through the CDBI Exchange Network, which brings best practices in risk management, valuation, and corporate governance to the sector. He has created NCIF Social Performance Metrics using publicly available data from Home Mortgage Disclosure Act filings and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation for providing a lens to “social performance” for community development banks and thrifts. He is actively involved in several industry initiatives, including alternatives to payday lending and check cashing, responsible lending, and first-chance accounts, through research projects and promoting best practices. Prior to NCIF, Mr. Narain had extensive experience in capital markets and risk management, having worked at Bank of America for almost seventeen years based in Asia and the U.S. On a personal basis, he is actively involved with the microfinance and micro-entrepreneurship movement in India. Mr. Narain serves on the boards of the CDFI Coalition and the New Markets Tax Credit Coalition and is a regular speaker at industry forums, including the Interagency Minority Depository Institutions National Conference. Ronald PhillipsWiscasset, Maine Mr. Phillips is President and founder of Coastal Enterprises, Inc. (CEI), a nonprofit community development corporation and community development financial institution (CDFI) based in Wiscasset, Maine. He has had a significant role in shaping the community finance sector through his leadership of CEI and his former role as a board member of Opportunity Finance Network, the trade association for CDFIs. As one of Maine's and the nation's major development organizations, CEI creates jobs, affordable housing, and social services for people and places left out of the economic mainstream, primarily in rural regions. Some of CEI's major programs include workforce development; business counseling services and lending to small businesses and to minority- and women-owned businesses, as well as to new immigrants and refugee communities; affordable housing; and policy research and development. Key CEI subsidiaries focus on venture capital initiatives and the New Markets Tax Credit program. Mr. Phillips was involved in the crafting of Maine's recent anti-predatory lending legislation. He has served on the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's Community Development Advisory Council, as well as KeyBank's National Community Development Advisory Board and the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston board. He is also a founding member of the New Markets Tax Credit Coalition and serves on the Coalition's board and executive committee. Kevin A. RheinMinneapolis, Minnesota Mr. Rhein, a thirty-year veteran of the financial services industry, serves as Division President and Business Manager of Wells Fargo Card Services. He is responsible for Wells Fargo's consumer credit card, consumer and business debit card, prepaid card, consumer unsecured lines/loans, and consumer global remittance services. Under his leadership, the 3,000 team members in these units manage more than $19 billion in credit card and unsecured lines/loans held by more than 7 million customers, along with transactions completed by 19.5 million debit/ATM card customers and consumer remittances to seven countries. Before joining Wells Fargo, Mr. Rhein spent fifteen years with Citibank/Citicorp in positions including director of retail banking, director of retail branch operations at Citibank Arizona, and regional director for Citicorp Mortgage. Mr. Rhein is a member of the Wells Fargo Management Committee and Fair Lending Committee. He actively promotes financial literacy and serves as an external board member for the Center for Financial Services Innovation, an organization based in Chicago that assists the financial services industry to identify, develop, and implement innovative ways to serve the underbanked market. Shanna L. SmithWashington, District of Columbia Ms. Smith is President and CEO of the National Fair Housing Alliance (NFHA), overseeing NFHA's various programs: enforcement, membership services, compliance and consulting, education and outreach, public policy, and resource development. She led the creation of new, full-service fair housing centers in eight cities as well as several national, multi-media campaigns teaching people to recognize and report housing, lending, and insurance discrimination. Ms. Smith has designed and implemented investigations dealing with mortgage lending, private mortgage insurance, homeowners insurance, real estate sales, and sexual harassment in rental housing. She was a founding member of NFHA in 1988. Over the past eighteen years, she has testified before congressional banking committees about policies and practices that violate the Fair Housing Act involving lending, private mortgage insurance, and homeowners insurance. Before joining NFHA, Ms. Smith was Executive Director of the Toledo Fair Housing Center for fifteen years. During her tenure, the Center worked on ground-breaking investigations and litigation of mortgage lending discrimination cases. Ms. Smith has written articles for the lending industry illustrating policies and practices that violate fair lending laws and regulations and has co-authored chapters in two books, one on mortgage lending discrimination issues and one on insurance redlining issues. Jennifer TescherChicago, Illinois Ms. Tescher is the Director of the Center for Financial Services Innovation (CFSI), which was launched in 2004 to promote and enhance financial services access and services to the underbanked. CFSI develops and distributes real world-tested research and strategy, provides funding to promising companies, and facilitates cross-sector business collaboration. The Center is a nonprofit affiliate of ShoreBank Corporation, the nation's leading community development bank holding company. Ms. Tescher has been part of the ShoreBank family since 1996 in a variety of capacities, focused primarily on the development and implementation of new financial products and services. She has guided CFSI since its inception, launching the Innovators Roundtable and a $1 million equity fund as well as acquiring the Responsible Credit Roundtable. Ms. Tescher has already achieved notable success in raising the profile of underbanked access and asset-building as an objective for the industry. She has become a nationally known expert on this topic, with a monthly column inAmerican Banker, and major speaking engagements at a broad spectrum of industry events. Ms. Tescher serves as a member of the board of directors for the Center for Economic Progress as well as the Credit Builders Alliance, and is a member of Bank of America's National Community Advisory Council. Council members whose terms continue through 2008 are: Dorothy BridgesChief Executive Officer and PresidentFranklin National Bank of MinneapolisMinneapolis, Minnesota Sarah LudwigExecutive DirectorNeighborhood Economic Development Advocacy ProjectNew York, New York Mark K. MetzSenior Vice President and Deputy General CounselWachovia CorporationCharlotte, North Carolina Lance MorganPresidentHo-Chunk, IncorporatedWinnebago Tribe of NebraskaWinnebago, Nebraska Joshua PeirezChief Payment System Integrity OfficerMasterCard WorldwidePurchase, New York Anna McDonald RentschlerBSA OfficerCentral BancompanyJefferson City, Missouri Faith Arnold SchwartzExecutive DirectorHOPE NOW AllianceWashington, District of Columbia Edward SivakDirector of Policy and EvaluationEnterprise Corporation of the DeltaJackson, Mississippi Alan WhiteAssistant ProfessorValparaiso University Law SchoolValparaiso, Indiana Council members whose terms continue through 2009 are: Jason EngelVice President and Chief Regulatory CounselExperianCosta Mesa, California Joseph L. FalkConsultantAkerman SenterfittMiami, Florida Louise J. GissendanerSenior Vice President, Director of Community DevelopmentFifth Third BankCleveland, Ohio Patricia HassonPresidentConsumer Credit Counseling Service of Delaware Valley, Inc.Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Thomas JamesSenior Assistant Attorney General - Consumer CounselOffice of the Illinois Attorney GeneralConsumer Fraud BureauChicago, Illinois H. Cooke SunooDirectorAsian Pacific Islander Small Business ProgramLos Angeles, California Stergios TheologidesExecutive Vice President, General CounselMorgan Stanley Home LoansFort Worth, Texas Linda TinneyVice President, Community DevelopmentWest Metro Region ManagerU.S. BankDenver, Colorado Luz UrrutiaPresident and Chief Operating OfficerBanuestra Financial CorporationRoswell, Georgia
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the American Economic Association Session, Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meeting, New Orleans, Louisiana This panel is dealing with an important topic--in effect, the design and functioning of monetary policy committees. Monetary policy decisions are judgment calls, informed by forecasts and discussions about how the economy is likely to evolve, alternative possibilities, and potential responses to policy actions. The question is how to bring the best possible judgments to bear on these questions. Besley, Meads and Surico's contribution is to ask whether certain characteristics of the policymakers matter for how they vote on the monetary policy committee. For the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) at the Bank of England, they find heterogeneous views among voters, but no systematic differences based on whether the MPC member is an insider--that is part of the hierarchy at the Bank--or an outsider appointed for a short term just to the MPC; whether the person comes from an academic background; or whether that person has worked at the Treasury. I found the piece well done and interesting, and I have only a few comments before moving on to some questions and observations about the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) sparked by reading this research.1 My first comment is that I'm not surprised by the results. The MPC has a well-defined objective given by the government. To be sure, members may differ about the precise time frame in which to meet that objective, but these distinctions should be small relative to the importance of the overall objective. In addition, at every policy meeting, each member of the MPC is operating with the same information from the staff, and before the quarterly meetings that precede an Inflation Report, the members have sat through a number of discussions covering all aspects of the forecast. Everyone should be equally familiar with the key issues and analysis. Finally, dissent is accepted, indeed encouraged in some respects, by insiders as well as outsiders, reducing any differences in incentives facing the two groups. Nonetheless, some aspects of the paper raised questions in my mind about the robustness of the results. For one, the authors, in testing for differences in policy preferences, assume everyone has the same forecast, thus eliminating one channel through which different backgrounds may manifest themselves. The MPC does go through an extensive internal process when producing its forecast, which as I just noted, may mitigate the differences among members. Still, some of the differences in policy choices probably reflect underlying differences in forecasts, not just differences in Taylor-rule parameters. Certainly, the minutes of the MPC meetings suggest divergence in how members view the outlook, and the Inflation Report routinely notes differences in views about the central tendency forecasts. Small differences, especially if sustained over time, could well have a substantial effect on voting patterns. In practice, policy decisions are likely to depend on more than the modal forecast used by the authors, such as the degree of uncertainty, the risks around the central tendency, and a weighting of the costs to public welfare from missing the forecast on one side or another. In this regard, the Inflation Reports also note that members may have different views about the balance of risks. I don't know how the authors could go about testing whether the backgrounds of MPC members are systematically related to differences in forecasts or in risk assessments, but surely these are important possibilities. I was also struck by the finding that the output gap did not play a significant role in policy decisions. As the paper notes, the MPC takes account of the gap in its inflation forecast, but the results suggest members give no independent weight to deviations of output from potential. On the surface, this may suggest that either the MPC has faced only demand shocks--unlikely given the rise in energy prices--or it is not really a flexible inflation targeter. Indeed, figure 1, column 3, indicates that many MPC members have significantly negative coefficients on the output gap. I suspect the reality is that members rely on much more than the projected output gap to judge the future balance of demand and potential supply, but the econometric results on the output gap suggest the need for further explanation. Finally, the authors find that the change in the policy rate at the last meeting matters for each person's vote at the current meeting. It is not clear why the decision to change rates at the last meeting should affect judgments on the appropriate policy at the current meeting, independent of the outlook. Perhaps the dissenters believe they've made their point and unless they feel especially strongly they don't need to dissent again, but the rationale for this variable should probably be explored further. The purpose of bringing outsiders onto the policy committee of the Bank of England is to assure that a variety of views will be considered in the policy debate. I'll spend the rest of my time addressing how this works at the Federal Reserve. I'll do this in the form of questions about the personnel and functioning of the FOMC, with my tentative answers. 1. Does it matter who is on the FOMC other than the Chairman?My answer is yes, and I think I have reasons other than simple self-esteem. To be sure, the Committee looks to the Chairman to provide strong leadership. The Chairman's special role is partly legal and structural--as the chair of the Board and the Committee and as the Committee's representative in front of Congress where the FOMC is held accountable for its actions. In addition, the Committee is so large--in effect nineteen people--that strong leadership is required to construct a policy position that can command a substantial majority and to present a coherent rationale for that policy to the public. But in my experience, the other members of the Committee are also important for good policy. Effective Chairmen cannot operate independently of the sentiment on the Committee; ultimately, the authority of the Chairman rests on his ability to persuade the other members of the Committee that the choices they are making under his leadership will accomplish their objectives. The better the collection of individuals he needs to persuade, the better the policy is likely to be. Individual members can exert considerable influence over time through the cogency of their arguments, and having a variety of perspectives on the Committee will strengthen this process. In addition, all FOMC members play important roles in explaining policy decisions to the public, and how they present their views can influence public attitudes, perceptions, and expectations. 2. Are there insider/outsider types of distinctions on the FOMC?Although the process by which people come onto the Committee leads naturally to considerable diversity, the insider/outsider distinction does not apply cleanly to the FOMC. Board members of course are appointed by the President with the approval of the Senate. The members of the Board are almost always outsiders--the appointment of a staff member, like myself, is very rare. And Board members typically come from a variety of backgrounds, including top-notch academic economists, but also bankers and others with experience in the financial arena, and occasionally business people. We are appointed for fixed terms, encouraging independent views. Reserve Bank presidents owe their appointments to both the board of directors of their regional Reserve Bank and the Board of Governors in Washington. Presidents can be either insiders--long-time staff members--or outsiders with relevant experience in academia, public policy, or the financial sector. Once appointed, a president can serve until retirement at age 65 or for a minimum of ten years, affording scope for maintaining their individual views. Nonetheless, FOMC members try to find consensus under the leadership of the Chairman, and neither Governors nor presidents dissent very often. Presidents have tended to dissent a little more than Governors. The greater number of dissents by presidents might reflect a number of factors. For one, presidents have their own staffs, which can help support alternative views in preparing for a meeting. Board members share a common staff with the Chairman, and, being in the same building, perhaps have a greater opportunity to influence and be influenced by the Chairman. In this regard, Bank presidents may act like "outsiders" more readily than Board members. At the same time, Bank presidents tend to be longer tenured than Board members, and can contribute the institutional memory one might expect from "insiders" when Board membership turns over rapidly. 3. Why so few dissents?FOMC members recognize the degree of uncertainty around their judgments. Unless they perceive that a serious misjudgment is being made, they expect, given common objectives, that when they prefer another policy and their analysis later proves correct, the Committee is likely to move in their direction in time to forestall problems developing. And they may see their influence on policy as greater over time if they are usually part of the consensus. Finally, they could perceive that a series of close votes could create uncertainty about policy and the direction of the institution. The absence of dissents should not be taken as indicating that alternative views are not expressed at FOMC meetings. Often these are manifest in participants' forecasts. Because we are such a large and geographically separated Committee, the FOMC, unlike the MPC, does not attempt to arrive at a common forecast, and the dispersion of individual forecasts illustrates the range of views. For example, participants' projections in October of gross domestic product (GDP) growth for 2008 differed by one full percentage point and differences were still a half a percentage point for 2010. Participants had alternative views about current developments affecting the economy and about its long-run growth properties, and they argued their points in the meeting. Nonetheless, all but one of the voting members was able to agree that the action taken that day was consistent with moving the economy toward meeting the Committee's objectives. 4. Do you need to be a monetary policy expert to contribute?The Committee is strengthened by having people with a wide variety of backgrounds, including those whose principal area of expertise of lies outside of monetary economics. To some extent, the range of backgrounds on the FOMC reflects the need for expertise to carry out the non-monetary policy responsibilities of the Federal Reserve. Any monetary policy committee needs to have a number of people on it that fully understand and can deal readily with the model behind policy deliberations, and who have an awareness of the lessons of monetary policy history. But other types of expertise also are valuable. Policy works through financial markets, and those with that background contribute to understanding how policy impulses are being transmitted to savers and spenders. Experience in private industry is valuable for gathering and interpreting information from many business sources that we bring to FOMC deliberations. Any member needs to understand the basic framework to have influence on the debate. But you don't need to be a monetary policy expert. Those who come on the Committee with policy credentials can be very effective immediately. But judgment and experience count. Noneconomists can become very effective as they learn the lingo and the framework. The large size of the Committee and long tenure of members allows time and space for this expertise to develop. One of the most difficult aspects of policymaking is recognizing what you don't know, perhaps because the world is no longer conforming to your models. A high level of monetary policy expertise is not necessarily a good guide to who will possess that skill. ConclusionThe proof of the pudding is in the eating. Since the late 1970s in the United States and since the establishment of the MPC in the United Kingdom, economic performance in both countries has, on balance, been good. A number of factors have contributed to this result, but the respective monetary policy committees must have played some role. To be sure, in the United States, the leadership of Chairmen Volcker, Greenspan, and Bernanke has been critical to the results, but I believe a diverse and independent minded group of policymakers has contributed as well, and it is important to maintain this mix and quality. Could the functioning of the FOMC be improved? Certainly, and Chairman Bernanke has moved to further utilize the diverse views of the FOMC members, while maintaining the leadership necessary to keep this diverse group headed in the appropriate direction. Footnotes 1.The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily shared by other members of the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text
On January 14, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $30 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 11.12% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on January 17, 2008, and will mature on February 14, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by Noon EST on January 15, 2008. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EST on January 15, 2008 to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On January 28, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $30 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Stop-out rate:3.123 percentTotal propositions submitted:$37.452 billionTotal propositions accepted:$30.000 billionBid/cover ratio:1.25Number of bidders:52Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 27.94% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000).The awarded loans will settle on January 31, 2008, and will mature on February 28, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans.Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by noon EST on January 29, 2008. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EST on January 29, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 27.94% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on January 31, 2008, and will mature on February 28, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by noon EST on January 29, 2008. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EST on January 29, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
The Federal Reserve will conduct two auctions of 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility (TAF) in January. It will offer $30 billion in the auction to be held on Monday, January 14 and $30 billion in the auction to be held on Monday, January 28. The minimum bid rate, along with further details, will be announced at noon EST, the Friday before each auction. The results of each auction will be announced at 10 a.m. EST on the Tuesday following each auction; final settlement will occur on the Thursday following each auction. Noncompetitive bids will not be accepted at the January auctions, but the Federal Reserve will continue to evaluate the potential usefulness of this feature. The Federal Reserve intends to conduct biweekly TAF auctions for as long as necessary to address elevated pressures in short-term funding markets. Decisions regarding auctions in February will be announced by Friday, February 1.
On January 14, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $30 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this Announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction Parameters Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the Opening Time and Closing Time on the Bid Submission Date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EST on the Notification Date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EST on the Notification Date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EST on the Notification Date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
On January 28, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $30 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this Announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction Parameters Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the Opening Time and Closing Time on the Bid Submission Date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EST on the Notification Date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EST on the Notification Date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EST on the Notification Date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Women in Housing and Finance and Exchequer Club Joint Luncheon, Washington, D.C. Since late last summer, the financial markets in the United States and in a number of other industrialized countries have been under considerable strain. The turmoil has affected the prospects for the broader economy, principally through its effects on the availability and terms of credit to households and businesses. Financial market conditions, in turn, have been sensitive to the evolving economic outlook, as investors have tried to assess the implications of incoming economic information for future earnings and asset values. These interactions have produced a volatile situation that has made forecasting the course of the economy even more difficult than usual. In my remarks today I will provide some perspective on recent developments in the economy and financial markets, focusing on conditions in the United States. I will then discuss the Fed’s recent policy actions and our plans for addressing the economic and financial challenges ahead. Housing, the Subprime Mortgage Market, and the Financial TurmoilAs you will recall, the U.S. economy experienced a mild recession in 2001. During the ensuing recovery, above-trend growth was accompanied by rising rates of resource utilization, particularly after the expansion picked up steam in mid-2003. Notably, the civilian unemployment rate declined from a high of 6.3 percent in June 2003 to 4.4 percent in March 2007. As the economy approached full employment, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the monetary policymaking arm of the Federal Reserve System, was faced with the classic problem of managing the mid-cycle slowdown--that is, of setting policy to help guide the economy toward sustainable growth without inflation. With that objective, the FOMC implemented a sequence of rate increases, beginning in mid-2004 and ending in June 2006, at which point the target for the federal funds rate was 5.25 percent--a level that, in the judgment of the Committee, would best promote the policy objectives given to us by the Congress. The economy continued to perform well into 2007, with solid growth through the third quarter and unemployment remaining near recent lows. Indicators of the underlying inflation trend, such as core inflation, showed signs of moderating. However, the situation was complicated by a number of factors. Continued increases in the prices of energy and other commodities, together with high levels of resource utilization, kept the Committee on inflation alert. But perhaps an even greater challenge was posed by a sharp and protracted correction in the U.S. housing market, which followed a multiyear boom in housing construction and house prices. Indicating the depth of the decline in housing, according to the most recent available data, housing starts and new home sales have both fallen by about 50 percent from their respective peaks. In all likelihood, the housing contraction would have been considerably milder had it not been for adverse developments in the subprime mortgage market. Since early 2007, financial market participants have been focused on the high and rising delinquency rates of subprime mortgages, especially those with adjustable interest rates (subprime ARMs). Currently, about 21 percent of subprime ARMs are ninety days or more delinquent, and foreclosure rates are rising sharply. Although poor underwriting and, in some cases, fraud and abusive practices contributed to the high rates of delinquency that we are now seeing in the subprime ARM market, the more fundamental reason for the sharp deterioration in credit quality was the flawed premise on which much subprime ARM lending was based: that house prices would continue to rise rapidly. When house prices were increasing at double-digit rates, subprime ARM borrowers were able to build equity in their homes during the period in which they paid a (relatively) low introductory (or “teaser”) rate on their mortgages. Once sufficient equity had been accumulated, borrowers were often able to refinance, avoiding the increased payments associated with the reset in the rate on the original mortgages. However, when declining affordability finally began to take its toll on the demand for homes and thus on house prices, borrowers could no longer rely on home-price appreciation to build equity; they were accordingly unable to refinance and found themselves locked into their subprime ARM contracts. Many of these borrowers found it difficult to make payments at even the introductory rate, much less at the higher post-adjustment rate. The result, as I have already noted, has been rising delinquencies and foreclosures, which will have adverse effects for communities and the broader economy as well as for the borrowers themselves. One of the many unfortunate consequences of these events, which may be with us for some time, is on the availability of credit for nonprime borrowers. Ample evidence suggests that responsible nonprime lending can be beneficial and safe for the borrower as well as profitable for the lender. For example, even as delinquencies on subprime ARMs have soared, loss rates on subprime mortgages with fixed interest rates, though somewhat higher recently, remain in their historical range. Some lenders, including some who have worked closely with nonprofit groups with strong roots in low-to-moderate-income communities, have been able to foster homeownership in those communities while experiencing exceptionally low rates of default. Unfortunately, at this point, the market is not discriminating to any significant degree between good and bad nonprime loans, and few new loans are being made. Although subprime borrowers and the investors who hold these mortgages are the parties most directly affected by the collapse of this market, the consequences have been felt much more broadly. I have already referred to the role that the subprime crisis has played in the housing correction. On the way up, expansive subprime lending increased the effective demand for housing, pushing up prices and stimulating construction activity. On the way down, the withdrawal of this source of demand for housing has exacerbated the downturn, adding to the sharp decline in new homebuilding and putting downward pressure on house prices. The addition of foreclosed properties to the inventories of unsold homes is further weakening the market. As you know, the losses in the subprime mortgage market also triggered a substantial reaction in other financial markets. At some level, the magnitude of that reaction might be deemed surprising, given the small size of the U.S. subprime market relative to world financial markets. Part of the explanation for the outsized effect may be that, following a period of more-aggressive risk-taking, the subprime crisis led investors to reassess credit risks more broadly and, perhaps, to become less willing to take on risks of any type. Investors have also been concerned that, by further weakening the housing sector, the problems in the subprime mortgage market may lead overall economic growth to slow. However, part of the explanation for the far-reaching financial impact of the subprime shock is that it has contributed to a considerable increase in investor uncertainty about the appropriate valuations of a broader range of financial assets, not just subprime mortgages. For example, subprime mortgages were often combined with other types of loans in so-called structured credit products. These investment products, sometimes packaged with various credit and liquidity guarantees obtained from banks or through derivative contracts, were divided into portions, or tranches, of varying seniority and credit quality. Thus, through financial engineering, a diverse combination of underlying credits became the raw material for a new set of financial assets, many of them garnering high ratings from credit agencies, which could be matched to the needs of ultimate investors. The complexity of structured credit products, as well as the difficulty of determining the values of some of the underlying assets, led many investors to rely heavily on the evaluations of these products by credit-rating agencies. However, as subprime mortgage losses rose to levels that threatened even highly rated tranches, investors began to question the reliability of the credit ratings and became increasingly unwilling to hold these products. Similar concerns arose in the market for asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP). In this market, various institutions established special-purpose vehicles to issue commercial paper to help fund a variety of assets, including some private-label mortgage-backed securities, mortgages warehoused for securitization, and other long-maturity assets. Investors had typically viewed the commercial paper backed by these assets as quite safe and liquid. But the concerns about mortgage-backed securities and structured credit products more generally (even those unrelated to mortgages) led to great reluctance on the part of investors to roll over ABCP, particularly at maturities of more than a few days, leaving the sponsors of the various investment vehicles scrambling for liquidity. Those who could not find new funding were forced to sell assets into a highly illiquid and unreceptive market. Importantly, investors’ loss of confidence was not restricted to securities related to subprime mortgages but extended to other key asset classes. Notably, the secondary market for private-label securities backed by prime jumbo mortgages has also contracted, and issuance of such securities has dwindled.1Even though default rates on prime jumbo mortgages have remained very low, the experience with subprime mortgages has evidently made investors more sensitive to the risks associated with other housing-related assets as well. Other types of assets that have seen a cooling of investor interest include loans for commercial real estate projects and so-called leveraged loans, which are used to finance mergers and leveraged buyouts. Although structured credit products and special-purpose investment vehicles may be viewed as providing direct channels between the ultimate borrowers and the broader capital markets, thereby circumventing the need for traditional bank financing, banks nevertheless played important roles in this mode of finance. Large money-center banks and other major financial institutions (which I will call “banks,” for short) underwrote many of the loans and created many of the structured credit products that were sold into the market. Banks also supported the various investment vehicles in many ways, for example, by serving as advisers and by providing standby liquidity facilities and various credit enhancements. As the problems with these facilities multiplied, banks came under increasing pressure to rescue the investment vehicles they sponsored--either by providing liquidity or other support or, as has become increasingly the norm, by taking the assets of the off-balance-sheet vehicles onto their own balance sheets. Banks’ balance sheets were swelled further by non-conforming mortgages, leveraged loans, and other credits that the banks had extended but for which well-functioning secondary markets no longer existed. Even as their balance sheets expanded, banks began to report large losses, reflecting the sharp declines in the values of mortgages and other assets. Thus, banks too became subject to valuation uncertainty, as could be seen in their share prices and other market indicators such as quotes on credit default swaps. The combination of larger balance sheets and unexpected losses also resulted in a decline in the capital ratios of a number of institutions. Several have chosen to raise new capital in response, and the banking system retains substantial levels of capital. However, on balance, these developments have prompted banks to become protective of their liquidity and balance sheet capacity and thus to become less willing to provide funding to other market participants, including other banks. As a result, both overnight and term interbank funding markets have periodically come under considerable pressure, with spreads on interbank lending rates over various benchmark rates rising notably. We also see considerable evidence that banks have become more restrictive in their lending to firms and households. More-expensive and less-available credit seems likely to impose a measure of financial restraint on economic growth. The recent developments in U.S. and foreign financial markets will stimulate considerable review and analysis in the months and years to come. Around the world, legislatures, regulators, supervisors, accounting boards, central banks, and others with responsibility for oversight of the financial system are already hard at work trying to distill the lessons to be drawn from this experience and their implications for policy. Many in the private sector, including banks, credit-rating agencies, and the investment community, are likewise actively reviewing and responding to these developments. Some of the areas that will draw scrutiny are the appropriate use of credit ratings by investors, banks, and supervisors; the need for enterprise-wide, better-integrated risk-management techniques in large financial institutions; the appropriateness of accounting rules governing asset valuation and the use of off-balance-sheet vehicles; and weaknesses in the originate-to-distribute model and in the design of structured credit products, among many others. In the longer term, the response of the public and private sectors to this experience should help create a stronger financial system. The Federal Reserve’s ResponseFortunately, after a number of years of strong earnings, most financial institutions entered the current episode in good financial condition. Thus, notwithstanding the effects of multi-billion dollar write-downs on the earnings and share prices of some large institutions, the banking system remains sound. Nevertheless, the market strains have been serious, and they continue to pose risks to the broader economy. The Federal Reserve accordingly has taken a number of steps to help markets return to more orderly functioning and to foster its macroeconomic objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price stability. Broadly, the Federal Reserve’s response has followed two tracks: efforts to support market liquidity and functioning and the pursuit of our macroeconomic objectives through monetary policy. To help address the significant strains in short-term money markets, the Federal Reserve has taken a range of steps. Notably, on August 17, the Federal Reserve Board cut the discount rate--the rate at which it lends directly to banks--by 50 basis points, or 1/2 percentage point, and it has since maintained the spread between the federal funds rate and the discount rate at 50 basis points, rather than the customary 100 basis points.2The Fed also adjusted its usual practices to facilitate the provision of discount window financing for as long as thirty days, renewable at the request of the borrower. Loans through the discount window differ from conventional open market operations in that the loans can be made directly to individual banks. In contrast, open market operations are arranged with a limited set of dealers of government securities. In addition, whereas open market operations involve lending against government and agency securities, loans through the discount window can be made against a much wider range of collateral. The changes to the discount window were designed to assure banks of the availability of a backstop source of liquidity. Although banks borrowed only moderate amounts at the discount window, they substantially increased the amount of collateral they placed with Reserve Banks. This and other factors suggest that these changes to the discount window facility, together with the statements and actions of the FOMC, had some positive influence on market conditions. However, as a tool for easing the strains in money markets, the discount window has two drawbacks. First, banks may be reluctant to use the window, fearing that markets will draw adverse inferences about their financial condition and access to private sources of funding--the so-called stigma problem. Second, to maintain the federal funds rate near its target, the Federal Reserve System’s open market desk must take into account the fact that loans through the discount window add reserves to the banking system and thus, all else equal, could tend to push the federal funds rate below the target set by the FOMC. The open market desk can offset this effect by draining reserves from the system. But the amounts that banks choose to borrow at the discount window can be difficult to predict, complicating the management of the federal funds rate, especially when borrowings are large. To address the limitations of the discount window, the Federal Reserve recently introduced a term auction facility, or TAF, through which prespecified amounts of discount window credit can be auctioned to eligible borrowers. As I will discuss in greater detail in a moment, our intention in developing the TAF was to provide a tool that could more effectively address the problems currently affecting the interbank lending market without complicating the administration of reserves and the federal funds rate. In December, the Fed successfully auctioned $40 billion through this facility and, as part of a coordinated operation, the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank lent an additional $24 billion. These two central banks obtained the dollars from the Federal Reserve through currency swaps (essentially, two-way lines of credit in which each central bank agrees to lend the other up to a fixed amount in its own currency). As part of the same coordinated action, the central banks of the United Kingdom and Canada conducted similar operations in their own currencies. On January 4, the Federal Reserve announced that we will auction an additional $60 billion in twenty-eight-day credit through the TAF, to be spread across two auctions that will be held later this month. With these actions and the passage of the year end, term premiums in the interbank market and some other measures of strains in funding markets have eased significantly, though they remain well above levels prevailing before August last year. Based on our initial experience, it appears that the TAF may have overcome the two drawbacks of the discount window, in that there appears to have been little if any stigma associated with participation in the auction, and--because the Fed was able to set the amounts to be auctioned in advance--the open market desk faced minimal uncertainty about the effects of the operation on bank reserves. The TAF may thus become a useful permanent addition to the Fed’s toolbox.3TAF auctions will continue as long as necessary to address elevated pressures in short-term funding markets, and we will continue to work closely and cooperatively with other central banks to address market strains that could hamper the achievement of our broader economic objectives. Although the TAF and other liquidity-related actions appear to have had some positive effects, such measures alone cannot fully address fundamental concerns about credit quality and valuation, nor do these actions relax the balance sheet constraints on financial institutions. Hence, they cannot eliminate the financial restraints affecting the broader economy. Monetary policy (that is, the management of the short-term interest rate) is the Fed’s best tool for pursuing our macroeconomic objectives, namely to promote maximum sustainable employment and price stability. Although economic growth slowed in the fourth quarter of last year from the third quarter’s rapid clip, it seems nonetheless, as best we can tell, to have continued at a moderate pace. Recently, however, incoming information has suggested that the baseline outlook for real activity in 2008 has worsened and the downside risks to growth have become more pronounced. Notably, the demand for housing seems to have weakened further, in part reflecting the ongoing problems in mortgage markets. In addition, a number of factors, including higher oil prices, lower equity prices, and softening home values, seem likely to weigh on consumer spending as we move into 2008. Financial conditions continue to pose a downside risk to the outlook for growth. Market participants still express considerable uncertainty about the appropriate valuation of complex financial assets and about the extent of additional losses that may be disclosed in the future. On the whole, despite improvements in some areas, the financial situation remains fragile, and many funding markets remain impaired. Adverse economic or financial news has the potential to increase financial strains and to lead to further constraints on the supply of credit to households and businesses. I expect that financial-market participants--and, of course, the Committee--will be paying particular attention to developments in the housing market, in part because of the potential for spillovers from housing to other sectors of the economy. A second consequential risk to the growth outlook concerns the performance of the labor market. Last week’s report on labor-market conditions in December was disappointing, as it showed an increase of 0.3 percentage point in the unemployment rate and a decline in private payroll employment. Heretofore, the labor market has been a source of stability in the macroeconomic situation, with relatively steady gains in wage and salary income providing households the wherewithal to support moderate growth in real consumption spending. It would be a mistake to read too much into any one report. However, should the labor market deteriorate, the risks to consumer spending would rise. Even as the outlook for real activity has weakened, there have been some important developments on the inflation front. Most notably, the same increase in oil prices that may be a negative influence on growth is also lifting overall consumer prices and probably putting some upward pressure on core inflation measures as well. Last year, food prices also increased exceptionally rapidly by recent standards, further boosting overall consumer price inflation. Thus far, inflation expectations appear to have remained reasonably well anchored, and pressures on resource utilization have diminished a bit. However, any tendency of inflation expectations to become unmoored or for the Fed’s inflation-fighting credibility to be eroded could greatly complicate the task of sustaining price stability and reduce the central bank’s policy flexibility to counter shortfalls in growth in the future. Accordingly, in the months ahead we will be closely monitoring the inflation situation, particularly as regards inflation expectations. Monetary policy has responded proactively to evolving conditions. As you know, the Committee cut its target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points at its September meeting and by 25 basis points each at the October and December meetings. In total, therefore, we have brought the funds rate down by a percentage point from its level just before financial strains emerged. The Federal Reserve took these actions to help offset the restraint imposed by the tightening of credit conditions and the weakening of the housing market. However, in light of recent changes in the outlook for and the risks to growth, additional policy easing may well be necessary. The Committee will, of course, be carefully evaluating incoming information bearing on the economic outlook. Based on that evaluation, and consistent with our dual mandate, we stand ready to take substantive additional action as needed to support growth and to provide adequate insurance against downside risks. Financial and economic conditions can change quickly. Consequently, the Committee must remain exceptionally alert and flexible, prepared to act in a decisive and timely manner and, in particular, to counter any adverse dynamics that might threaten economic or financial stability. Footnotes 1.Jumbo mortgages are those mortgages for which the principal value does not conform to the limit set annually by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac for loans they will purchase; the amount for 2008 is $417,000. Jumbo loans are thus a type of “nonconforming” loan. Prime loans are those made to borrowers with good credit records.Return to text 2.The discount rate is also known as the primary credit rate.Return to text 3.Before making the TAF permanent, however, we would seek public comment on its design and utility.Return to text
The Federal Open Market Committee has decided to lower its target for the federal funds rate 75 basis points to 3-1/2 percent. The Committee took this action in view of a weakening of the economic outlook and increasing downside risks to growth. While strains in short-term funding markets have eased somewhat, broader financial market conditions have continued to deteriorate and credit has tightened further for some businesses and households. Moreover, incoming information indicates a deepening of the housing contraction as well as some softening in labor markets. The Committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters, but it will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully. Appreciable downside risks to growth remain. The Committee will continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act in a timely manner as needed to address those risks. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Charles L. Evans; Thomas M. Hoenig; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Eric S. Rosengren; and Kevin M. Warsh. Voting against was William Poole, who did not believe that current conditions justified policy action before the regularly scheduled meeting next week. Absent and not voting was Frederic S. Mishkin. In a related action, the Board of Governors approved a 75-basis-point decrease in the discount rate to 4 percent. In taking this action, the Board approved the requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and Minneapolis.
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate 50 basis points to 3 percent. Financial markets remain under considerable stress, and credit has tightened further for some businesses and households. Moreover, recent information indicates a deepening of the housing contraction as well as some softening in labor markets. The Committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters, but it will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully. Today’s policy action, combined with those taken earlier, should help to promote moderate growth over time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity. However, downside risks to growth remain. The Committee will continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act in a timely manner as needed to address those risks. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Frederic S. Mishkin; Sandra Pianalto; Charles I. Plosser; Gary H. Stern; and Kevin M. Warsh. Voting against was Richard W. Fisher, who preferred no change in the target for the federal funds rate at this meeting. In a related action, the Board of Governors unanimously approved a 50-basis-point decrease in the discount rate to 3-1/2 percent. In taking this action, the Board approved the requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, and San Francisco.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from November 5 through December 11, 2007. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 11, 2007, and of a conference call held on December 6, 2007. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The summary description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/fomc. Minutes of Federal Open Market Committee, December 11, 2007 (862 KB PDF)
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York In my remarks today, I would like to consider the rationale for greater flexibility in monetary policy during periods of financial disruptions. Before doing so, however, I would like to make not just one, but two important disclaimers. First, as usual, my remarks reflect only my own views and are not intended to reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System. And second, my comments today should not be viewed as suggesting what policy actions I would be likely to advocate at the next FOMC meeting; rather, my purpose here is to discuss at a general level what can be said about the appropriate framework for monetary policy when we face a financial disruption of the sort that we have seen recently. I have two reasons for making the second disclaimer. First, in some circumstances, the appropriate near-term path for policy rates can be highly uncertain and may well evolve right up until the time of the meeting, depending on the implications of the incoming data. Second, as I noted in a speech in late November, I think there is too much focus on what decision will be made about the federal funds rate target at the next FOMC meeting (Mishkin, 2007e). What is important for pricing most financial assets is the path of monetary policy, not the particular action taken at a single meeting. For these reasons, I hope the recent enhancements to the Federal Reserve’s communication strategy--especially the greater prominence of the macroeconomic projections of FOMC participants--will help shift attention toward our medium-term objectives and our approach in meeting these objectives.1 In particular, the Congress has given the Federal Reserve a specific mandate (often referred to as the dual mandate) of fostering the objectives of price stability and maximum employment. Therefore, when the economy faces a disruption in financial markets, monetary policy must aim at balancing the risks to both economic growth and inflation. In the remainder of this speech, I will elaborate a bit further about why financial market disruptions can pose significant risks to the macroeconomy. Then I will explain how the science of monetary policy can help provide a conceptual framework for a systematic approach to managing these risks, and I will briefly discuss how that framework can be useful for understanding the course of Federal Reserve policy over the past few months. Financial Disruptions and Macroeconomic RiskBefore considering the appropriate policy response to strains in financial markets, it is essential to consider the sources of these strains and the potential consequences for the macroeconomy. In general, the U.S. financial system is an efficient mechanism for channeling funds to individuals or corporations with worthy investment opportunities, because the financial markets are highly competitive and provide strong incentives for collecting and processing information. Although financial markets and institutions deal with large volumes of information, some of this information is by nature asymmetric; that is, one party to a financial contract (typically the lender) has less accurate information about the likely distribution of outcomes than does the other party (typically the borrower).2Historically, banks and other financial intermediaries have played a major role in reducing the asymmetry of information, partly because these firms tend to have long-term relationships with their clients. Recent years have witnessed the development of new types of financial institutions and of new markets for trading financial products, and these innovations have had the potential (not always realized) to contribute to the efficient flow of information. The continuity of this information flow is crucial to the process of price discovery--that is, the ability of market participants to assess the fundamental worth of each financial asset. During periods of financial distress, however, information flows may be disrupted and price discovery may be impaired. As a result, such episodes tend to generate greater uncertainty, which contributes to higher credit spreads and greater reluctance to engage in market transactions. As I noted in another recent speech, financial disruptions are associated with two distinct types of risk:valuation riskandmacroeconomic risk(Mishkin, 2007d). Valuation risk refers to the extent that market participants become more uncertain about the returns on a specific asset, especially in cases where the security is highly complex and its underlying creditworthiness is relatively opaque. In recent months, for example, this type of risk has been central to the repricing of many structured credit products, as investors have struggled to understand how potential losses in subprime mortgages might filter through the various layers of securities linked to these loans. While valuation risk is relevant for individual investors, monetary policymakers are concerned with macroeconomic risk. In particular, strains in financial markets can spill over to the broader economy and have adverse consequences on output and employment. Furthermore, an economic downturn tends to generate even greater uncertainty about asset values, which could initiate an adverse feedback loop in which the financial disruption restrains economic activity; such a situation could lead to greater uncertainty and increased financial disruption, causing a further deterioration in macroeconomic activity, and so on. In the academic literature, this phenomenon is generally referred to as the financial accelerator (Bernanke and Gertler, 1989; Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist, 1996, 1999). The quality of balance sheets of households and firms comprise a key element of the financial accelerator mechanism, because some of the assets of each borrower may serve as collateral for its liabilities. The use of collateral helps mitigate the problem of asymmetric information, because the borrower’s incentive not to engage in excessive risk-taking is strengthened by the threat of losing the collateral: If a default does occur, the lender can take title to the borrower’s collateral and thereby recover some or all of the value of the loan. However, a macroeconomic downturn tends to diminish the value of many forms of collateral, thereby exacerbating the impact of frictions in credit markets and reinforcing the propagation of the adverse feedback loop. Risk Management and the Science of Monetary PolicyGiven that a financial market disruption can pose significant risks to the macroeconomy, risk management is crucial in formulating the appropriate response of monetary policy. Unfortunately, most existing studies of optimal monetary policy have completely abstracted from considerations of macroeconomic risk, because these studies use specific formulations or approximations which imply that the design of the optimal monetary policy does not depend on the magnitude or direction of uncertainty facing the economy‑‑an implication referred to as certainty equivalence. To elaborate on these issues, it’s necessary for me to proceed at a somewhat more technical level, but I promise to use plain English again later in the speech. In particular, the standard textbook approach to analyzing optimal monetary policy utilizes alinear-quadratic(LQ)framework, in which the equations describing the dynamic behavior of the economy arelinearand the objective function specifying the goals of policy isquadratic. For example, in light of the dual mandate, monetary policy is often characterized as seeking to minimize a loss function comprising the squared value of the inflation gap (that is, actual inflation minus desired inflation) and the squared value of the output gap (that is, actual output minus potential output). Under these assumptions, the optimal policy is certainty equivalent: This policy can be characterized by a linear time-invariant response to each shock, and the magnitude of these responses does not depend on the variances or any other aspect of the probability distribution of the shocks. In such an environment, optimal monetary policy does not focus on risk management. Furthermore, when financial market participants and wage and price setters are relatively forward-looking, the optimal policy under commitment is characterized by considerable inertia.3 Indeed, the actual course of monetary policy over the past quarter-century has typically been very smooth in the United States as well as in many other industrial economies.For example, the Federal Reserve has usually adjusted the federal funds rate in increments of 25 or 50 basis points (that is, 1/4 or 1/2 percentage point) and sharp reversals in the funds rate path have been rare. Numerous empirical studies have characterized monetary policy using Taylor-style rules in which the policy rate responds to the inflation gap and the output gap; these studies have generally found that the fit of the regression equation is improved by including a lagged interest rate that reflects the smoothness of the typical adjustment pattern.4 While an LQ framework may provide a reasonable approximation to how monetary policy should operate under fairly normal circumstances, this approach is less likely to be adequate for thinking about monetary policy when the risk of poor economic performance is unusually high. First, the dynamic behavior of the economy may well exhibit nonlinearities, at least in response to some shocks (Hamilton, 1989; Kim and Nelson, 1999; and Kim, Morley, and Piger, 2005). Furthermore, the use of a quadratic objective function does not reflect the extent to which most individuals have strong preferences for minimizing the incidence of worst-case scenarios. Therefore, given that the central bank’s ultimate goal should be to maximize the public welfare, I believe that the design of monetary policy ought to reflect the public’s preferences, especially with respect to avoiding particularly adverse economic outcomes. Most of the quantitative studies of optimal monetary policy have also assumed that the shocks hitting the economy have a time-invariant Gaussian distribution, that is, a classical bell curve with symmetric and well-behaved tails. In reality, however, the distribution of shocks hitting the economy is more complex. In some instances, the uncertainty facing the economy is clearly skewed in one direction or another; again, this is likely when there are significant financial disruptions. The Federal Reserve often reports on our judgments regarding the degree of skewness and the associated economic costs by giving assessments of the “Balance of Risks” in the press releases that are issued following FOMC meetings. In addition, at least in some circumstances, the shocks hitting the economy may exhibit excess kurtosis, commonly referred to as tail risk because the probability of relatively large disturbances is higher than would be implied by a Gaussian distribution. In that light, one element of the recent enhancements to the Federal Reserve’s communication strategy is that FOMC participants now provide assessments of the relative degree of uncertainty. For example, in the “Summary of Economic Projections”issued in late November, FOMC participants indicated that the degree of uncertainty regarding the economic growth outlook was relatively high compared to the average degree of uncertainty over the past two decades. This account could be interpreted as a statement that the Committee perceived the tail risk as unusually large. With a nonquadratic objective function (consistent with the importance of uncertainty for the course of monetary policy) as well as nonlinear dynamics and non-Gaussian shocks, optimal monetary policy will also be nonlinear and will tend to focus on risk management. Policy in this setting tends to respond aggressively when a large shock becomes evident; for this reason, the degree of inertia in such cases may be markedly lower than in more routine circumstances. Indeed, as I will argue, I believe that financial disruptions of the sort that have been experienced in recent months tend to have highly nonlinear effects on the economy. Thus, compared with the standard case, optimal policy may well involve much more rapid adjustment‑‑a pattern that I will refer to aspolicy flexibility. Formal models of how monetary policy should respond to financial disruptions are unfortunately not yet available, and this is an area of research that I plan to pursue with Board staff. However, I do have some thoughts about what a systematic framework should look like, and I would like to share them with you without going into any further technical details. A Risk-Management Framework for Dealing with Financial DisruptionsAlthough the assumptions behind the LQ framework might be reasonable during normal times, financial disruptions are likely to produce large deviations from these assumptions, making it especially important to adopt a more flexible framework for analyzing the behavior of a central bank that practices risk management. What factors come into play with special vigor during financial disruptions? First, financial disruptions are likely to lead to highly nonlinear behavior because the cost and availability of credit can shift suddenly. Furthermore, even though linear approximations of the financial accelerator mechanism have typically been used in recent quantitative studies, this mechanism is, in fact, highly nonlinear (Levin, Natalucci, and Zakrajšek, 2004). Finally, because financial disruptions, if severe enough, raise the probability of particularly adverse outcomes, the standard approach of employing a quadratic approximation of the objective function may not be sufficiently accurate to convey the extent to which policymakers seek to avoid such outcomes in maximizing the public’s welfare. In light of these risk-management considerations, how should monetary policy respond to financial disruptions? Periods of financial instability are characterized by valuation risk and macroeconomic risk. Monetary policy cannot‑‑and should not‑‑aim at minimizing valuation risk, but policy should aim at reducing macroeconomic risk. By cutting interest rates to offset the negative effects of financial turmoil on aggregate economic activity, monetary policy can reduce the likelihood that a financial disruption might set off an adverse feedback loop. The resulting reduction in uncertainty can then make it easier for the markets to collect the information that facilitates price discovery, thus hastening the return of normal market functioning. To achieve this result most effectively, monetary policy needs to be timely, decisive, and flexible. First,timely actionis crucial when an episode of financial instability becomes sufficiently severe to threaten the core macroeconomic objectives of the central bank. In such circumstances, waiting too long to ease policy could result in further deterioration of the macroeconomy and might well increase the overall amount of easing that would eventually be needed. Therefore, monetary policy must be at least as preemptive in responding to financial shocks as in responding to other types of disturbances to the economy. When financial markets are working well, monetary policy can respond primarily to the incoming flow of economic data about production, employment, and inflation. When a financial disruption occurs, however, greater consideration needs to be given to indicators of market liquidity, credit spreads, and other financial market measures that can provide information about sharp changes in the magnitude of tail risk to the macroeconomy. Second, policymakers should be prepared fordecisive actionin response to financial disruptions. In such circumstances, the most likely outcome‑‑referred to as the modal forecast‑‑for the economy may be fairly benign, but there may be a significant risk of more severe adverse outcomes. In such circumstances, the central bank may prefer to take out insurance by easing the stance of policy further than if the distribution of probable outcomes were perceived as fairly symmetric around the modal forecast. Moreover, in such circumstances, these policy actions should not be interpreted by the public or market participants as implying a deterioration in the central bank’s assessment of the most likely outcome for the economy, but rather as an appropriate form of risk management that reduces the risk of particularly adverse outcomes. Third,policy flexibilityis crucial throughout the evolution of a financial market disruption. During the onset of the episode, this flexibility may be evident from the decisive easing of policy that is intended to forestall the contractionary effects of the disruption and provide insurance against the downside risks to the macroeconomy. However, it is important to recognize that financial markets can also turn around quickly, thereby reducing the drag on the economy as well as the degree of tail risk. Therefore, the central bank needs to monitor credit spreads and other incoming data for signs of financial market recovery and, if necessary, take back some of the insurance; thus, at each stage of the episode, the appropriate monetary policy may exhibit much less smoothing than would be typical in other circumstances. Of course, while policymakers may need to react aggressively to financial market information that indicates a significant shift in macroeconomic risks, monetary policy would typically move back toward a more incremental approach once the risks to the macroeconomy have returned to more usual levels. Risk Management and the Anchoring of Inflation ExpectationsAn important proviso to my discussion thus far involves the other part of the dual mandate, price stability. A central bank must always be concerned with inflation as well as growth. As I have emphasized in an earlier speech about inflation dynamics, the behavior of inflation is significantly influenced by the public’s expectations about where inflation is likely to head in the long run (Mishkin, 2007a). Therefore, preemptive actions of the sort I have described here would be counterproductive if these actions caused an increase in inflation expectations and the underlying rate of inflation; in other words, the flexibility to act preemptively against a financial disruption presumes that inflation expectations are well anchored and unlikely to rise during a period of temporary monetary easing. Indeed, as I have argued elsewhere, a commitment to a strong nominal anchor is crucial for both aspects of the dual mandate, that is, for achieving maximum employment as well as for keeping inflation under control (Mishkin, 2007b). How can a central bank keep inflation expectations solidly anchored so it can respond preemptively to financial disruptions? The central bank has to have earned credibility with financial markets and the public through a record of previous actions to maintain low and stable inflation. Furthermore, the central bank needs to clearly indicate the rationale for its policy actions. Policymakers also need to monitor information about underlying inflation and longer-run inflation expectations, and if the evidence indicates that these inflation expectations have begun rising significantly, the central bank should be prepared to hold steady or even raise the policy rate. The Federal Reserve’s Recent Monetary Policy DecisionsThe framework I have outlined here can be useful in understanding the rationale for the recent decisions of the Federal Reserve and our policy approach going forward. Yesterday, Chairman Bernanke provided a detailed discussion of economic and financial developments and of the Federal Reserve’s policy strategy, so here I will just relate some key points of his discussion to the major themes that I have emphasized today. First, we are proceeding in atimelymanner in countering any developments that might threaten economic or financial stability. The FOMC has not been basing its decisions solely on the incoming flow of economic data; for example, the sequence of interest rate cuts was initiated last fall even though growth in the gross domestic product had been quite strong in the third quarter. Rather, our policy approach has reflected the rapid deterioration of financial market conditions, which has contributed to a worsening of the economic outlook and the emergence of pronounced downside risks to economic growth and employment. Second, in my view, the Federal Reserve has been acting and will continue to actdecisively, in the sense that our policy strategy reflects the evolution of the balance of risks and not simply a change in the modal outlook for the macroeconomy. The disruption in financial markets poses a substantial downside risk to the outlook for economic growth, and adverse economic or financial news has the potential to cause further strains. In that light, the Federal Reserve’s policy strategy is aimed at providing insurance to help avoid more severe macroeconomic outcomes. Third, because we recognize that financial and economic conditions can change quickly, the Federal Reserve is prepared to respondflexiblyto incoming information. Of course, in making its decisions, the Federal Reserve also gives careful consideration to the outlook and risks associated with the second aspect of our dual mandate, namely, price stability. Because longer-run inflation expectations appear to have remained reasonably well anchored, in my view, the easing of the stance of policy in response to deteriorating financial conditions seems unlikely to have an adverse impact on the outlook for inflation. Nonetheless, we will continue to monitor incoming data on inflation and inflation expectations, especially given the potential risks to price stability that are associated with the rapid increase in energy prices and the depreciation of the dollar. In short, the FOMC will determine the future course of monetary policy in light of the evolution of the macroeconomic outlook and the balance of risks to our objectives of maximum employment and price stability. ConclusionsThe monetary policy that is appropriate during an episode of financial market disruption is likely to be quite different than in times of normal market functioning. When financial markets experience a significant disruption, a systematic approach to risk management requires policymakers to be preemptive in responding to the macroeconomic implications of incoming financial market information, and decisive actions may be required to reduce the likelihood of an adverse feedback loop. The central bank also needs to exhibit flexibility--that is, less inertia than would otherwise be typical‑‑not only in moving decisively to reduce downside risks arising from a financial market disruption, but also in being prepared to take back some of that insurance in response to a recovery in financial markets or an upward shift in inflation risks. Finally, while I have argued that monetary policy needs to be decisive and timely in responding to a financial market disruption, a lot of art as well as science is involved in determining the severity and duration of the disruption and the associated implications for the macroeconomy (Mishkin, 2007c). Indeed, assessing the macroeconomic risks to output and inflation in such circumstances remains among the most difficult challenges faced by monetary policymakers. Furthermore, a central bank may well be able to employ non-monetary tools‑‑such as liquidity provision‑‑to help alleviate the adverse impact from financial disruptions. All of these considerations must be taken into account in determining the most appropriate course of monetary policy. ReferencesBenigno, Pierpaolo, and Michael Woodford (2003). “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy: A Linear-Quadratic Approach,” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 271-332. Bernanke, Ben S. (2004).“Gradualism,”speech delivered at an economics luncheon co-sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco (Seattle Branch) and theUniversity of Washington, held in Seattle, May 20. Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler (1989).“Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,”American Economic Review, vol. 79 (March), pp. 14-31. Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1996).“The Financial Accelerator and the Flight to Quality,”Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 78 (February), pp. 1-15. Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999). “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1, part 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 1341-93. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1998).“Monetary Policy Rules in Practice: Some International Evidence,”European Economic Review, vol. 42 (June), pp. 1033-67. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999).“The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,”Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37 (December), pp. 1661-707. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000).“Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 115 (February), pp. 147-80. English, William B., William R. Nelson, and Brian P. Sack (2003).“Interpreting the Significance of the Lagged Interest Rate in Estimated Monetary Policy Rules,”Contributions to Macroeconomics, vol. 3 (no. 1), article 5. Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000).“Optimal Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,”Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 46 (October), pp. 281-313. Giannoni, Marc P. , and Michael Woodford (2005). “Optimal Inflation-Targeting Rules,” in Ben S. Bernanke and Michael Woodford, eds.,Inflation Targeting. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 93-172. Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert King (1997). “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role of Monetary Policy,” in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 231-83. Hamilton, James D. (1989).“A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonstationary Time Series and the Business Cycle,”Econometrica, vol. 57 (March), pp. 357-84. Kim, Chang-Jin, and Charles Nelson (1999).“Has the U.S. Economy Become More Stable? A Bayesian Approach Based on a Markov-Switching Model of the Business Cycle,”Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 81 (November), pp. 608-16. Kim, Chang-Jin, James Morley, and Jeremy Piger (2005).“Nonlinearity and the Permanent Effects of Recessions,”Journal of Applied Econometrics, vol. 20 (no. 2), pp. 291-309. King, Robert G., and Alexander L. Wolman (1999). “What Should the Monetary Authority Do When Prices Are Sticky?” in John Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 349-98. Levin, Andrew T., Fabio M. Natalucci, and Egon Zakrajšek (2004).“The Magnitude and Cyclical Behavior of Financial Market Frictions,”Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2004-70. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December. Levin, Andrew, Alexei Onatski, John C. Williams, and Noah Williams (2005). “Monetary Policy under Uncertainty in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models,” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 229-88. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007a).“Inflation Dynamics,”speech delivered at the Annual Macro Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 23. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007b).“Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate,”speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007c).“Will Monetary Policy Become More of a Science?”Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-44. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007d).“Financial Instability and Monetary Policy,”speech delivered at the Risk USA 2007 Conference, New York, November 5. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007e).“The Federal Reserve’s Enhanced Communication Strategy and the Science of Monetary Policy,”speech delivered to the Undergraduate Economics Association, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., November 29. Rotemberg, Julio, and Michael Woodford (1997). “An Optimization-Based Econometric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 297-346. Sack, Brian (2000).“Does the Fed Act Gradually? A VAR Analysis,”Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 46 (August), pp. 229-56. Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe (2005). “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in a Medium-Scale Macroeconomic Model,” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 383-425. Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters (2003).“An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area,”Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 1 (September), pp. 1123-75. Woodford, Michael (2003).Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Footnotes 1.I appreciate the comments and assistance ofWilliam English,Andrew Levin,Brian Madigan,Roberto Perli,David Reifschneider, andDavid Wilcox.Return to text 2.Such asymmetry leads to two prominent difficulties for the functioning of the financial system: adverse selection and moral hazard. Adverse selection arises when investments that are most likely to produce an undesirable (adverse) outcome are the most likely to be financed (selected). For example, investors who intend to take on large amounts of risk are the most likely to be willing to seek out loans because they know that they are unlikely to pay them back. Moral hazard arises because a borrower has incentives to invest in high-risk projects, in which the borrower does well if the project succeeds but the lender bears a substantial loss if the project fails.Return to text 3.The now-classic textbook on this topic is Woodford (2003); refer also to Goodfriend and King (1997); Rotemberg and Woodford (1997); Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999); King and Wolman (1999); Erceg, Henderson, and Levin (2000); Benigno and Woodford (2003); Giannoni and Woodford (2005); Levin and others (2005); and Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2005);Return to text 4.Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1998, 2000); Sack (2000); English, Nelson, and Sack (2003); Smets and Wouters (2003); Levin and others (2005); further discussion is in Bernanke (2004).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Traders Bank, Spencer, West Virginia, a state member bank. Traders Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires Traders Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $4,200, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a Consent Order of Prohibition against Aldo N. Morales, former vice president, loan officer, and institution-affiliated party of Coconut Grove Bank, Miami, Florida. Mr. Morales, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order which was based on his alleged violations of law, unsafe and unsound banking practices, and breaches of fiduciary duties to the Bank, in connection with his activities as a lending officer with respect to the Bank's dealer-referred subprime automobile lending program. A copy of the Consent Order is attached.
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the National Association for Business Economics Session, Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meeting, New Orleans, Louisiana Good communication is essential to successful central banking. It is critical to preserving the democratic accountability and public legitimacy of central banks that, for good reasons, have been granted a high degree of insulation from short-run political pressures. And good communication strengthens the effectiveness of good policy, largely because expectations are so important to the choices that households and businesses make about spending and saving and about prices and wages, as well as to the asset prices that help shape those choices. Private decisions are more likely to reinforce the achievement of central bank objectives if decisionmakers understand the goals of the central bank, its evaluation of the forces bearing on the economy, and its possible responses to economic shocks. Good communication is a complement to good policy, not a substitute for it. Ultimately, central banks are judged on the outcomes for the economy--how well they meet their objectives. No amount of well-designed communication can counter the effects of consistently deficient analysis or poorly judged policy choices. But clear explanations and public frameworks can themselves help to promote good policy. Feedback from the market is more useful to central banks when the market understands the central bank's reasoning, strategy, and objectives, even if market participants don't agree with the central bank's outlook. And the discussions and decisions on how to frame the public presentation of policy can lead to improvements in internal deliberations. Among the most important criteria for judging the effectiveness of communications and transparency, then, is whether or not they impede making the best possible policy decisions. Transparency should not be allowed to inhibit the free give and take and the testing of ideas at meetings that are so important to reaching good decisions. And communication must deal with the diversity of views on the policy committee; that diversity is a strength of policy committees, but it can make it challenging to arrive at a clear, consistent public explanation of a policy decision, because policymakers can arrive at the same policy position based on different rationales. Good communication must also take into account uncertainty. Understandably, market participants want to know what is going to happen next--to the economy and to policy. But we cannot say more than we know, and we should strive to avoid giving people the impression that we know more than we do. I'll touch on a number of these themes as I review recent Federal Reserve communications. Before I do, I have one last comment: Our communication strategy is a work in process--we are constantly looking for additional steps that could reasonably be expected to improve public understanding and policy effectiveness. However, we move slowly in changing what we say in part because ill-conceived communication policy has the power to harm the economy, and, even if that harm were to be realized, the policy could be difficult to alter. Enhanced Economic ProjectionsAs already noted, I believe that the additional information in the enhanced projections the FOMC announced in November should be a substantial step forward in increasing public understanding of monetary policy decisions.2The enhanced projections give more information about the FOMC's medium-term outlook for the economy. That's particularly important, because the lags in the effect of policy on economic activity and prices mean that policy decisions are necessarily based on a view of the likely path for the economy over several years, relative to the Federal Reserve's legislated objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. In that regard, one of the most significant aspects of the initiative is the lengthening of the forecast horizon from 1-1/2 to 2 years previously to about 3 years. Shorter-term forecasts tend to be dominated by the interpretation of how recent shocks to the economy will play out. By lengthening the projection horizon, FOMC members will also be giving a sense of their assessment of a number of important structural characteristics of the economy that influence the conduct of policy. For example, given the starting point for the outlook, the forecasts will trace out a path for the economy to preserve or reestablish maximum employment and price stability that will reflect FOMC participants' views of the relative variation in output and inflation that is possible in the short run. In addition, FOMC participants' projections of growth and unemployment in the third year of their forecasts will be influenced significantly by their interpretation of maximum sustainable growth and resource utilization, given their understanding of the likely growth of productivity and structure of labor markets. And our projections for inflation in year three will depend importantly on our sense of what inflation rate is consistent with our mandates for employment and price stability. That projection, along with the path to year-three inflation, should help the public differentiate short-term shocks to price stability from the longer-term price trends it should use for planning purposes. Over time, as actual inflation tends toward the year-three forecasts, inflation expectations may well become even more firmly anchored than they are today. In another change, the Committee included total consumer inflation in its forecasts along with the core measure it had been using. We have always recognized that "price stability" was not intended to apply to a subset of prices that people paid. However, we have also found that excluding volatile food and energy prices generally gives a better sense of underlying inflation pressures that are likely to persist and dominate total inflation over time. Hence, core inflation has been the most useful guide to the factors affecting policy when our forecast horizon was relatively short. Because the final year or so of the longer horizon is heavily influenced by our longer-term objectives, a more comprehensive measure is now also useful and appropriate. FOMC members will be making their forecasts quarterly, thereby adding two rounds to the semiannual forecasts keyed to our monetary policy reports and Chairman Bernanke's testimonies. Economic circumstances, and thus the appropriate path for policy, can change rapidly, and we will continue to address those changes in our policy announcements and the minutes for our meetings. However, the increased frequency of forecasts will give us more opportunities to place such changes in the context of our medium-term outlook. The forecasts themselves are each Committee member's assessment of the most likely outcome for the economy. From time to time, however, policy decisions must take account of less likely, but especially important, potential outcomes. A significant contribution of the enhanced forecasts is to report more regularly and systematically on Committee members' views on the degree of uncertainty in the medium-term outlook and whether the risks to the most likely forecasts are skewed in any particular direction. Both elements can influence Committee actions. Uncertainty arises not only from future economic shocks, but also from our incomplete knowledge of the structure of the economy and of the full characteristics of recent economic developments that had not been anticipated. When, as now, the FOMC believes that uncertainty is high, it may need to give greater weight to new information and be readier to revise its forecasts. Policy decisions may also take into account the substantial risk that the economy will turn out differently than the most likely forecast, especially when that alternative is seen as having unusually large costs in terms of public welfare. The enhanced forecasts will be accompanied by a narrative derived from the forecast submissions and the discussion of those forecasts at the meeting. This narrative will give the Committee an opportunity to tell the story behind the forecast--the most important forces it sees as bearing on the outlook and on the risks around the outlook, extending and expanding on the discussion in the minutes. This explanation, as much as the forecasts themselves, may well be most useful to the public in interpreting new data and developments and their implications for the economy and policy. The narrative will regularly include Committee members' take on why reality has deviated from the expectations embodied in past forecasts--often a key to understanding and anticipating policy actions. In the FOMC's discussion of communications, we considered, but did not adopt, a number of proposals at this time, and I thought it might be useful for me to briefly address a few of these, while keeping in mind my previous comment that we are constantly reviewing our communication strategy. As noted previously, our longer-term forecasts of inflation are presumably influenced by our individual assessments of what inflation rate would be acceptable and consistent with fulfilling our congressional mandates, but we chose not to ask each participant for an explicit numerical definition of price stability. We believed that the steps we were taking would provide additional information that could help clarify how we viewed price stability that at the same time would allow us to remain consistent with giving information about how we expected to fulfill our dual mandate. I expect that our new projections will provide some of the benefits of an explicit target in better anchoring inflation expectations while not giving up any flexibility to react to developments that threaten high employment. As we gain experience with the enhanced forecasts, we will continue to evaluate how best to promote stability of both prices and employment. When FOMC participants make their forecasts, each individual assumes "appropriate" monetary policy--that is, the policy that is most likely to foster the achievement of our objectives. Forecasts made under such an assumption should better reveal the participants' views of the underlying structural parameters of the economy--the best possible tradeoffs between inflation and output stability in the short run and longer-term price and output trends--than would be made assuming an externally derived path for rates, such as the path implicit in market interest rates. If the markets' path for appropriate policy were at odds with my judgment about appropriate policy, I would have to write down a forecast whose path or end points were not consistent with what I believed were our best efforts to achieve our objectives. The FOMC decided against reporting a range or histogram for participants' assumptions about appropriate policy, because it was concerned about the potential for unintended consequences of such a publication. Specifically, it worried about a tendency for the public to infer more of a commitment to following the implied path than would be appropriate for good policy. In that circumstance, deviating from the path would risk market instability, and concerns about such dynamic responses would complicate already difficult policy choices. To be sure, over time, market participants might learn how little weight they should give any published average of "appropriate" policies, but the learning process could take time and be costly, and we would not be assured of a successful outcome. Recent FOMC CommunicationCommunication in a period of market turmoil as we have experienced in the past several months poses special challenges. The situation has been changing rapidly, taking unexpected twists and turns. Every episode of financial turmoil is different, which greatly complicates the analysis of how the financial situation is likely to evolve in the current circumstances, how lenders and borrowers might react, and how spending and prices could be affected. Central bankers, like everyone else, necessarily are operating with incomplete information about the state of the financial system, and some of the day-to-day information they are getting is colored by the perspective of the people giving it. With everyone looking for clues as to underlying conditions, central bank communications will be scrutinized especially closely, with the risk of unanticipated and unwelcome reactions; a frequently debated question within the central bank is whether a given statement will reassure market participants or alarm them. At any given point, the FOMC must make judgments about an appropriate policy and its communication based on what it knows at the time and thinks, given that information, it can anticipate for the future. Because of the uncertainty and fluidity of the situation, the FOMC needs to be aware of the high odds of unanticipated developments as it formulates and discusses policy; however, market participants and other observers also must keep the same caveats in mind as they interpret what the FOMC is saying. In many respects, our recent communication has been driven by the necessity to announce and explain unusual actions we have taken. Examples of this are the reduction in the penalty on the primary discount rate in August and the inauguration of a Term Auction Facility in December. In addition, we've tried to adhere to certain principles in our communications over this period. First, we have tried to provide more information than usual to reduce uncertainty and clarify our intentions. This effort is particularly noticeable with respect to open market operations--beginning in August, we have been especially forthcoming about the operations we were undertaking to manage actual or potential disturbances in money markets. Second, we have attempted to let people know when our views of the macroeconomic situation had changed materially between FOMC meetings. For instance, we issued a FOMC statement about the changing balance of risks on August 17 and Chairman Bernanke delivered a speech in late November after market conditions had deteriorated again. And third, we have tried to be open in our balance-of-risks portion of our announcement about our perceptions of the shifting degree of uncertainty in the outlook caused by the recent turmoil. In both September and December we said that the uncertainty was so great that we couldn't usefully characterize the balance of risks; at the end of October, when markets looked as though they were settling down and spillovers beyond the housing sector might be limited, we thought we could characterize "rough balance." Because the situation has been so fluid and so uncertain in its effects, the speeches of individual FOMC participants have given varied interpretations of the developments and their implications for policy. The resulting dispersion of messages has bothered market participants seeking clear, unambiguous guidance about the views of the central bank. The public should understand that the FOMC members do not coordinate schedules and messages, and that members' views are likely to be especially diverse when, as in the current situation, circumstances are changing quickly and are subject to many different analyses. The diversity of views on the Committee is one of its strengths and vital to arriving at sound decisions. As I noted in the introduction to this talk, sound decisions are the most important contributions we can make to further the accomplishment of our public policy objectives. I'm sure that the communications of the Federal Reserve, like all human endeavors, can be improved. We will be learning from our own experiences and those of our sister central banks, as well as from discussions such as this one organized by the National Association for Business Economics. Footnotes 1.These views are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.The policy regarding enhanced projections was announced in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007),press release, Nov. 14. Also, the new policy was discussed in a speech given by Chairman Bernanke that day (Ben S. Bernanke, 2007,"Federal Reserve Communications,"speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, Nov. 14). And the first set of projections under the new policy was prepared in conjunction with the Oct. 30-31, 2007, FOMC meeting and released in the minutes of that meeting (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2007,press release, Nov. 20).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced that the Federal Reserve Banks distributed approximately $34.437 billion of their $41.941 billion total income to the U.S. Treasury during 2007. Federal Reserve System income is derived primarily from interest earned on U.S. government securities that the Federal Reserve has acquired through open market operations. This income amounted to $40.298 billion in 2007. Additionally, income from fees for the provision of priced services to depository institutions totaled $878 million. The remaining income of $765 million includes earnings on foreign currencies, earnings from loans, and other income. Net operating expenses of the twelve Reserve Banks totaled $2.608 billion in 2007. In addition, the cost of earnings credits granted to depository institutions amounted to $242 million. The Reserve Banks were assessed for Board expenditures totaling $296 million and for the cost of currency totaling $576 million. Net additions to income amounted to $198 million, primarily representing unrealized gains on assets denominated in foreign currencies that are revalued to reflect current market exchange rates, which is offset, in part, by interest expense on reverse repurchase agreements. Net income for the Federal Reserve Banks in 2007 amounted to $38.551 billion. Under the Board’s policy, each Reserve Bank’s net income was transferred to the U.S. Treasury, after providing for $992 million in statutory dividends to member banks and $3.121 billion to equate surplus to paid-in capital.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved amendments to Appendix A of Regulation CC that reflect the restructuring of the check processing operations of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, and Cleveland, and provided notice relating to future changes to Appendix A. Appendix A provides a routing symbol guide that helps depository institutions determine the maximum permissible hold periods for most deposited checks. To ensure that the information in Appendix A accurately describes the structure of check processing operations within the Federal Reserve System, the Board is amending the lists of routing symbols in Appendix A associated with the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, and Cleveland to reflect the transfer of check processing operations from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Utica office to the head offices of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Cleveland. To coincide with the effective date of the underlying reassignment of check processing functions, the amendments to Appendix A under the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Cleveland that revise the listings for the Utica office and the Cleveland headoffice are effective February 23, 2008, and the amendments to Appendix A under the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Philadelphia that revise thelistings for the Philadelphia head office and delete the remaining listings for the Utica office are effective March 29, 2008. As a result of these changes, some checks deposited in the affected regions that currently are nonlocal checks will become local checks that are subject to shorter permissible hold periods. The attachment also provides advance notice that the Reserve Banks have decided to cease check processing operations, as they announced in June 2007, at all of their check processing offices except four--Cleveland, Philadelphia, Atlanta, and Dallas--between 2008 and early 2011. The attachment lists the branches and offices from which and to which the Reserve Banks plan to transfer check processing operations and the tentative timeframe for each transfer. The Board intends to publish each related amendment to Appendix A approximately 60 days prior to the effective date of the amendment to give affected banks ample time to make necessary changes. The Board’s notice is attached. Federal Register Notice55 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public website,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Spratt, Representative Ryan, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here to offer my views on the near-term economic outlook and related issues. Developments in Financial MarketsSince late last summer, financial markets in the United States and in a number of other industrialized countries have been under considerable strain. Heightened investor concerns about the credit quality of mortgages, especially subprime mortgages with adjustable interest rates, triggered the financial turmoil. Notably, as the rising rate of delinquencies of subprime mortgages threatened to impose losses on holders of even highly rated securities, investors were led to question the reliability of the credit ratings for a range of financial products, including structured credit products and various special-purpose vehicles. As investors lost confidence in their ability to value complex financial products, they became increasingly unwilling to hold such instruments. As a result, flows of credit through these vehicles have contracted significantly. As these problems multiplied, money center banks and other large financial institutions, which in many cases had served as sponsors of these financial products, came under increasing pressure to take the assets of the off-balance-sheet vehicles onto their own balance sheets. Bank balance sheets were swelled further by holdings of nonconforming mortgages, leveraged loans, and other credits that the banks had extended but for which well-functioning secondary markets no longer existed. Even as their balance sheets expanded, banks began to report large losses, reflecting marked declines in the market prices of mortgages and other assets. Thus, banks too became subject to valuation uncertainty, as could be seen in the sharp movements in their share prices and in other market indicators such as quotes on credit default swaps. The combination of larger balance sheets and unexpected losses prompted banks to become protective of their liquidity and balance sheet capacity and thus to become less willing to provide funding to other market participants, including other banks. Banks have also evidently become more restrictive in their lending to firms and households. More-expensive and less-available credit seems likely to impose a measure of restraint on economic growth. The Outlook for the Real EconomyTo date, the largest effects of the financial turmoil appear to have been on the housing market, which, as you know, has deteriorated significantly over the past two years or so. The virtual shutdown of the subprime mortgage market and a widening of spreads on jumbo mortgage loans have further reduced the demand for housing, while foreclosures are adding to the already-elevated inventory of unsold homes. New home sales and housing starts have both fallen by about half from their respective peaks. The number of homes in inventory has begun to edge down, but at the current sales pace the months' supply of new homes has continued to climb, and home prices are falling in many parts of the country. The slowing in residential construction, which subtracted about 1 percentage point from the growth rate of real gross domestic product in the third quarter of 2007, likely curtailed growth even more in the fourth quarter, and it may continue to be a drag on growth for a good part of this year as well. Recently, incoming information has suggested that the baseline outlook for real activity in 2008 has worsened and that the downside risks to growth have become more pronounced. In particular, a number of factors, including continuing increases in energy prices, lower equity prices, and softening home values, seem likely to weigh on consumer spending as we move into 2008. Consumer spending also depends importantly on the state of the labor market, as wages and salaries are the primary source of income for most households. Labor market conditions in December were disappointing; the unemployment rate increased 0.3 percentage point, to 5.0 percent from 4.7 percent in November, and private payroll employment declined. Employment in residential construction posted another substantial reduction, and employment in manufacturing and retail trade also decreased significantly. Employment in services continued to grow, but at a slower pace in December than in earlier months. It would be a mistake to read too much into one month's data. However, developments in the labor market will bear close attention. In the business sector, investment in equipment and software appears to have been sluggish in the fourth quarter, while nonresidential construction grew briskly. In light of the softening in economic activity and the adverse developments in credit markets, growth in both types of investment spending seems likely to slow in coming months. Outside the United States, however, economic activity in our major trading partners has continued to expand vigorously. U.S. exports will likely continue to grow at a healthy pace in coming quarters, providing some impetus to the domestic economy. Financial conditions continue to pose a downside risk to the outlook. Market participants still express considerable uncertainty about the appropriate valuation of complex financial assets and about the extent of additional losses that may be disclosed in the future. On the whole, despite improvements in some areas, the financial situation remains fragile, and many funding markets remain impaired. Adverse economic or financial news thus has the potential to increase financial strains and to lead to further constraints on the supply of credit to households and businesses. Even as the outlook for real activity has weakened, some important developments have occurred on the inflation front. Most notably, the same increase in oil prices that may be a negative influence on growth is also lifting overall consumer prices. Last year, food prices also increased exceptionally rapidly by recent standards, further boosting overall consumer price inflation. The most recent reading on overall personal consumption expenditure inflation showed that prices in November were 3.6 percent higher than they were a year earlier. Core price inflation (which excludes prices of food and energy) has stepped up recently as well, with November prices up almost 2-1/4 percent from a year earlier. Part of this rise may reflect pass-through of energy costs to the prices of core consumer goods and services, as well as the effects of the depreciation of the dollar on import prices, although some other prices--such as those for some medical and financial services--have also accelerated lately.1 Thus far, the public's expectations of future inflation appear to have remained reasonably well anchored, and pressures on resource utilization have diminished a bit. Further, futures markets suggest that food and energy prices will decelerate over the coming year. Given these factors, overall and core inflation should moderate this year and next, so long as the public's confidence in the Federal Reserve's commitment to price stability is unshaken. However, any tendency of inflation expectations to become unmoored or for the Fed's inflation-fighting credibility to be eroded could greatly complicate the task of sustaining price stability and reduce the central bank's policy flexibility to counter shortfalls in growth in the future. Accordingly, in the months ahead we will be closely monitoring the inflation situation, particularly inflation expectations. Monetary Policy ResponseThe Federal Reserve has taken a number of steps to help markets return to more orderly functioning and to foster its economic objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price stability. Broadly, the Federal Reserve's response has followed two tracks: efforts to improve market liquidity and functioning and the pursuit of our macroeconomic objectives through monetary policy. To help address the significant strains in short-term money markets, the Federal Reserve has taken a range of steps. Notably, on August 17, the Federal Reserve Board cut the discount rate--the rate at which it lends directly to banks--by 50 basis points, or 1/2 percentage point, and it has since maintained the spread between the federal funds rate and the discount rate at 50 basis points, rather than the customary 100 basis points. In addition, the Federal Reserve recently unveiled a term auction facility, or TAF, through which prespecified amounts of discount window credit can be auctioned to eligible borrowers. The goal of the TAF is to reduce the incentive for banks to hoard cash and increase their willingness to provide credit to households and firms. In December, the Fed successfully auctioned $40 billion through this facility. And, as part of a coordinated operation, the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank lent an additional $24 billion to banks in their respective jurisdictions. This month, the Federal Reserve is auctioning $60 billion in twenty-eight‑day credit through the TAF, to be spread across two auctions. TAF auctions will continue as long as necessary to address elevated pressures in short-term funding markets, and we will continue to work closely and cooperatively with other central banks to address market strains that could hamper the achievement of our broader economic objectives. Although the TAF and other liquidity-related actions appear to have had some positive effects, such measures alone cannot fully address fundamental concerns about credit quality and valuation, nor do these actions relax the balance sheet constraints on financial institutions. Hence, they alone cannot eliminate the financial restraints affecting the broader economy. Monetary policy (that is, the management of the short-term interest rate) is the Fed's best tool for pursuing our macroeconomic objectives, namely to promote maximum sustainable employment and price stability. Monetary policy has responded proactively to evolving conditions. As you know, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) cut its target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points at its September meeting and by 25 basis points each at the October and December meetings. In total, therefore, we have brought the federal funds rate down by 1 percentage point from its level just before the financial strains emerged. The Federal Reserve took these actions to help offset the restraint imposed by the tightening of credit conditions and the weakening of the housing market. However, in light of recent changes in the outlook for and the risks to growth, additional policy easing may well be necessary. The FOMC will, of course, be carefully evaluating incoming information bearing on the economic outlook. Based on that evaluation, and consistent with our dual mandate, we stand ready to take substantive additional action as needed to support growth and to provide adequate insurance against downside risks. Financial and economic conditions can change quickly. Consequently, the FOMC must remain exceptionally alert and flexible, prepared to act in a decisive and timely manner and, in particular, to counter any adverse dynamics that might threaten economic or financial stability. A number of analysts have raised the possibility that fiscal policy actions might usefully complement monetary policy in supporting economic growth over the next year or so. I agree that fiscal action could be helpful in principle, as fiscal and monetary stimulus together may provide broader support for the economy than monetary policy actions alone. But the design and implementation of the fiscal program are critically important. A fiscal initiative at this juncture could prove quite counterproductive, if (for example) it provided economic stimulus at the wrong time or compromised fiscal discipline in the longer term. To be useful, a fiscal stimulus package should be implemented quickly and structured so that its effects on aggregate spending are felt as much as possible within the next twelve months or so. Stimulus that comes too late will not help support economic activity in the near term, and it could be actively destabilizing if it comes at a time when growth is already improving. Thus, fiscal measures that involve long lead times or result in additional economic activity only over a protracted period, whatever their intrinsic merits might be, will not provide stimulus when it is most needed. Any fiscal package should also be efficient, in the sense of maximizing the amount of near-term stimulus per dollar of increased federal expenditure or lost revenue. Finally, any program should be explicitly temporary, both to avoid unwanted stimulus beyond the near-term horizon and, importantly, to preclude an increase in the federal government's structural budget deficit. As I have discussed on other occasions, the nation faces daunting long-run budget challenges associated with an aging population, rising health-care costs, and other factors. A fiscal program that increased the structural budget deficit would only make confronting those challenges more difficult. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. Footnotes 1.Prices for some financial services are implicit; for example, depositors may pay for "free" checking services only indirectly, by accepting a lower interest rate on their deposits. The Bureau of Labor Statistics uses estimates of such prices, as well as other nonmarket prices, in calculating the inflation rate.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Southern Bank of Commerce, Paragould, Arkansas, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and the Arkansas State Bank Department. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.