The federal banking and thrift regulatory agencies announced today they are extending the applicability of their October 24, 2008 Interagency Statement on direct investments to certain indirect investments in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac preferred stock. The change, made in response to a newly issued federal tax revenue procedure, means that banks, bank holding companies, and thrifts (banking organizations) are permitted to adjust their September 30, 2008 regulatory capital calculations for the tax effects from losses on direct and indirect investments in Fannie Mae (Federal National Mortgage Association) and Freddie Mac (Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation) preferred stock. In other words, banking organizations may proceed as if Section 301 of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (EESA) had been enacted and Revenue Procedure 2008-64 (Rev. Proc. 2008-64) had been issued in the quarter ending September 30, 2008. The Treasury Department and the Internal Revenue Service issued Rev. Proc. 2008-64 on October 29, 2008, to provide banking organizations the tax benefit of treating gains and losses on certain indirect investments in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac preferred stock as ordinary rather than capital. Indirect investments in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac preferred stock include certain adjustable rate preferred stock programs (such as auction pass-through certificates) and stock held by certain subsidiaries of financial institutions. Banking organizations should follow the guidance in the appendix of the October 24, 2008 Interagency Statement for reporting the effect of the tax treatment change in the regulatory capital schedule of their September 30, 2008 regulatory reports. Banking organizations that have already filed their regulatory reports for September 30, 2008 may submit amended reports.
The federal banking and thrift regulatory agencies announced today that they will allow banks, bank holding companies, and thrifts (collectively, "banking organizations") to recognize the effect of the tax change enacted in Section 301 of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (EESA) in their third quarter 2008 regulatory capital calculations. Section 301 of EESA provides tax relief to banking organizations that have suffered losses on certain holdings of Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac) preferred stock by changing the character of these losses from capital to ordinary for federal income tax purposes. However, because the EESA was not enacted until October 3, 2008, banking organizations will not be able to recognize the tax effects of the ordinary losses resulting from Section 301 of EESA in financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles until the fourth quarter of 2008. Today's decision by the agencies will allow banking organizations to recognize the economic benefits of the change in the tax treatment of losses on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac preferred stock under Section 301 of the EESA in the third quarter of 2008 for regulatory capital purposes. The agencies plan to provide regulatory reporting instructions to banking organizations describing how the effect of the tax change enacted in Section 301 of EESA should be reflected in the measurement of regulatory capital in their regulatory reports for September 30, 2008.
The federal banking and thrift regulatory agencies encourage all eligible institutions to use the Treasury Department's Capital Purchase Program and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program. On October 14, 2008, the U.S. government announced a series of initiatives to strengthen market stability, improve the strength of financial institutions, and enhance market liquidity. Treasury announced a voluntary Capital Purchase Program to encourage U.S. financial institutions to build capital to increase the flow of financing to U.S. businesses and consumers and to support the U.S. economy. Under the program, Treasury will purchase up to $250 billion of senior preferred shares on standardized terms. Treasury's Capital Purchase Program and the FDIC's Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program complement one another. Through these programs, fresh capital and liquidity are available to foster new lending in our nation's communities. Under Treasury's Capital Purchase Program, eligible institutions will be able to sell equity interests to Treasury in amounts equal to 1 percent to 3 percent of the institution's risk-weighted assets. These equity interests will constitute Tier 1 capital for the eligible institution. Treasury and the agencies on Monday issued application guidelines and other documents for the Capital Purchase Program. Those documents are attached. If regulated by the Federal Reserve, contact your local Reserve Bank about the program. If regulated by the FDIC, contact the appropriate regional office for your institution. If regulated by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, contact Fred Finke ([email protected]) for more information and send applications to[email protected]or OCC Director of Licensing, 250 E St. SW, Mail Stop 7-13, Washington DC, 20219-0001. If regulated by the Office of Thrift Supervision, contact the appropriate regional office for your institution. Nine large financial organizations already have agreed to participate in the Capital Purchase Program. We encourage other institutions to take advantage of the benefits of the Capital Purchase Program by contacting their primary federal regulator and appropriate bank holding company regulator if applicable for details about the program, conditions, and eligibility. The deadline to apply is November 14, 2008. All eligible institutions are automatically covered by the FDIC's Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program without charge for the first 30 days. The Treasury's Capital Purchase Program and FDIC’s Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program share a common goal--to restore capital flows to the consumers and businesses that form the core of our economy. The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies encourage eligible institutions to participate in that common goal. Attachments:Application guidelines and form (85 KB PDF)FAQs (15 KB PDF)Media Contacts:Federal ReserveDeborah Lagomarsino202-452-2955FDICDavid Barr202-898-6992OCCKevin M. Mukri202-874-5770OTSWilliam Ruberry202-906-6677
The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies announced today that they will request public comment on a joint notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) to allow a banking organization to assign a 10 percent risk weight to claims on, and portions of claims guaranteed by, the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac). Claims include all credit exposures, such as senior and subordinated debt and counterparty credit risk exposures, but do not include preferred or common stock.The agencies believe reducing the risk weight from the current 20 percent is appropriate in light of the financial support the Treasury Department announced in September to provide to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac through senior preferred stock purchase agreements. Under the proposal, the 10 percent risk weight would apply as long as these agreements remain in effect.The NPR is being issued by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision. Public comments are due 30 days following publication in theFederal Register, which is expected soon. The draftFederal Registernotice is attached. Federal Registernotice:76 KB PDF|HTML
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the proposal by Caja de Ahorros y Monte de Piedad de Madrid and Caja Madrid Cibeles S.A., both of Madrid, Spain, and CM Florida Holdings, Inc., Coral Gables, Florida, to acquire 83 percent of the voting securities of City National Bancshares, Inc. and thereby acquire control of its subsidiary bank, City National Bank of Florida, both of Miami, Florida. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday approved the application by Corpbanca, Santiago, Chile, to establish a branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application and notice under sections 3 and 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group, Inc., Tokyo, Japan, to acquire up to 24.9 percent of the voting shares of Morgan Stanley, New York, New York, and to acquire an indirect interest in Morgan Stanley's subsidiary bank, Morgan Stanley Bank, National Association, Salt Lake City, Utah; subsidiary savings association, Morgan Stanley Trust, Jersey City, New Jersey; and subsidiary trust company, Morgan Stanley Trust National Association, Wilmington, Delaware. A statement discussing the approval will be released at a later date. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Sunday announced its approval of the application and notice under sections 3 and 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Wells Fargo & Company, San Francisco, California, to acquire Wachovia Corporation and its subsidiary banks, Wachovia Bank, National Association, both of Charlotte, North Carolina, and Wachovia Bank Delaware, National Association, Wilmington, Delaware, and the nonbanking subsidiaries of Wachovia Corporation. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday approved an action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, decreasing the discount rate at the Bank from 1-3/4 percent to 1-1/4 percent, effective immediately.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and Kansas City, decreasing the discount rate at the Banks from 1-3/4 percent to 1-1/4 percent, effective immediately. The Board also approved an action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, decreasing the discount rate at the Bank from 1-3/4 percent to 1-1/4 percent, effective October 30, 2008.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco, decreasing the discount rate at the Banks from 2-1/4 percent to 1-3/4 percent, effective immediately. The Board also approved an action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, decreasing the discount rate at the Bank from 2-1/4 percent to 1-3/4 percent, effective October 9, 2008.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Richmond, Minneapolis, and Dallas, decreasing the discount rate at the Banks from 1-3/4 percent to 1-1/4 percent, effective immediately.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced additional details regarding the Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF), including that it would begin funding purchases of commercial paper on October 27, 2008. The Board authorized the CPFF on October 7, 2008 underSection 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Actto provide a liquidity backstop to U.S. issuers of commercial paper. The CPFF is intended to improve liquidity in short-term funding markets and thereby increase the availability of credit for businesses and households. Under the CPFF, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York will finance the purchase of unsecured and asset-backed commercial paper from eligible issuers through its primary dealers. The CPFF will finance only highly rated, U.S. dollar-denominated, three-month commercial paper. The attached terms-and-conditions and questions-and-answers documents describe the terms and operational details of the facility, which were determined after consultation with commercial paper issuers and dealers. Commercial Paper Funding FacilityTerms and conditionsFAQs
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the creation of the Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF), a facility that will complement the Federal Reserve's existing credit facilities to help provide liquidity to term funding markets. The CPFF will provide a liquidity backstop to U.S. issuers of commercial paper through a special purpose vehicle (SPV) that will purchase three-month unsecured and asset-backed commercial paper directly from eligible issuers. The Federal Reserve will provide financing to the SPV under the CPFF and will be secured by all of the assets of the SPV and, in the case of commercial paper that is not asset-backed commercial paper, by the retention of up-front fees paid by the issuers or by other forms of security acceptable to the Federal Reserve in consultation with market participants. The Treasury believes this facility is necessary to prevent substantial disruptions to the financial markets and the economy and will make a special deposit at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in support of this facility. The commercial paper market has been under considerable strain in recent weeks as money market mutual funds and other investors, themselves often facing liquidity pressures, have become increasingly reluctant to purchase commercial paper, especially at longer-dated maturities. As a result, the volume of outstanding commercial paper has shrunk, interest rates on longer-term commercial paper have increased significantly, and an increasingly high percentage of outstanding paper must now be refinanced each day. A large share of outstanding commercial paper is issued or sponsored by financial intermediaries, and their difficulties placing commercial paper have made it more difficult for those intermediaries to play their vital role in meeting the credit needs of businesses and households. By eliminating much of the risk that eligible issuers will not be able to repay investors by rolling over their maturing commercial paper obligations, this facility should encourage investors to once again engage in term lending in the commercial paper market. Added investor demand should lower commercial paper rates from their current elevated levels and foster issuance of longer-term commercial paper. An improved commercial paper market will enhance the ability of financial intermediaries to accommodate the credit needs of businesses and households. October 7, 2008 Commercial Paper Funding Facility Terms & Conditions Updated term sheet:Commercial Paper Funding Facility
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced that it will begin to pay interest on depository institutions' required and excess reserve balances. The payment of interest on excess reserve balances will give the Federal Reserve greater scope to use its lending programs to address conditions in credit markets while also maintaining the federal funds rate close to the target established by the Federal Open Market Committee. Consistent with this increased scope, the Federal Reserve also announced today additional actions to strengthen its support of term lending markets. Specifically, the Federal Reserve is substantially increasing the size of the Term Auction Facility (TAF) auctions, beginning with today's auction of 84-day funds. These auctions allow depository institutions to borrow from the Federal Reserve for a fixed term against the same collateral that is accepted at the discount window; the rate is established in the auction, subject to a minimum set by the Federal Reserve. In addition, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department are consulting with market participants on ways to provide additional support for term unsecured funding markets. Together these actions should encourage term lending across a range of financial markets in a manner that eases pressures and promotes the ability of firms and households to obtain credit. The Federal Reserve stands ready to take additional measures as necessary to foster liquid money market conditions. Interest on ReservesThe Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2006 originally authorized the Federal Reserve to begin paying interest on balances held by or on behalf of depository institutions beginning October 1, 2011. The recently enacted Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 accelerated the effective date to October 1, 2008. Employing the accelerated authority, the Board has approved a rule to amend its Regulation D (Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions) to direct the Federal Reserve Banks to pay interest on required reserve balances (that is, balances held to satisfy depository institutions' reserve requirements) and on excess balances (balances held in excess of required reserve balances and clearing balances). The interest rate paid on required reserve balances will be the average targeted federal funds rate established by the Federal Open Market Committee over each reserve maintenance period less 10 basis points. Paying interest on required reserve balances should essentially eliminate the opportunity cost of holding required reserves, promoting efficiency in the banking sector. The rate paid on excess balances will be set initially as the lowest targeted federal funds rate for each reserve maintenance period less 75 basis points. Paying interest on excess balances should help to establish a lower bound on the federal funds rate. The formula for the interest rate on excess balances may be adjusted subsequently in light of experience and evolving market conditions. The payment of interest on excess reserves will permit the Federal Reserve to expand its balance sheet as necessary to provide the liquidity necessary to support financial stability while implementing the monetary policy that is appropriate in light of the System's macroeconomic objectives of maximum employment and price stability. The Board also approved other related revisions to Regulation D to prescribe the treatment of balances maintained by pass-through correspondents under the new rule and to eliminate transitional adjustments for reserve requirements in the event of a merger or consolidation. In addition, the Board approved associated minor changes to the method for calculating earnings credits under its clearing balance policy and the method for recovering float costs. The revisions to Regulation D and the other changes will take effect on Thursday, October 9, 2008. The Board recognizes that depository institutions may choose to adjust their typical liquidity management practices in light of the payment of interest on required reserve balances and excess balances; the primary credit program and other Federal Reserve liquidity facilities are available to help institutions meet temporary funding requirements. The Board’s notice of its actions regarding the amendments to Regulation D and associated changes is attached. While the action is effective immediately, the Board will accept public comments until November 21, 2008, and the proposal will be published in theFederal Registershortly. The Board will adjust the rule as appropriate in light of comments. Substantial Further Increases in Term Auction Facility AuctionsThe sizes of both 28-day and 84-day Term Auction Facility (TAF) auctions will be boosted to $150 billion each, effective with the 84-day auction to be conducted Monday. These increases will eventually bring the amounts outstanding under the regular TAF program to $600 billion. In addition, the sizes of the two forward TAF auctions to be conducted in November to extend credit over year end have been increased to $150 billion each, so that $900 billion of TAF credit will potentially be outstanding over year end. Exemption to Allow Limited Bank Purchases of Assets from Money Market Mutual FundsThe Board on Monday published a letter granting a request by a depository institution for an exemption from the limits on transactions with affiliates under section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act and the Board's Regulation W to allow the institution to purchase assets from affiliated money market mutual funds under certain circumstances. The Board is open to considering similar requests from depository institutions under similar circumstances. Federal Registernotice:62 KB PDF|HTML View comments on this proposal Federal Reserve System Reporting and Reserves websiteContact informationExamplesInterest on Reserve's page Interest on reserves and the implementation of monetary policy FAQs Legal interpretation, exemption from section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act, letter dated October 6, 2008 (39 KB PDF) Related InformationStatement by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the approval of fee schedules for payment services the Federal Reserve Banks provide to depository institutions (priced services), effective January 2, 2009. The Reserve Banks project that they will recover 93.7 percent of all their priced services costs in 2009. This cost recovery is heavily influenced by the projected under recovery in the check service as it transitions to an end-to-end electronic check processing environment. As an increasing proportion of checks collected through the Reserve Banks are presented electronically, the effective fees paid to collect checks using the Reserve Banks' Check 21 services are expected to decline 10 percent. This change, along with a 41 percent increase in paper check fees, will further encourage the continued movement to electronic check collection. In addition, the fees for the Reserve Banks' electronic payment services will increase approximately 2 percent. The 2009 fee schedule for each of the priced services, except the check service, is included in the attached Federal Register notice. Fee schedules for all priced services are available on the Federal Reserve Banks' financial services website athttp://www.frbservices.org/. In addition, the Board approved the 2009 private-sector adjustment factor (PSAF) for Reserve Bank priced services of $62.2 million. The PSAF is an allowance for income taxes and other imputed expenses that would have to be paid and profits that would have to be earned if the Reserve Banks' priced services were provided by a private business. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires that the Federal Reserve establish fees to recover the costs of providing priced services, including the PSAF, over the long run, to promote competition between the Reserve Banks and private-sector service providers. The Board's notice is attached. Federal Registernotice:1.32 MB PDF|HTML
The Federal Reserve Board has authorized the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to borrow securities from certain regulated U.S. insurance subsidiaries of the American International Group (AIG), undersection 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. Under this program, the New York Fed will borrow up to $37.8 billion in investment-grade, fixed-income securities from AIG in return for cash collateral. These securities were previously lent by AIG’s insurance company subsidiaries to third parties. As expected, drawdowns to date under the existing $85 billion New York Fed loan facility have been used, in part, to settle transactions with counterparties returning these third-party securities to AIG. This new program will allow AIG to replenish liquidity used in settling those transactions, while providing enhanced credit protection to the New York Fed and U.S. taxpayers in the form of a security interest in these securities.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released a Statement concerning its action of October 6, 2008, approving the application and notice under sections 3 and 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group, Inc., Tokyo, Japan, to acquire up to 24.9 percent of the voting shares of Morgan Stanley, New York, New York, and to acquire an indirect interest in Morgan Stanley's subsidiary bank, Morgan Stanley Bank, National Association, Salt Lake City, Utah; subsidiary savings association, Morgan Stanley Trust, Jersey City, New Jersey; and subsidiary trust company, Morgan Stanley Trust National Association, Wilmington, Delaware.Attached is the Board's Statement relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released a Statement concerning its action of October 12, 2008, approving the proposal by Wells Fargo & Company, San Francisco, California, to acquire Wachovia Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina. Attached is the Board's Statement relating to this action.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the National Association for Business Economics 50th Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C. As you know, financial systems in the United States and in much of the rest of the world are under extraordinary stress, particularly the credit and money markets. The losses suffered by many banks and nonbank financial firms have both constrained their ability to lend and reduced the willingness of other market participants to deal with them. Great uncertainty about the values of financial assets, particularly more complex and opaque assets, has made investors extremely reluctant to bear credit risk, resulting in further declines in asset prices and a drying up of liquidity in a number of funding markets. Even secured funding has become expensive and difficult to obtain, as lenders worry about their ability to sell collateral in illiquid markets in the event of default. In addition, many securitization markets, such as the secondary market for private-label mortgage-backed securities, remain closed or impaired. Considerable experience in both industrialized and emerging economies has shown that severe financial instability, together with the associated declines in asset prices and disruptions in credit markets, can take a heavy toll on the broader economy if left unchecked. For this reason, the Federal Reserve, the Treasury, and other agencies are committed to restoring market stability and are working assiduously to ensure that the financial system is able to perform its critical economic functions. Recent actions by the Congress have given the Treasury new tools and resources to address the stressed conditions of our financial markets and institutions. The Federal Reserve has also been granted a new authority, the ability to pay interest on bank reserves, which will allow us to expand our lending as needed to support the system while better managing the federal funds rate. These tools will provide important additional support for the government's efforts to strengthen financial markets and the economy. Let me briefly review recent financial developments. On the heels of nearly a year of stress in credit markets, investors' and creditors' concerns about funding and credit risks at financial firms intensified over the summer as mortgage-related assets deteriorated further, economic growth slowed, and uncertainty about the economic outlook increased. As investors and creditors lost confidence in the ability of certain firms to meet their obligations, their access to capital markets as well as to short-term funding markets became increasingly impaired and their stock prices fell sharply. Among the companies that experienced this dynamic most forcefully were the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac; the investment bank Lehman Brothers; and the insurance company American International Group (AIG). The Federal Reserve believes that, whenever possible, such difficulties should be addressed through private-sector arrangements--for example, by raising new equity capital, as many firms have done, by negotiations leading to a merger or acquisition, or by an orderly wind-down. Government assistance should be provided with the greatest reluctance and only when the stability of the financial system, and thus the health of the broader economy, is at risk. In those cases when financial stability is threatened, however, intervention to protect the public interest may well be justified. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac present cases in point. The Federal Reserve had long warned about the systemic risks posed by these companies' large portfolios of mortgages and mortgage-backed securities, as well as the problems arising from the conflict between shareholders' objectives and the government's goals for the two firms. Given the scale of losses in their portfolios, raising enough new capital from private investors was infeasible. The firms' size and their government-sponsored status precluded a merger with, or acquisition by, another company. To avoid unacceptably large dislocations in the mortgage markets, the financial sector, and the economy as a whole, the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) put Fannie and Freddie into conservatorship and the Treasury, drawing on authorities recently granted by the Congress, made financial support available. The Federal Reserve, acting in a consultative role, worked closely with FHFA in evaluating the GSE portfolios and capital positions. Based on the joint findings of the agencies, we supported FHFA's decision to place the companies into conservatorship as necessary and appropriate, given their conditions and systemic importance. The government's actions appear to have stabilized the GSEs, although like virtually all other firms they are experiencing effects of the current crisis. Nonetheless, we already have seen benefits of their stabilization in the form of lower mortgage rates, which should help the housing market. The difficulties at Lehman and AIG raised somewhat different issues. Like the GSEs, both companies were large and complex and deeply embedded in our financial system. In both cases, as the firms approached default, the Treasury and the Federal Reserve sought private-sector solutions, but none was forthcoming. Attempts to organize a consortium of private firms to purchase or recapitalize Lehman were unsuccessful. With respect to public-sector solutions, we determined that either facilitating a sale of Lehman or maintaining the company as a free-standing entity would have required a very sizable injection of public funds--much larger than in the case of Bear Stearns--and would have involved the assumption by taxpayers of billions of dollars of expected losses. Even if assuming these costs could be justified on public policy grounds, neither the Treasury nor the Federal Reserve had the authority to commit public money in that way; in particular, the Federal Reserve's loans must be sufficiently secured to provide reasonable assurance that the loan will be fully repaid. Such collateral was not available in this case. Recognizing that Lehman's potential failure posed risks to market functioning, the Federal Reserve sought to cushion the effects by implementing a number of measures, including substantially broadening the collateral accepted by the Fed's Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) and Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) to ensure that the remaining primary dealers would have uninterrupted access to funding. In the case of AIG, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury judged that a disorderly failure of AIG would have severely threatened global financial stability and the performance of the U.S. economy. That judgment reflected our assessment of prevailing market conditions, AIG's central role in a number of markets other firms use to manage risks, and the size and composition of AIG's balance sheet. To avoid the default of AIG, the Federal Reserve was able to provide emergency credit that was judged to be adequately secured by the assets of the company. To protect U.S. taxpayers and to mitigate the possibility that lending to AIG would encourage inappropriate risk-taking by financial firms in the future, the Federal Reserve further ensured that the terms of the credit extended to AIG imposed significant costs and constraints on the firm's owners, managers, and creditors. AIG's difficulties and Lehman's failure, along with growing concerns about the U.S. housing sector and economy, contributed to extraordinarily turbulent conditions in global financial markets in recent weeks. Equity prices have fallen sharply, the cost of short-term credit, where such credit has been available, has spiked, and liquidity has dried up in many markets. One money market fund's losses forced it to "break the buck"--that is, the value of its assets fell below par--an event that triggered extensive withdrawals from a number of money market funds. Those funds responded to the surge in redemptions by attempting to reduce their holdings of commercial paper and large certificates of deposit issued by banks. Some firms that could not roll over maturing commercial paper drew on back-up lines of credit with banks just as the banks were finding it even more difficult to raise cash in the money markets. At the same time, a marked increase in the demand for safe assets--a flight to quality and liquidity--resulted in a further drop in the value of mortgage-related assets and sent the yield on Treasury bills down to a few hundredths of a percent. Developments during the summer pressured not only nonbank financial firms, but also a number of depository institutions, including Washington Mutual (WaMu) and Wachovia. In recent weeks, these two institutions suffered deposit outflows and reduced access to wholesale funding. The Office of Thrift Supervision, WaMu's regulator, closed that company and appointed the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) as receiver; the FDIC immediately sold the institution to JPMorgan Chase. In the case of Wachovia, to avoid serious adverse effects on economic conditions and financial stability, the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the President and on the recommendation of the Federal Reserve and FDIC, authorized the FDIC to use its funds to facilitate the sale of that company's banking operations without loss to creditors. Both Citicorp and Wells Fargo have offered to buy the company and negotiations are continuing. Most importantly, however, in either case all depositors and creditors of Wachovia are fully protected, and depositors and other customers will experience no interruption in banking services. By potentially restricting future flows of credit to households and businesses, the developments in financial markets pose a significant threat to economic growth. The Treasury and the Fed have taken a range of actions to address the very tight funding conditions that now prevail. For example, the Treasury implemented a temporary guarantee program for balances held in money market mutual funds, helping to stem the outflows from these funds and thus reducing their need to sell assets into already distressed markets. The Federal Reserve has taken a number of steps, including putting in place a temporary lending facility that provides financing for banks to purchase high-quality asset-backed commercial paper from money market funds. The Fed has also significantly increased the quantity of funds it auctions to banks and has accommodated heightened demands for funding from banks and primary dealers; as of last Wednesday, our various lending facilities, including our securities lending program, were providing more than $800 billion of liquidity to the financial system. To address dollar funding pressures worldwide, we have significantly expanded reciprocal currency arrangements (so-called swap agreements) with foreign central banks. These agreements enable the foreign central banks to provide dollar funding to financial institutions in their jurisdictions, which helps to improve the functioning of dollar funding markets globally. In addition, this morning the Federal Reserve announced a new facility that will help provide liquidity to term funding markets by purchasing three-month commercial paper and asset-backed commercial paper directly from eligible issuers. The expansion of Federal Reserve lending is helping financial firms cope with reduced access to their usual sources of funding. Recently, however, our liquidity provision had begun to run ahead of our ability to absorb excess reserves held by the banking system, leading the effective funds rate, on many days, to fall below the target set by the Federal Open Market Committee. This problem has largely been addressed by a provision of the legislation the Congress passed last week, which gives the Federal Reserve the authority to pay interest on balances that depository institutions hold in their accounts at the Federal Reserve Banks. The Federal Reserve announced yesterday that it will pay interest on required reserve balances at 10 basis points below the target federal funds rate, and pay interest on excess reserves, initially at 75 basis points below the target. Paying interest on reserves should allow us to better control the federal funds rate, as banks are unlikely to lend overnight balances at a rate lower than they can receive from the Fed; thus, the payment of interest on reserves should set a floor for the funds rate over the day. With this step, our lending facilities may be more easily expanded as necessary. So long as financial conditions warrant, we will continue to look for ways to reduce funding pressures in key markets. Economic activity had shown signs of decelerating even before the recent upsurge in financial-market tensions. As has been the case for some time, the housing market continues to be a primary source of weakness in the real economy as well as in the financial markets. However, the slowdown in economic activity has spread outside the housing sector. Private payrolls have continued to contract, and the declines in employment, together with earlier increases in food and energy prices, have eroded the purchasing power of households. This sluggishness of real incomes, together with tighter credit and declining household wealth, is now showing through more clearly to consumer spending. Indeed, since May, real consumer outlays have contracted significantly. Meanwhile, in the business sector, worsening sales prospects and a heightened sense of uncertainty have begun to weigh more heavily on investment spending as well. The intensification of financial turmoil and the further impairment of the functioning of credit markets seem likely to increase the restraint on economic activity in the period ahead. Even households with good credit histories are now facing difficulties obtaining mortgage loans or home equity lines of credit. Banks are also reducing credit card limits, and denial rates on automobile loan applications reportedly are rising. Businesses, too, are confronting diminished access to credit. For example, disruptions in the commercial paper market and tightening of bank lending standards have made it more difficult for businesses to obtain the working capital they need to meet everyday operating expenses such as payrolls and inventories. All told, economic activity is likely to be subdued during the remainder of this year and into next year. The heightened financial turmoil that we have experienced of late may well lengthen the period of weak economic performance and further increase the risks to growth. To support growth and reduce the downside risks, continued efforts to stabilize the financial markets are essential. The Federal Reserve will continue to use the tools at its disposal to improve market functioning and liquidity. Inflation has been elevated, reflecting the steep increases in the prices of oil, other commodities, and imports that occurred earlier this year, as well as some pass-through by firms to consumers of their higher costs of production. However, more recently, the prices of oil and other commodities, while remaining quite volatile, have fallen from their peaks, and prices of imports show signs of decelerating. In addition, expected inflation, as measured by consumer surveys and inflation-indexed Treasury securities, has held steady or eased. These recent developments, together with economic activity that is likely to fall short of potential for a time, should lead to rates of inflation more consistent with price stability. Still, the inflation outlook remains highly uncertain, in part because of the extraordinary volatility of commodity prices. We will need to continue to monitor price developments closely. Overall, the combination of the incoming data and recent financial developments suggests that the outlook for economic growth has worsened and that the downside risks to growth have increased. At the same time, the outlook for inflation has improved somewhat, though it remains uncertain. In light of these developments, the Federal Reserve will need to consider whether the current stance of policy remains appropriate. The intensification of the financial crisis in recent weeks made clear that a more powerful and comprehensive approach involving the fiscal authorities was needed to solve these problems. On that basis, the Secretary of the Treasury, with the support of the Federal Reserve, went to the Congress to ask for a substantial program aimed at stabilizing our financial markets. As you know, last week the Congress passed and the President signed the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act. This legislation provides important new tools for addressing the distress in financial markets and thus mitigating the risks to the economy. The act adds broad, flexible authorities to buy troubled assets, to provide guarantees, and to directly strengthen the balance sheets of individual institutions. Notably, the legislation establishes a new Troubled Asset Relief Program, or TARP, under which the Treasury is authorized to purchase as much as $700billion of troubled mortgages, mortgage-related securities, and other financial instruments from financial firms that are regulated under U.S. law and have significant operations in the United States. The act also raises the limit on deposit insurance at banks and credit unions from $100,000 to $250,000 per account, a step that should reinforce depositors' confidence in the security of their funds and thus help to stabilize depository institutions. And, as I mentioned, the act provides the Federal Reserve the authority to pay interest on reserves, which will allow us to better manage the federal funds rate as we provide liquidity to the markets. We will begin exercising that authority this week. The TARP's purchases of illiquid assets from banks and other financial institutions will create liquidity and promote price discovery in the markets for these assets. This in turn will reduce investor uncertainty about the current value and prospects of financial institutions, enabling banks and other institutions to raise capital and increasing the willingness of counterparties to engage. More generally, increased liquidity and transparency in pricing will help to restore confidence in our financial markets and promote more normal functioning. With time, strengthening our financial institutions and markets will allow credit to begin flowing again, supporting economic growth. The interests of taxpayers are carefully protected under this program. First, the Congress has required extensive controls and oversight to ensure that the allotted funds are used appropriately and effectively. Second, the $700 billion allocated by the legislation is not an authorization to spend but rather an authorization to purchase financial assets. The Treasury will be a patient investor and will likely hold these assets for an appreciable period of time. Eventually, however, some assets will mature, and the Treasury will choose to sell others to private investors. Financially, in the long run, the taxpayer may come out either ahead or behind in this process; in light of the many uncertainties, no assurances can be given. But the ultimate cost of the program to the taxpayer will certainly be far less than $700 billion. Third, and most important, restoring the normal flow of credit is essential for economic recovery. If the TARP promotes financial stability, leading ultimately to stronger economic growth and job creation, it will have proved a very good investment indeed, to everyone's benefit. To be sure, there are many challenges associated with the design and implementation of the TARP, including determining which assets will be purchased and how prices will be determined. The Treasury, with the advice and cooperation of the Federal Reserve, is working to address these challenges as quickly as possible. It is unlikely that a single method will be used for acquiring assets; inevitably, some experimentation will be necessary to determine which approaches are most effective. Importantly, the legislation that created the TARP does provide sufficient flexibility to allow for different approaches to solving the problem--subject, of course, to the close oversight that will ensure that the program's funds are used in ways that are in the interest of taxpayers. These are momentous steps, but they are being taken to address a problem of historic dimensions. In one respect, however, we are fortunate. We have learned from historical experience with severe financial crises that if government intervention comes only at a point at which many or most financial institutions are insolvent or nearly so, the costs of restoring the system are greatly increased. This is not the situation we face today. The Congress and the Administration chose to act at a moment of great stress, but one at which the great majority of financial institutions have sufficient capital and liquidity to return to their critical function of providing new credit for our economy. The steps being taken now to restore confidence in our institutions and markets will go far to resolving the current dislocations in the markets. I believe that the bold actions taken by the Congress, the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, and other agencies, together with the natural recuperative powers of the financial markets, will lay the groundwork for financial and economic recovery.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Spratt, Representative Ryan, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate this opportunity to discuss recent developments in financial markets, the near-term economic outlook, and issues surrounding the possibility of a second package of fiscal measures. Financial DevelopmentsAs you know, financial markets in the United States and some other industrialized countries have been under severe stress for more than a year. The proximate cause of the financial turmoil was the steep increase and subsequent decline of house prices nationwide, which, together with poor lending practices, have led to large losses on mortgages and mortgage-related instruments by a wide range of institutions. More fundamentally, the turmoil is the aftermath of a credit boom characterized by underpricing of risk, excessive leverage, and an increasing reliance on complex and opaque financial instruments that have proved to be fragile under stress. A consequence of the unwinding of this boom and the resulting financial strains has been a broad-based tightening in credit conditions that has restrained economic growth. The financial turmoil intensified in recent weeks, as investors' confidence in banks and other financial institutions eroded and risk aversion heightened. Conditions in the interbank lending market have worsened, with term funding essentially unavailable. Withdrawals from prime money market mutual funds, which are important suppliers of credit to the commercial paper market, severely disrupted that market; and short-term credit, when available, has become much more costly for virtually all firms. Households and state and local governments have also experienced a notable reduction in credit availability. Financial conditions deteriorated in other countries as well, putting severe pressure on both industrial and emerging-market economies. As confidence in the financial markets has declined and concerns about the U.S. and global economies have increased, equity prices have been volatile, falling sharply on net. In collaboration with governments and central banks in other countries, the Treasury and the Federal Reserve have taken a range of actions to ameliorate these financial problems. To address ongoing pressures in interbank funding markets, the Federal Reserve significantly increased the quantity of term funds it auctions to banks and accommodated heightened demands for funding from banks and primary dealers. We have also greatly expanded our currency swap lines with foreign central banks. These swap lines allow the cooperating central banks to supply dollar liquidity in their own jurisdictions, helping to reduce strains in global money markets and, in turn, in our own markets. To address illiquidity and impaired functioning in the market for commercial paper, the Treasury implemented a temporary guarantee program for balances held in money market mutual funds, helping to stem the outflows from these funds. The Federal Reserve put in place a temporary lending facility that provides financing for banks to purchase high-quality asset-backed commercial paper from money market funds, thus providing some relief for money market funds that have needed to sell their holdings to meet redemptions. Moreover, we soon will be implementing a new Commercial Paper Funding Facility that will provide a backstop to commercial paper markets by purchasing highly rated commercial paper from issuers at a term of three months. The recently enacted Emergency Economic Stabilization Act provided critically important new tools to address the dysfunction in financial markets and thus reduce the accompanying risks to the economy. The Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) authorized by the legislation will allow the Treasury to undertake two highly complementary activities. First, the Treasury will use TARP funds to provide capital to financial institutions. Indeed, last week, nine of the nation's largest financial institutions indicated their willingness to accept capital from the program, and many other institutions, large and small, are expected to follow suit in coming weeks. Second, the Treasury will purchase or guarantee troubled mortgage-related and possibly other assets held by banks and other financial institutions. Taken together, these measures should help rebuild confidence in the financial system, increase the liquidity of financial markets, and improve the ability of financial institutions to raise capital from private sources. As another measure to improve confidence, the act also temporarily raised the limit on the deposit insurance coverage provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the National Credit Union Administration from $100,000 to $250,000 per account, effective immediately. Unfortunately, the loss of confidence in financial institutions became so severe in recent weeks that additional steps in this direction proved necessary. The FDIC, the Federal Reserve Board, and the Secretary of the Treasury in consultation with the President determined that significant risks to the stability of the financial system were present. With this determination, the FDIC was able to use its authority to provide, for a specified period, unlimited insurance coverage of funds held in non-interest-bearing transactions accounts, such as payroll accounts. In addition, the FDIC announced that it would guarantee the senior unsecured debt of FDIC-insured depository institutions and their associated holding companies. In taking the dramatic steps of providing capital to the banking system and expanding guarantees, the United States consulted with other countries, many of whom have announced similar actions. Given the global nature of the financial system, international consultation and cooperation on actions to address the crisis are important for restoring confidence and stability. These measures were announced less than a week ago, and, although there have been some encouraging signs, it is too early to assess their full effects. However, I am confident that these initiatives, together with other actions by the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, and other regulators, will help restore trust in our financial system and allow the resumption of more-normal flows of credit to households and firms. I would like to reiterate the critical importance of the recent legislation passed by the Congress; without that action, tools essential for stabilizing the financial system and thereby containing the damage to the broader economy would not have been available. That said, the stabilization of the financial system, though an essential first step, will not quickly eliminate the challenges still faced by the broader economy. Economic OutlookEven before the recent intensification of the financial crisis, economic activity had shown considerable signs of weakening. In the labor market, private employers shed 168,000 jobs in September, bringing the total job loss in the private sector since January to nearly 900,000. Meanwhile, the unemployment rate, at 6.1 percent in September, has risen 1.2 percentage points since January. Incoming data on consumer spending, housing, and business investment have all showed significant slowing over the past few months, and some key determinants of spending have worsened: Equity and house prices have fallen, foreign economic growth has slowed, and credit conditions have tightened. One brighter note is that the declines in the prices of oil and other commodities will have favorable implications for the purchasing power of households. Nonetheless, the pace of economic activity is likely to be below that of its longer-run potential for several quarters. As I noted, the slowing in spending and activity spans most major sectors. Real personal consumption expenditures for goods and services declined over the summer and apparently fell further in September. Although the weakness in household spending has been widespread, the drop-off in purchases of motor vehicles recently has been particularly sharp. Increased difficulty in obtaining auto loans appears to have contributed to the decline in auto sales. Consumer sentiment has been quite low, reflecting concerns about jobs, gasoline prices, the state of the housing market, and stock prices. In the business sector, orders and shipments for nondefense capital goods have generally slowed, and forward-looking indicators suggest further declines in business investment in coming months. Outlays for construction of nonresidential buildings, which had posted robust gains over the first half of the year, also appear to have decelerated in the third quarter. Although the less favorable outlook for sales has undoubtedly played a role, the softening in business investment also appears to reflect reduced credit availability from banks and other lenders. As has been the case for some time, the housing market remains depressed, with sales and construction of new homes continuing to decline. Indeed, single-family housing starts fell 12 percent in September, and permit issuance also dropped sharply. With demand for new homes remaining at a low level and the backlog of unsold homes still sizable, residential construction is likely to continue to contract into next year. International trade provided considerable support for the U.S. economy over the first half of the year. Domestic output was buoyed by strong foreign demand for a wide range of U.S. exports, including agricultural products, capital goods, and industrial supplies. Although trade should continue to be a positive factor for the U.S. economy, its contribution to U.S. growth is likely to be less dramatic as global growth slows. The prices of the goods and services purchased by consumers rose rapidly earlier this year, as steep increases in the prices of oil and other commodities led to higher retail prices for fuel and food, and as firms were able to pass through a portion of their higher costs of production. These effects are now reversing in the wake of the substantial declines in commodity prices since the summer. Moreover, the prices of imports now appear to be decelerating, and consumer surveys and yields on inflation-indexed Treasury securities suggest that expected inflation has held steady or eased. If not reversed, these developments, together with the likelihood that economic activity will fall short of potential for a time, should bring inflation down to levels consistent with price stability. Over time, a number of factors are likely to promote the return of solid gains in economic activity and employment in the context of low and stable inflation. Among those factors are the stimulus provided by monetary policy, the eventual stabilization in housing markets that will occur as the correction runs its course, improvements in our credit markets as the new programs take effect and market participants work through remaining problems, and the underlying strengths and recuperative powers of our economy. The time needed for economic recovery, however, will depend greatly on the pace at which financial and credit markets return to more-normal functioning. Because the time that will be needed for financial normalization and the effects of ongoing credit problems on the broader economy are difficult to judge, the uncertainty currently surrounding the economic outlook is unusually large. Fiscal PolicyI understand that the Congress is evaluating the desirability of a second fiscal package. Any fiscal action inevitably involves tradeoffs, not only among current needs and objectives but also--because commitments of resources today can burden future generations and constrain future policy options--between the present and the future. Such tradeoffs inevitably involve value judgments that can properly be made only by our elected officials. Moreover, with the outlook exceptionally uncertain, the optimal timing, scale, and composition of any fiscal package are unclear. All that being said, with the economy likely to be weak for several quarters, and with some risk of a protracted slowdown, consideration of a fiscal package by the Congress at this juncture seems appropriate. Should the Congress choose to undertake fiscal action, certain design principles may be helpful. To best achieve its goals, any fiscal package should be structured so that its peak effects on aggregate spending and economic activity are felt when they are most needed, namely, during the period in which economic activity would otherwise be expected to be weak. Any fiscal package should be well-targeted, in the sense of attempting to maximize the beneficial effects on spending and activity per dollar of increased federal expenditure or lost revenue; at the same time, it should go without saying that the Congress must be vigilant in ensuring that any allocated funds are used effectively and responsibly. Any program should be designed, to the extent possible, to limit longer-term effects on the federal government's structural budget deficit. Finally, in the ideal case, a fiscal package would not only boost overall spending and economic activity but would also be aimed at redressing specific factors that have the potential to extend or deepen the economic slowdown. As I discussed earlier, the extraordinary tightening in credit conditions has played a central role in the slowdown thus far and could be an important factor delaying the recovery. If the Congress proceeds with a fiscal package, it should consider including measures to help improve access to credit by consumers, homebuyers, businesses, and other borrowers. Such actions might be particularly effective at promoting economic growth and job creation. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Georgetown University Wall Street Alliance, New York, New York We gather in difficult times for our financial markets and our economy. Recent weeks have seen a sharp intensification of the turmoil in financial markets: There has been a broad-based pullback in risk-taking and a virtual seizing up of term lending to many banks and other financial institutions; interest rates have risen for many borrowers, and credit availability has significantly diminished; and equity prices have fallen sharply, on net. The authorities have responded with a series of forceful and innovative measures that promise to rebuild confidence and free up lending. Tonight I will try to put these developments in the context of the recent course of our economy and its prospects for the future.1 Before commenting on the current situation and its economic implications, I thought it might be useful to begin by giving you my perspective on where the economy stood prior to the recent intensification of financial turmoil. Overall economic activity--as measured by the growth of real gross domestic product (GDP)--held up surprisingly well over the first half of 2008 given the ongoing stresses in broader financial markets and the further rise in oil prices. At the same time, however, a number of disquieting signs lay underneath the surface of the aggregate growth figures. Conditions in housing markets, as had been widely expected, were continuing to deteriorate, with further declines in home sales, new construction, and house prices in most markets. And, while consumer spending posted moderate gains during the spring, it seemed likely that much of that strength stemmed from the sizable tax rebate checks that began to go out to households at the end of April. Meanwhile, on the business side, employers had been reducing payrolls since the turn of the year, industrial production fell from February through May, and many corporations were seeing their profits squeezed by rising costs and weak demand. During the summer, it became increasingly clear that a downshifting in the pace of economic activity was in train. In particular, the long list of negative factors weighing on domestic demand--including high prices for oil and other commodities, tight credit conditions, and the housing downturn--were beginning to take a significant toll on the economy. The deterioration was led by a noticeable retrenchment in consumer spending. Although rebate checks continued to provide a boost to incomes in June and July, households were facing some stiff headwinds. Ongoing job losses and sharp increases in energy and food prices subtracted from household purchasing power, declining home prices and falling equity values led to a further drop in household wealth, and consumers remained extremely downbeat about prospects for jobs and income. At the same time, credit became more difficult to obtain as lenders became increasingly concerned about the prospects for loan performance in a softening economy. Many banks and other creditors tightened standards for credit cards and other consumer loans, and some lenders either reduced borrowing limits on or eliminated home equity lines of credit. As a result of all these influences, real consumer outlays fell from June through August, putting real consumer spending for the third quarter as a whole on track to decline for the first time since 1991. Business investment also appears to have slowed over the summer. Orders and shipments for nondefense capital goods have weakened, on net, in recent months, pointing to a decline in real outlays for new business equipment. Similarly, outlays for nonresidential construction projects edged lower in July and August after rising at a robust pace over the first half of this year. Although the deteriorating sales outlook and increased uncertainty about the economy undoubtedly played a role, the softening in business outlays also appeared to reflect reduced credit availability from banks and other lenders. In addition, conditions in housing markets have remained on a downward trajectory. Sales and construction of new homes continued to decline over the summer, and while existing home sales showed signs of stabilizing at low levels, many of the sales that did occur appear to have been stimulated by sharp price reductions for distressed properties. National indexes of house prices continued to post sizable declines. Unfortunately, our trading partners have proven not to be immune from financial turmoil and economic weakness. Incoming data indicate that the pace of activity in many foreign economies slowed in recent quarters, reflecting many of the same forces of credit contraction, rising energy prices, and housing market decelerations that have affected the U.S. economy. This weakening in foreign activity suggests that the support to domestic production from net exports that was evident in the first half of this year is likely diminishing. We can see evidence of this in manufacturing production outside of motor vehicles, which had benefited from the earlier decline in the dollar and strong foreign growth; it fell for a third consecutive month in August, and indications for September suggest a further decline last month, even after excluding the effects of the recent hurricanes and the strike at Boeing. Meanwhile, inflation remained uncomfortably high through much of the summer. The sharp increases in the prices of oil and many agricultural commodities showed through to consumer food and energy prices, and producers passed through some of their higher input costs into retail prices for "core" goods and services. More recently, however, the prices of oil and other commodities have posted substantial declines, non-oil import prices have edged down, and the prospect of greater slack in resource markets and weak demand seems likely to restrain labor cost pressures and pricing power. Reflecting these developments, inflation expectations appear to have eased a bit. The weakening U.S. economy and ongoing declines in house prices, with their implications for credit performance, put further pressure on exposed financial institutions over the summer. Investors lost confidence in some of these institutions, which then saw their access to liquidity dry up, causing some to fail and others to require government assistance or to consolidate via their acquisition by healthier institutions. The speed with which these developments occurred, along with worries about losses throughout the financial system, led banks and other lenders to pull back from extending credit except at the very shortest maturities. As a result, conditions in funding markets deteriorated substantially further in September and early October, with interbank lending rates moving up sharply from already-high levels and spreads over comparable-maturity overnight index swaps widening to unprecedented levels. In addition, the commercial paper market became severely disrupted as money market mutual funds, the largest investors in that market, substantially reduced their demand in response to outflows and the difficulty of liquidating commercial paper in secondary markets. As a result, yields on commercial paper skyrocketed for most issuers, and funding became increasingly concentrated in paper with overnight maturities. Similarly, interest rates on longer-term corporate bonds rose sharply even for investment-grade firms, and bond markets were closed off to many issuers. These developments quickly led to sharp declines in equity prices more generally, as well as to widespread disruptions in other markets, including the markets for municipal bonds. Market distress fed on itself, as efforts by lenders to protect themselves triggered calls for increased margins, sales of assets that accentuated price declines, large increases in volatility in an uncertain and unfamiliar environment, and a sharp cutback in the willingness to extend credit. Financial stresses have intensified in major foreign economies as well, with many also experiencing a drying up of liquidity in financial markets, sharp increases in the cost of short-term credit, and steep declines in equity prices. The net result of the erosion of confidence, declines in asset prices, and freezing up of many financial markets has been a marked deterioration in the outlook for economic growth both here and abroad. Already, the latest readings on the U.S. economy have become more downbeat. In the labor market, private payroll employment fell 170,000 in September, a faster pace of decline than had been evident in preceding months, and the Institute for Supply Management survey of conditions in the manufacturing sector turned down sharply. In addition, motor vehicle sales fell to a 12-1/2 million unit pace in September, and today's report on retail sales indicated that purchases of other goods also dropped sharply last month. Meanwhile, pressures in financial markets have undoubtedly further restricted the availability of credit to households and businesses. Indeed, many of our contacts for the Beige Book, which was published today, highlighted tight and tightening credit conditions, and, in increasing numbers, indicated that a lack of credit availability is negatively affecting their customers' ability to spend or impairing their own ability to maintain the normal working capital they need to manage their day-to-day operations. To combat the increased stresses in financial markets and their effects on the economy, the U.S. authorities, as well as those of many foreign governments, have taken a number of forceful and innovative steps in recent weeks. Of greatest consequence was the passage of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act (EESA) with its authority for the government to use up to $700 billion to support financial markets. Importantly, the U.S. Treasury has indicated that a significant share of this authority will be used to inject capital into financial institutions. As the turmoil has persisted and deepened, it has become increasingly clear that the fear and uncertainty gripping markets stems from questions about the exposure of many financial intermediaries to losses on mortgages and other loans. Banks and other lenders need greater capital cushions to reassure their counterparties that they will be able to meet their obligations, and they need it soon. The capital purchase plan announced by the Treasury yesterday is a start on building capital and confidence, and, by strengthening lenders, should make it easier for them to access the private capital they also require. In addition, the troubled asset purchase program should help by counteracting the effect of forced sales and impaired market liquidity on asset prices. Although capital is the bedrock of confidence, it probably will take some time for enough to be raised to completely reassure those who extend funds to many intermediaries. In the meantime, the inability of lenders to fund themselves beyond the very near term creates vulnerability in the financial system and impedes their capacity to make loans to households and businesses to finance the purchases of cars, houses, and business capital. To bridge the gap to stronger capital, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) is offering banks and their holding companies an opportunity to issue guaranteed obligations for the next nine months. This guarantee covers the obligations most likely to be withdrawn when confidence erodes, but it is also structured to encourage banks to lengthen the maturity of their borrowing to provide stability, rebuild confidence, and stimulate lending. The FDIC program will operate alongside the earlier Treasury guarantee of money market fund balances designed to stabilize investments in those accounts and hence reduce the need for these funds to liquidate assets. For its part, the Federal Reserve has greatly expanded its provision of liquidity to banks here and abroad and to other borrowers. We could do so in part because the EESA accelerated the authority for the Federal Reserve to pay interest on reserves. With that power, we can expand our lending and still maintain the federal funds rate target established by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Under normal circumstances, we face no tension between supplying liquidity and achieving our interest rate objective, because we supply a relatively small amount of funds to the private sector through our open market operations with primary dealers and discount window lending to banks. Over the past 15 months, however, as lenders have become increasingly reluctant to lend to each other, the Federal Reserve has had to take on a much greater role in the financial system to carry out its public policy responsibilities to provide a backstop source of liquidity. At first, we did this by expanding the amount and lengthening the maturity of our lending to banks at the discount window and through our traditional open market operations with dealers. Then, we found that we needed to supply credit against a greater variety of collateral to primary dealers so we opened the discount window to them and expanded our securities lending facilities. And just within the past few weeks we determined that, with normal intermediation increasingly disrupted, economic and financial stability required us to lend to firms that issued commercial paper. At the same time, we have greatly expanded our dollar swaps with foreign central banks to help them meet the dollar funding needs of their domestic banks--needs that have been adding to pressures on our markets here at home. By opening and expanding these facilities, we are trying to assure banks, dealers, and commercial paper issuers that they can extend credit without worrying about whether they will be able to borrow to fund those loans. We are also trying to assure those who lend to these firms that the borrowers will have a source of funding to pay them back. Clearly, the willingness of the Federal Reserve to lend substantial amounts to more counterparties over longer periods has not, by itself, been sufficient to unlock private credit flows; but Federal Reserve credit has been a critical ingredient in the mix of policy tools. As I noted earlier, the troubles in the financial markets have spilled over to the economy. Indeed, fear of economic weakness and the associated deterioration in credit quality contributed to the adverse dynamics in credit markets. To counter this dynamic and adjust its policy to the evolving economic outlook, the FOMC reduced the target federal funds rate 50 basis points last week. To be sure, the effects of the easier stance of policy on the cost and availability of credit were overwhelmed last week by the further erosion in confidence. But, over time, lower rates will help to support asset prices and reduce the cost of capital to encourage spending, economic expansion, and job creation. Importantly, this easing action was taken alongside similar actions by many other central banks. Financial markets are connected around the world by the free flow of capital, and the freezing up of credit has occurred, to one degree or another, in many foreign economies as well as our own. In these circumstances, measures to address financial market problems within each country are likely to be more effective if other countries are also taking similar steps, as they are doing not only in monetary policy but also in their efforts to recapitalize banks, guarantee bank obligations, and shore up the confidence of lenders. I am optimistic that this multipronged approach is laying the groundwork for a return to more normal functioning in financial markets and a restoration of vigorous economic growth. The initial reaction has been positive, but it will take some time before we know to what extent the current stresses in the financial sector are being resolved. Over time, financial firms will need to bolster profits to offset losses and attract capital, to delever by reducing debt relative to equity, and in many cases to consolidate through mergers and acquisitions. All of this points to a prolonged period of cautious lending and a high cost of capital relative to benchmark interest rates like the federal funds rate, even as market functioning improves. Similarly, although the adjustment in housing markets is well under way, it likely still has further to go. House prices will probably continue to fall for a while, and inventories of unsold homes, while decreasing, will remain elevated. At some point, however, house prices will begin to stabilize, demand will be bolstered by the lower level of prices and low interest rates, and inventories will come into better alignment with sales. To be sure, any rebound in housing activity will likely be modest, but even a stabilization in housing markets will remove what has been a significant drag on the U.S. economy. Given the likely drawn-out nature of the prospective adjustments in housing and financial markets, I see the most probable scenario as one in which the performance of the economy remains subpar well into next year and then gradually improves in late 2009 and 2010. As credit restraint abates, the low level of policy interest rates will begin to show through into more accommodative financial conditions. This improvement in financial conditions, together with the gradual stabilization of housing markets and the stimulative effects of lower oil and commodity prices, should lead to a pickup in jobs and income, contributing to a broad recovery in the U.S. economy. At the same time, inflation seems likely to move onto a downward track. If sustained, the recent declines in commodity prices should soon lead to a sharp reduction in headline inflation. In addition, I expect core inflation to slow from current levels as lower commodity prices and greater economic slack moderate upward pressures on costs. Similar reductions in inflation abroad, as well as the recent appreciation of the dollar, should restrain increases in the prices of imported goods. I would caution, however, that the uncertainty around my forecast is substantial. The path of the economy will depend critically on how quickly the current stresses in financial markets abate. But these events have few if any precedents, and thus we can have even less confidence than usual in our economic forecasts. Here's what I do know: The authorities around the world have brought to bear on this situation an array of actions that are unprecedented in scope and force; these actions show every promise of being successful in restoring confidence in lending institutions and freeing the flow of credit to households and businesses; and governments in the United States and elsewhere have shown themselves able to work across political parties and across international boundaries to craft new approaches to problems. As Chairman Bernanke has often remarked, at the Federal Reserve we will utilize all the tools at our disposal to meet our responsibilities for fostering high employment and stable prices. I also know that the U.S. economy has proven itself over the years to be flexible and resilient as well as innovative and productive, qualities which enable it to rebound from serious economic shocks. I am confident that we will emerge from this episode with a stronger and more robust financial system and with a restoration of solid and sustainable economic growth. Footnotes 1.The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of other members of the Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. William Wascher, of the Board’s staff, contributed to these remarks.Return to text
In order to provide broad access to liquidity and funding to financial institutions, the Bank of England (BoE), the European Central Bank (ECB), the Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan, and the Swiss National Bank (SNB) are jointly announcing further measures to improve liquidity in short-term U.S. dollar funding markets.The BoE, ECB, and SNB will conduct tenders of U.S. dollar funding at 7-day, 28-day, and 84-day maturities at fixed interest rates for full allotment. Funds will be provided at a fixed interest rate, set in advance of each operation. Counterparties in these operations will be able to borrow any amount they wish against the appropriate collateral in each jurisdiction. Accordingly, sizes of the reciprocal currency arrangements (swap lines) between the Federal Reserve and the BoE, the ECB, and the SNB will be increased to accommodate whatever quantity of U.S. dollar funding is demanded. The Bank of Japan will be considering the introduction of similar measures.Central banks will continue to work together and are prepared to take whatever measures are necessary to provide sufficient liquidity in short-term funding markets.Federal Reserve ActionsTo assist in the expansion of these operations, the Federal Open Market Committee has authorized increases in the sizes of its temporary swap facilities with the BoE, the ECB, and the SNB, so that these central banks can provide U.S. dollar funding in quantities sufficient to meet demand.These arrangements have been authorized through April 30, 2009.Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central BanksInformation on the actions that will be taken by the other central banks is available at the following websites:Bank of EnglandEuropean Central BankBank of Japan (53 KB PDF)Swiss National Bank (56 KB PDF) In order to provide broad access to liquidity and funding to financial institutions, the Bank of England (BoE), the European Central Bank (ECB), the Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan, and the Swiss National Bank (SNB) are jointly announcing further measures to improve liquidity in short-term U.S. dollar funding markets. The BoE, ECB, and SNB will conduct tenders of U.S. dollar funding at 7-day, 28-day, and 84-day maturities at fixed interest rates for full allotment. Funds will be provided at a fixed interest rate, set in advance of each operation. Counterparties in these operations will be able to borrow any amount they wish against the appropriate collateral in each jurisdiction. Accordingly, sizes of the reciprocal currency arrangements (swap lines) between the Federal Reserve and the BoE, the ECB, and the SNB will be increased to accommodate whatever quantity of U.S. dollar funding is demanded. The Bank of Japan will be considering the introduction of similar measures. Central banks will continue to work together and are prepared to take whatever measures are necessary to provide sufficient liquidity in short-term funding markets. Federal Reserve ActionsTo assist in the expansion of these operations, the Federal Open Market Committee has authorized increases in the sizes of its temporary swap facilities with the BoE, the ECB, and the SNB, so that these central banks can provide U.S. dollar funding in quantities sufficient to meet demand. These arrangements have been authorized through April 30, 2009. Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central BanksInformation on the actions that will be taken by the other central banks is available at the following websites:Bank of EnglandEuropean Central BankBank of Japan (53 KB PDF)Swiss National Bank (56 KB PDF)
Central banks recently announced coordinated actions to expand the provision of U.S. dollar liquidity. Today, the central banks are announcing schedules for term and forward auctions of U.S. dollar liquidity conducted during the fourth quarter of this year. These schedules include dates of any 28-day and 84-day term auctions and two preliminary dates for any forward auctions of U.S. dollar liquidity over the year-end. Scheduling of the forward auctions is still tentative and may be adjusted in response to financial market conditions.Federal Reserve ActionsAs previously announced, the Federal Reserve will conduct an auction of 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility (TAF) in October and another in November. A third auction of 28-day credit is now scheduled for December. These auction dates are October 20, November 17, and December 15, and $150 billion will be offered in each auction.As previously announced, the Federal Reserve will also conduct two auctions of three-month credit through the TAF in October and November. Two more auctions of three-month funding are now scheduled for December. These auction dates are October 6, November 3, December 1, and December 29, and $150 billion will be offered in each auction.Two forward TAF auctions, designed to reassure market participants that term funding will be available over year-end, are now tentatively scheduled for November 10 and November 24. Settlement would occur on December 22 and December 23, respectively, and the funding would be over corresponding terms of 17 days and 13 days, to bridge the turn of the year. Each forward auction will offer funding of $150 billion.Schedule for 28-day and 84-day TAF AuctionsFourth Quarter 2008Auction DateTermSettlement DateMaturity Date6 October 200885 days19 October 20082 January 200920 October 200828 days23 October 200820 November 20083 November 200884 days6 November 200829 January 200917 November 200828 days20 November 200818 December 20081 December 200884 days4 December 200826 February 200915 December 200828 days18 December 200815 January 200929 December 200883 days12 January 200926 March 20091.Term modified because of holiday.Return to textPreliminary Schedule for Forward TAF AuctionsAuction DateTermSettlement DateMaturity Date10 November 200817 days22 December 20088 January 200924 November 200813 days23 December 20085 January 2009Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central BanksInformation on the actions that will be taken by other central banks is available at the following websites:Bank of CanadaBank of EnglandBank of Japan (19 KB PDF)European Central BankSwiss National Bank (55 KB PDF) Central banks recently announced coordinated actions to expand the provision of U.S. dollar liquidity. Today, the central banks are announcing schedules for term and forward auctions of U.S. dollar liquidity conducted during the fourth quarter of this year. These schedules include dates of any 28-day and 84-day term auctions and two preliminary dates for any forward auctions of U.S. dollar liquidity over the year-end. Scheduling of the forward auctions is still tentative and may be adjusted in response to financial market conditions. Federal Reserve ActionsAs previously announced, the Federal Reserve will conduct an auction of 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility (TAF) in October and another in November. A third auction of 28-day credit is now scheduled for December. These auction dates are October 20, November 17, and December 15, and $150 billion will be offered in each auction. As previously announced, the Federal Reserve will also conduct two auctions of three-month credit through the TAF in October and November. Two more auctions of three-month funding are now scheduled for December. These auction dates are October 6, November 3, December 1, and December 29, and $150 billion will be offered in each auction. Two forward TAF auctions, designed to reassure market participants that term funding will be available over year-end, are now tentatively scheduled for November 10 and November 24. Settlement would occur on December 22 and December 23, respectively, and the funding would be over corresponding terms of 17 days and 13 days, to bridge the turn of the year. Each forward auction will offer funding of $150 billion. Schedule for 28-day and 84-day TAF AuctionsFourth Quarter 2008 Auction Date Term Settlement Date Maturity Date 6 October 2008 85 days1 9 October 2008 2 January 2009 20 October 2008 28 days 23 October 2008 20 November 2008 3 November 2008 84 days 6 November 2008 29 January 2009 17 November 2008 28 days 20 November 2008 18 December 2008 1 December 2008 84 days 4 December 2008 26 February 2009 15 December 2008 28 days 18 December 2008 15 January 2009 29 December 2008 83 days1 2 January 2009 26 March 2009 1.Term modified because of holiday.Return to textPreliminary Schedule for Forward TAF AuctionsAuction DateTermSettlement DateMaturity Date10 November 200817 days22 December 20088 January 200924 November 200813 days23 December 20085 January 2009 1.Term modified because of holiday.Return to text Preliminary Schedule for Forward TAF Auctions Auction DateTermSettlement DateMaturity Date10 November 200817 days22 December 20088 January 200924 November 200813 days23 December 20085 January 2009 Auction Date Term Settlement Date Maturity Date 10 November 2008 17 days 22 December 2008 8 January 2009 24 November 2008 13 days 23 December 2008 5 January 2009 Bank of CanadaBank of EnglandBank of Japan (19 KB PDF)European Central BankSwiss National Bank (55 KB PDF)
Today, the Federal Reserve and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand are announcing the establishment of a temporary reciprocal currency arrangement (swap line) to address ongoing, elevated pressures in U.S. dollar short-term funding markets. This facility, like those already established with other central banks, is designed to help improve liquidity conditions in global financial markets. Federal Reserve ActionsThe Federal Open Market Committee has authorized the establishment of a new swap facility with the Reserve Bank of New Zealand that will support the provision of U.S. dollar liquidity in amounts of up to $15 billion. This reciprocal currency arrangement has been authorized through April 30, 2009. The FOMC previously authorized temporary reciprocal currency arrangements with nine other central banks: the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Bank of Canada, Danmarks Nationalbank, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, the Norges Bank, the Sveriges Riksbank, and the Swiss National Bank. Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central BanksInformation on the actions that will be taken by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand is available at the following website: Reserve Bank of New Zealand Related Federal Reserve AnnouncementsSeptember 18Coordinated measures with Bank of Canada, Bank of England, ECB, Bank of Japan, and Swiss National BankSeptember 24Arrangements with Reserve Bank of Australia, Danmarks Nationalbank, Norges Bank, and Sveriges RiksbankSeptember 26Federal Reserve and other central banks announce operations to address funding pressures over quarter endSeptember 29Federal Reserve and other central banks announce further coordinated actions to expand significantly the capacity to provide U.S. dollar liquidityOctober 13, 2008Federal Reserve and other central banks announce further measures to provide broad access to liquidity and funding to financial institutionsOctober 14, 2008FOMC authorizes an increase in the size of its temporary reciprocal currency arrangement with the Bank of Japan Related Federal Reserve AnnouncementsSeptember 18Coordinated measures with Bank of Canada, Bank of England, ECB, Bank of Japan, and Swiss National BankSeptember 24Arrangements with Reserve Bank of Australia, Danmarks Nationalbank, Norges Bank, and Sveriges RiksbankSeptember 26Federal Reserve and other central banks announce operations to address funding pressures over quarter endSeptember 29Federal Reserve and other central banks announce further coordinated actions to expand significantly the capacity to provide U.S. dollar liquidityOctober 13, 2008Federal Reserve and other central banks announce further measures to provide broad access to liquidity and funding to financial institutionsOctober 14, 2008FOMC authorizes an increase in the size of its temporary reciprocal currency arrangement with the Bank of Japan Related Federal Reserve AnnouncementsSeptember 18Coordinated measures with Bank of Canada, Bank of England, ECB, Bank of Japan, and Swiss National BankSeptember 24Arrangements with Reserve Bank of Australia, Danmarks Nationalbank, Norges Bank, and Sveriges RiksbankSeptember 26Federal Reserve and other central banks announce operations to address funding pressures over quarter endSeptember 29Federal Reserve and other central banks announce further coordinated actions to expand significantly the capacity to provide U.S. dollar liquidityOctober 13, 2008Federal Reserve and other central banks announce further measures to provide broad access to liquidity and funding to financial institutionsOctober 14, 2008FOMC authorizes an increase in the size of its temporary reciprocal currency arrangement with the Bank of Japan
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the adoption of an interim final rule that will allow bank holding companies to include in their Tier 1 capital without restriction the senior perpetual preferred stock issued to the Treasury Department under the capital purchase program announced by the Treasury on October 14, 2008. Treasury established the capital purchase program under the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008, which became law on October 3, 2008. Details about the capital purchase program are available on theTreasury's website. The Board adopted the rule on an interim final basis to immediately provide guidance to bank holding companies concerning the regulatory capital treatment of such senior perpetual preferred stock and to support and facilitate the timely provision of capital to bank holding companies under the capital purchase program. The Board continues to work with Treasury, the other federal banking agencies, and other parties on other capital and related matters associated with the capital purchase program. The interim rule will be effective as of October 17, 2008. The Board is, however, seeking public comment on the interim rule. Comments must be submitted within 30 days of publication of the interim rule in theFederal Register, which is expected soon. The draftFederal Registernotice for the rule is attached. Federal Registernotice:57 KB PDF|HTML
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced that it will alter the formula used to determine the interest rate paid to depository institutions on excess balances. Previously, the rate on excess balances had been set as the lowest federal funds rate target established by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in effect during the reserve maintenance period minus 75 basis points. Under the new formula, the rate on excess balances will be set equal to the lowest FOMC target rate in effect during the reserve maintenance period less 35 basis points. This change will become effective for the maintenance periods beginning Thursday, October 23. The Board judged that a narrower spread between the target funds rate and the rate on excess balances at this time would help foster trading in the funds market at rates closer to the target rate. The Board will continue to evaluate the appropriate setting of the rate on excess balances in light of evolving market conditions and make further adjustments as needed.
On October 20, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $150 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction:Stop-out rate:1.110 percentTotal propositions submitted:$113.271 billionTotal propositions accepted:$113.271 billionBid/cover ratio:0.76Number of bidders:74The awarded loans will settle on October 23, 2008, and will mature on November 20, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans.Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EDT on October 21, 2008. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EDT on October 21, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Stop-out rate:1.110 percentTotal propositions submitted:$113.271 billionTotal propositions accepted:$113.271 billionBid/cover ratio:0.76Number of bidders:74 The awarded loans will settle on October 23, 2008, and will mature on November 20, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EDT on October 21, 2008. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EDT on October 21, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On October 6, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $150 billion in 85-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Stop-out rate:1.390 percentTotal propositions submitted:$138.092 billionTotal propositions accepted:$138.092 billionBid/cover ratio:0.92Number of bidders:71 The awarded loans will settle on October 9, 2008, and will mature on January 2, 2009. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EDT on October 7, 2008. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EDT on October 7, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the creation of the Money Market Investor Funding Facility (MMIFF), which will support a private-sector initiative designed to provide liquidity to U.S. money market investors. Under the MMIFF, authorized by the Board undersection 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) will provide senior secured funding to a series of special purpose vehicles to facilitate an industry-supported private-sector initiative to finance the purchase of eligible assets from eligible investors. Eligible assets will include U.S. dollar-denominated certificates of deposit and commercial paper issued by highly rated financial institutions and having remaining maturities of 90 days or less. Eligible investors will include U.S. money market mutual funds and over time may include other U.S. money market investors. The short-term debt markets have been under considerable strain in recent weeks as money market mutual funds and other investors have had difficulty selling assets to satisfy redemption requests and meet portfolio rebalancing needs. By facilitating the sales of money market instruments in the secondary market, the MMIFF should improve the liquidity position of money market investors, thus increasing their ability to meet any further redemption requests and their willingness to invest in money market instruments. Improved money market conditions will enhance the ability of banks and other financial intermediaries to accommodate the credit needs of businesses and households. The attached term sheet describes the basic terms and operational details of the facility. The MMIFF complements the previously announcedCommercial Paper Funding Facility(CPFF), which on October 27, 2008, will begin funding purchases of highly rated, U.S.-dollar denominated, three-month, unsecured and asset-backed commercial paper issued by U.S. issuers, as well as theAsset Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility(AMLF), announced on September 19, 2008, which extends loans to banking organizations to purchase asset backed commercial paper from money market mutual funds. The AMLF, CPFF, and MMIFF are all intended to improve liquidity in short-term debt markets and thereby increase the availability of credit.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday approved final amendments to Regulation C that revise the rules for reporting price information on higher-priced mortgage loans. The changes are intended to improve the accuracy and usefulness of data reported under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act. Regulation C currently requires lenders to collect and report the spread between the annual percentage rate (APR) on a mortgage loan and the yield on a Treasury security of comparable maturity if the spread is greater than 3.0 percentage points for a first lien loan or greater than 5.0 percentage points for a subordinate lien loan. This difference is known as a rate spread. Under the final rule, a lender will report the spread between the loan's APR and a survey-based estimate of APRs currently offered on prime mortgages of a comparable type ("average prime offer rate") if the spread is equal to or greater than 1.5 percentage points for a first lien loan or equal to or greater than 3.5 percentage points for a subordinate-lien loan. The Board will publish average prime offer rates based on the Primary Mortgage Market Survey® currently published by Freddie Mac. The Board will conduct its own survey if it becomes appropriate or necessary to do so. In setting the rate spread reporting threshold, the Board sought to cover subprime mortgages and generally avoid covering prime mortgages. Applying the new, market survey-based benchmarks in place of Treasury security yields should better achieve this purpose and ensure more consistent and more useful data. The changes to Regulation C conform the threshold for rate spread reporting to the definition of higher-priced mortgage loans adopted by the Board under Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) in July of 2008. By implementing the same pricing threshold test under both regulations, the Board is reducing the overall regulatory burden on mortgage lenders. The final rule is effective October 1, 2009. The Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached. Federal Registernotice:89 KB PDF|HTML
The Federal Reserve on Thursday issued enhanced guidance that refines and clarifies its programs for the consolidated supervision of bank holding companies and the combined U.S. operations of foreign banking organizations (FBOs). The Federal Reserve also released guidance clarifying supervisory expectations with respect to firmwide compliance risk management. While initiation of these efforts predated the recent period of considerable strain in the financial markets, these enhanced approaches to consolidated supervision and firmwide compliance risk management emphasize several elements that should support a more resilient financial system. The Federal Reserve continues to work, both independently and in conjunction with other supervisors and functional regulators, on a number of initiatives to strengthen supervisory approaches and reinforce expectations for sound practices in response to market events. "This supervisory guidance on consolidated supervision and compliance risk management will better equip our supervisory staff, working closely with other U.S. and foreign supervisors and regulators, to understand and assess the full range and scope of a banking organization's operations and risks," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Randall S. Kroszner. "This guidance should not only provide greater clarity regarding our longstanding responsibilities as a consolidated supervisor, but is also responsive to ongoing developments in the financial sector. The objectives of fostering financial stability and deterring or managing financial crises will be furthered by the Federal Reserve having a more complete view of firmwide risks and controls," Governor Kroszner said. The continuing growth in the size and complexity of many banking organizations exposes these firms to a wide array of potential risks, while at the same time making it more challenging for a single supervisor to have a comprehensive perspective on the firm as a whole. In this regard, the consolidated supervision guidance is designed to foster consistent Federal Reserve supervisory practices and assessments across institutions with similar activities and risks. The guidance describes how Federal Reserve staff develops an understanding and assessment of the consolidated operations of a bank holding company and the U.S. operations of an FBO through continuous monitoring activities, discovery reviews, and testing activities, as well as through interaction with, and reliance to the fullest extent possible on, other relevant supervisors and functional regulators. The separate compliance risk management guidance endorses the principles set forth in the April 2005 paper issued by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision entitledCompliance and the compliance function in banks. This guidance clarifies certain Federal Reserve supervisory policies regarding compliance risk management programs and oversight at large banking organizations with complex compliance profiles. The supervisory guidance on both consolidated supervision and compliance risk management is attached. SR Letter 08-8/CA Letter 08-11 SR Letter 08-9/CA Letter 08-12
The factors that gave rise to high-poverty neighborhoods, and the challenges these communities face, are the focus of a Systemwide Federal Reserve research effort that examines the diverse landscape of concentrated poverty in America. The report,"The Enduring Challenge of Concentrated Poverty: Case Studies from Communities Across the U.S.,"explores how pockets of extreme poverty manifest in communities. Some of the themes highlighted are common across all of the low-income communities that were studied--lack of human capital development, high rates of unemployment, inadequate housing. However, the varying social and economic contexts in which concentrated poverty occurs imply the need for tailored strategies to ensure a better future for these communities and their residents. Motivating the project was the recognition that the problems faced by many of the poor communities devastated by Hurricane Katrina in 2005 were shared by residents of neighborhoods across the United States. While concentrations of poor people living in poor neighborhoods have been observed in large Midwestern and Northeastern cities, concentrated poverty also exists in smaller cities, immigrant gateways, suburban municipalities and rural counties. The need for a deeper understanding of the relationship between poverty, people, and place led the Federal Reserve to join with the Brookings Institution's Metropolitan Policy Program. The resulting report contains case studies, undertaken by the Federal Reserve System's Community Affairs Offices, of 16 high-poverty communities across the United States. The studies cover communities in places as diverse as Cleveland, Ohio; El Paso, Texas; and the Blackfeet Reservation in Montana. The report sought to answer the following questions: While the case study communities collectively were diverse, four factors emerged consistently from each. First, it is evident that history matters. Poverty and disadvantage have tended to concentrate there over time and decades of disinvestments are difficult to turn around. Second, high-poverty communities are isolated. Residents are often physically, socially, racially, and linguistically separated from the larger economy and community, and local organizations often lack the resources and capacity to respond to the wide range of community needs. Third, many of these neighborhoods have experienced significant demographic changes, such as a rise in immigrant households, a rise in single-parent families, or both. Finally, these communities of concentrated poverty exist within both weak and strong regional economies. The report contains case studies of the following high-poverty communities: Albany, Ga.; Atlantic City, N. J.; Austin, Tex.; Blackfeet Reservation, Mont.; Cleveland, Ohio; El Paso, Tex.; Fresno, Calif.; Greenville, N.C.; Holmes County, Miss.; Martin County, Ky.; McDowell County, W.Va.; McKinley County, N.M.; Miami, Fla.; Milwaukee, Wis.; Rochester, N.Y.; and Springfield, Mass. The report's findings will contribute to the Federal Reserve's understanding of low-income communities and their needs in carrying out ongoing community development partnerships in these areas. The report also identifies issues for future research. The report is available online at:http://www.frbsf.org/cpreport/. Single copies of the publication are free from: Publications, Mail Stop 127, Federal Reserve Board, 20th and C Streets, N.W., Washington, DC 20551; 202-452-3245.
On October 20, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $150 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm).Description of Offering and Auction Parameters Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
On October 6, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $150 billion in 85-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm).Description of Offering and Auction Parameters Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
Today, the Federal Reserve, the Banco Central do Brasil, the Banco de Mexico, the Bank of Korea, and the Monetary Authority of Singapore are announcing the establishment of temporary reciprocal currency arrangements (swap lines). These facilities, like those already established with other central banks, are designed to help improve liquidity conditions in global financial markets and to mitigate the spread of difficulties in obtaining U.S. dollar funding in fundamentally sound and well managed economies.Federal Reserve ActionsIn response to the heightened stress associated with the global financial turmoil, which has broadened to emerging market economies, the Federal Reserve has authorized the establishment of temporary liquidity swap facilities with the central banks of these four large and systemically important economies. These new facilities will support the provision of U.S. dollar liquidity in amounts of up to $30 billion each by the Banco Central do Brasil, the Banco de Mexico, the Bank of Korea, and the Monetary Authority of Singapore.These reciprocal currency arrangements have been authorized through April 30, 2009.The FOMC previously authorized temporary reciprocal currency arrangements with ten other central banks: the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Bank of Canada, Danmarks Nationalbank, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Norges Bank, the Sveriges Riksbank, and the Swiss National Bank.IMF AnnouncementSeparately, the Federal Reserve welcomes the announcement today by the International Monetary Fund of the establishment of the Short-Term Liquidity Facility, which is designed to help member countries that are facing temporary liquidity problems in the global capital markets. The Federal Reserve is supportive of the IMF's role in helping countries address and resolve their ongoing economic and financial difficulties.Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central Banks and by the IMFInformation on the actions that will be taken by central banks and by the International Monetary Fund is available at the following websites:Banco Central do BrasilBanco de MexicoBank of KoreaMonetary Authority of SingaporeInternational Monetary FundRelated Federal Reserve AnnouncementsSeptember 18Coordinated measures with Bank of Canada, Bank of England, ECB, Bank of Japan, and Swiss National BankSeptember 24Arrangements with Reserve Bank of Australia, Danmarks Nationalbank, Norges Bank, and Sveriges RiksbankSeptember 26Federal Reserve and other central banks announce operations to address funding pressures over quarter endSeptember 29Federal Reserve and other central banks announce further coordinated actions to expand significantly the capacity to provide U.S. dollar liquidityOctober 13, 2008Federal Reserve and other central banks announce further measures to provide broad access to liquidity and funding to financial institutionsOctober 14, 2008FOMC authorizes an increase in the size of its temporary reciprocal currency arrangement with the Bank of JapanOctober 28, 2008Federal Reserve and Reserve Bank of New Zealand announce the establishment of temporary reciprocal currency arrangement Today, the Federal Reserve, the Banco Central do Brasil, the Banco de Mexico, the Bank of Korea, and the Monetary Authority of Singapore are announcing the establishment of temporary reciprocal currency arrangements (swap lines). These facilities, like those already established with other central banks, are designed to help improve liquidity conditions in global financial markets and to mitigate the spread of difficulties in obtaining U.S. dollar funding in fundamentally sound and well managed economies. Federal Reserve ActionsIn response to the heightened stress associated with the global financial turmoil, which has broadened to emerging market economies, the Federal Reserve has authorized the establishment of temporary liquidity swap facilities with the central banks of these four large and systemically important economies. These new facilities will support the provision of U.S. dollar liquidity in amounts of up to $30 billion each by the Banco Central do Brasil, the Banco de Mexico, the Bank of Korea, and the Monetary Authority of Singapore. These reciprocal currency arrangements have been authorized through April 30, 2009. The FOMC previously authorized temporary reciprocal currency arrangements with ten other central banks: the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Bank of Canada, Danmarks Nationalbank, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Norges Bank, the Sveriges Riksbank, and the Swiss National Bank. IMF AnnouncementSeparately, the Federal Reserve welcomes the announcement today by the International Monetary Fund of the establishment of the Short-Term Liquidity Facility, which is designed to help member countries that are facing temporary liquidity problems in the global capital markets. The Federal Reserve is supportive of the IMF's role in helping countries address and resolve their ongoing economic and financial difficulties. Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central Banks and by the IMFInformation on the actions that will be taken by central banks and by the International Monetary Fund is available at the following websites: Banco Central do BrasilBanco de MexicoBank of KoreaMonetary Authority of SingaporeInternational Monetary Fund Related Federal Reserve AnnouncementsSeptember 18Coordinated measures with Bank of Canada, Bank of England, ECB, Bank of Japan, and Swiss National BankSeptember 24Arrangements with Reserve Bank of Australia, Danmarks Nationalbank, Norges Bank, and Sveriges RiksbankSeptember 26Federal Reserve and other central banks announce operations to address funding pressures over quarter endSeptember 29Federal Reserve and other central banks announce further coordinated actions to expand significantly the capacity to provide U.S. dollar liquidityOctober 13, 2008Federal Reserve and other central banks announce further measures to provide broad access to liquidity and funding to financial institutionsOctober 14, 2008FOMC authorizes an increase in the size of its temporary reciprocal currency arrangement with the Bank of JapanOctober 28, 2008Federal Reserve and Reserve Bank of New Zealand announce the establishment of temporary reciprocal currency arrangement Related Federal Reserve AnnouncementsSeptember 18Coordinated measures with Bank of Canada, Bank of England, ECB, Bank of Japan, and Swiss National BankSeptember 24Arrangements with Reserve Bank of Australia, Danmarks Nationalbank, Norges Bank, and Sveriges RiksbankSeptember 26Federal Reserve and other central banks announce operations to address funding pressures over quarter endSeptember 29Federal Reserve and other central banks announce further coordinated actions to expand significantly the capacity to provide U.S. dollar liquidityOctober 13, 2008Federal Reserve and other central banks announce further measures to provide broad access to liquidity and funding to financial institutionsOctober 14, 2008FOMC authorizes an increase in the size of its temporary reciprocal currency arrangement with the Bank of JapanOctober 28, 2008Federal Reserve and Reserve Bank of New Zealand announce the establishment of temporary reciprocal currency arrangement
The Federal Open Market Committee has authorized an increase in the size of its temporary reciprocal currency arrangement (swap line) with the Bank of Japan, so that the Bank of Japan can provide U.S. dollar funding in quantities sufficient to meet demand.Following on the joint announcement by central banks on October 13, the Bank of Japan announced Tuesday that it will conduct tenders of U.S. dollar funding for full allotment at pre-announced fixed rates. As in Europe, counterparties in Japan will be able to borrow any amount they wish against appropriate collateral.Accordingly, the size of the swap line between the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan will be increased to accommodate whatever quantity of U.S. dollar funding is demanded. On October 13, the Federal Reserve made the sameannouncementwith respect to its swap lines with the Bank of England, European Central Bank, and Swiss National Bank.These arrangements have been authorized through April 30, 2009.Information on the action by the Bank of Japan is available at its website:Bank of Japan The Federal Open Market Committee has authorized an increase in the size of its temporary reciprocal currency arrangement (swap line) with the Bank of Japan, so that the Bank of Japan can provide U.S. dollar funding in quantities sufficient to meet demand. Following on the joint announcement by central banks on October 13, the Bank of Japan announced Tuesday that it will conduct tenders of U.S. dollar funding for full allotment at pre-announced fixed rates. As in Europe, counterparties in Japan will be able to borrow any amount they wish against appropriate collateral. Accordingly, the size of the swap line between the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan will be increased to accommodate whatever quantity of U.S. dollar funding is demanded. On October 13, the Federal Reserve made the sameannouncementwith respect to its swap lines with the Bank of England, European Central Bank, and Swiss National Bank. These arrangements have been authorized through April 30, 2009. Information on the action by the Bank of Japan is available at its website: Bank of Japan
Joint Statement by Central BanksThroughout the current financial crisis, central banks have engaged in continuous close consultation and have cooperated in unprecedented joint actions such as the provision of liquidity to reduce strains in financial markets.Inflationary pressures have started to moderate in a number of countries, partly reflecting a marked decline in energy and other commodity prices. Inflation expectations are diminishing and remain anchored to price stability. The recent intensification of the financial crisis has augmented the downside risks to growth and thus has diminished further the upside risks to price stability.Some easing of global monetary conditions is therefore warranted. Accordingly, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve, Sveriges Riksbank, and the Swiss National Bank are today announcing reductions in policy interest rates. The Bank of Japan expresses its strong support of these policy actions.Federal Reserve ActionsThe Federal Open Market Committee has decided to lower its target for the federal funds rate 50 basis points to 1-1/2 percent. The Committee took this action in light of evidence pointing to a weakening of economic activity and a reduction in inflationary pressures.Incoming economic data suggest that the pace of economic activity has slowed markedly in recent months. Moreover, the intensification of financial market turmoil is likely to exert additional restraint on spending, partly by further reducing the ability of households and businesses to obtain credit. Inflation has been high, but the Committee believes that the decline in energy and other commodity prices and the weaker prospects for economic activity have reduced the upside risks to inflation.The Committee will monitor economic and financial developments carefully and will act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability.Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Elizabeth A. Duke; Richard W. Fisher; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Sandra Pianalto; Charles I. Plosser; Gary H. Stern; and Kevin M. Warsh.In a related action, the Board of Governors unanimously approved a 50-basis-point decrease in the discount rate to 1-3/4 percent. In taking this action, the Board approved the request submitted by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.Information on Actions Taken by Other Central BanksInformation on the actions that will be taken by other central banks is available at the following websites:Bank of CanadaBank of EnglandEuropean Central BankSveriges Riksbank (Bank of Sweden)Swiss National Bank (68 KB PDF)Statements by Other Central BanksBank of Japan (79 KB PDF) Throughout the current financial crisis, central banks have engaged in continuous close consultation and have cooperated in unprecedented joint actions such as the provision of liquidity to reduce strains in financial markets. Inflationary pressures have started to moderate in a number of countries, partly reflecting a marked decline in energy and other commodity prices. Inflation expectations are diminishing and remain anchored to price stability. The recent intensification of the financial crisis has augmented the downside risks to growth and thus has diminished further the upside risks to price stability. Some easing of global monetary conditions is therefore warranted. Accordingly, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve, Sveriges Riksbank, and the Swiss National Bank are today announcing reductions in policy interest rates. The Bank of Japan expresses its strong support of these policy actions. Federal Reserve ActionsThe Federal Open Market Committee has decided to lower its target for the federal funds rate 50 basis points to 1-1/2 percent. The Committee took this action in light of evidence pointing to a weakening of economic activity and a reduction in inflationary pressures. Incoming economic data suggest that the pace of economic activity has slowed markedly in recent months. Moreover, the intensification of financial market turmoil is likely to exert additional restraint on spending, partly by further reducing the ability of households and businesses to obtain credit. Inflation has been high, but the Committee believes that the decline in energy and other commodity prices and the weaker prospects for economic activity have reduced the upside risks to inflation. The Committee will monitor economic and financial developments carefully and will act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Elizabeth A. Duke; Richard W. Fisher; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Sandra Pianalto; Charles I. Plosser; Gary H. Stern; and Kevin M. Warsh. In a related action, the Board of Governors unanimously approved a 50-basis-point decrease in the discount rate to 1-3/4 percent. In taking this action, the Board approved the request submitted by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. Information on Actions Taken by Other Central BanksInformation on the actions that will be taken by other central banks is available at the following websites: Bank of CanadaBank of EnglandEuropean Central BankSveriges Riksbank (Bank of Sweden)Swiss National Bank (68 KB PDF) Statements by Other Central BanksBank of Japan (79 KB PDF)
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate 50 basis points to 1 percent. The pace of economic activity appears to have slowed markedly, owing importantly to a decline in consumer expenditures. Business equipment spending and industrial production have weakened in recent months, and slowing economic activity in many foreign economies is damping the prospects for U.S. exports. Moreover, the intensification of financial market turmoil is likely to exert additional restraint on spending, partly by further reducing the ability of households and businesses to obtain credit. In light of the declines in the prices of energy and other commodities and the weaker prospects for economic activity, the Committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters to levels consistent with price stability. Recent policy actions, including today’s rate reduction, coordinated interest rate cuts by central banks, extraordinary liquidity measures, and official steps to strengthen financial systems, should help over time to improve credit conditions and promote a return to moderate economic growth. Nevertheless, downside risks to growth remain. The Committee will monitor economic and financial developments carefully and will act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Elizabeth A. Duke; Richard W. Fisher; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Sandra Pianalto; Charles I. Plosser; Gary H. Stern; and Kevin M. Warsh. In a related action, the Board of Governors unanimously approved a 50-basis-point decrease in the discount rate to 1-1/4 percent. In taking this action, the Board approved the requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Cleveland, and San Francisco.
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Financial markets have been strained for more than a year, as house prices declined, economic activity slowed, and investors pulled back from risk-taking. These strains intensified in recent weeks. Lending to banks and other financial institutions beyond a few days virtually shut down. Withdrawals from money market mutual funds and prospects that net asset values would fall further severely disrupted commercial paper and other short-term funding markets. Longer-term credit also became much more costly as credit spreads for bonds jumped and interest rates rose. The problems in credit markets and increasing concerns about the state of the economy caused equity prices to swing sharply and decline notably. Policymakers here and in other countries have taken a series of extraordinary actions in recent weeks to restore market functioning and improve investor confidence, with the aim ultimately to increase the availability of credit and the value of savings. The Federal Reserve has continued to address ongoing problems in interbank funding markets by expanding its existing lending facilities, and recently increased the quantity of term funds it auctions to banks and accommodated greater demand for funds from banks and primary dealers. We also increased our currency swap lines with foreign central banks. To alleviate pressures on money market mutual funds and commercial paper issuers, we implemented several important temporary facilities, including one to provide financing to banks to purchase high-quality asset-backed commercial paper from money funds, and another to provide a backstop to commercial paper markets by purchasing highly rated commercial paper directly from businesses at a term of three months. On Tuesday of this week, we announced another program in which we will provide senior secured financing to conduits that purchase certain highly rated commercial paper and certificates of deposit from money market mutual funds. The financial rescue package recently enacted by Congress, the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act (EESA), provides critically important new tools to address financial market problems. EESA authorized the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), which allows the Treasury to buy troubled assets, to provide guarantees, and to inject capital to strengthen the balance sheets of financial institutions. As provided in the Act, the Federal Reserve Board and its staff are consulting with the Treasury regarding the TARP. In addition, Chairman Bernanke serves as the Chairman of the oversight board for TARP that will, among other things, review the policies that are implemented and make recommendations, as appropriate, regarding the use of authorities under TARP. EESA also temporarily raised the limit on the deposit insurance coverage provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) from $100,000 to $250,000 per account. Last week, the first use of TARP funds was announced. In particular, the Treasury announced a voluntary capital purchase program, and nine of the nation’s largest financial institutions have agreed to participate. The program is open to financial institutions of all sizes. Under the program, the Treasury would acquire capital of financial institutions on terms that are attractive to the institutions and with features that protect the taxpayer. At the same time, the Federal Reserve Board, the FDIC, and the Secretary of the Treasury in consultation with the President, determined that there were significant risks to the stability of the financial system. With this determination, the FDIC used its authority to expand for a specified period, insurance to non-interest-bearing transactions accounts, such as payroll accounts, and a guarantee for newly issued senior unsecured debt of FDIC-insured depository institutions, including their associated holding companies. A second, complementary, use of TARP funds will be to purchase mortgage assets, including mortgage-backed securities and whole loans. These purchases are designed to remove uncertainty from lenders’ balance sheets and to restore confidence in their viability. Another objective is to improve the modification efforts of servicers on these loans to more effectively prevent avoidable foreclosures. The Federal Reserve System is also working to develop solutions to rising foreclosures. Preventing avoidable foreclosures is good for borrowers, communities, and the economy. A number of efforts are underway. The Federal Reserve has worked with other agencies to put in place the standards and procedures for the new Hope for Homeowners (H4H) program, and I serve on the Oversight Board. These loans can help borrowers who might otherwise face foreclosure because the new loan payments are more affordable and the homeowners get some equity in their homes. Lenders and servicers are analyzing their borrowers for good candidates for the H4H program, and the FHA and its authorized lenders are poised to process applications. We appreciate the additional flexibility provided to the program by Congress in EESA, in particular allowing up-front payments to junior lien holders that agree to release their claims. For some time, we have called upon lenders, investors, and servicers to aggressively pursue sustainable loss mitigation activities. For example, last year the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies issued supervisory guidance to encourage mortgage lenders and servicers to pursue prudent loan workouts. We continue to support industry-led efforts, especially those of HOPE NOW, in pursuing flexible approaches to stem the rise in foreclosures and to deal with their effects. Earlier this year, we embarked on a joint effort with NeighborWorks America on neighborhood stabilization to help communities develop strategies for addressing increases in foreclosures and vacant properties. The Federal Reserve System is strategically utilizing its presence around the country through its regional Federal Reserve Banks and their branches to address foreclosures. Our history of working closely at the local level with communities enables us to tailor activities to the specific needs of that area. Our efforts have taken a variety of forms. We have employed economic research and analysis to target scarce resources to the communities most in need of assistance. We have provided community leaders with detailed analyses identifying neighborhoods at high risk of foreclosures. This information is helping local groups to better focus their borrower outreach and counseling efforts. In addition, we have sponsored or supported a wide range of activities in local communities. For example, the Federal Reserve System has sponsored a series of “Recovery, Renewal, Rebuilding” forums in cities around the country in which key experts discussed the challenges related to real-estate owned inventories and vacant properties in strong and weak housing markets, and explored effective neighborhood stabilization policies. Four events were held in various parts of the country earlier this year, and the series concluded with a fifth meeting of experts this past Monday in Washington. This series is just an example of many events. All told, the Federal Reserve System has sponsored or co-sponsored more than 80 events related to foreclosures since last summer, reaching more than 6,000 attendees including lenders, counselors, community development specialists, and policymakers. We also have supported events that bring together borrowers with counselors, lenders, and servicers. In August, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston partnered with the HOPE NOW Alliance, NeighborWorks America, the Kraft family, and the New England Patriots Charitable Foundation, among many others, and held an event at Gillette Stadium. More than 2,100 borrowers seeking help attended. Twenty servicers and twenty non-profit counseling agencies took part, with staff at the event and on dedicated phone lines. Although we do not yet know the outcomes for these homeowners, we are monitoring the results and other Federal Reserve Banks are considering holding similar events. In conclusion, the Federal Reserve has taken a range of actions to stabilize financial markets and to help borrowers and communities. Taken together, these measures should help rebuild confidence in the financial system, increase the liquidity of financial markets, and improve the ability of financial institutions to raise capital from private sources. Efforts to stem avoidable foreclosure and help borrowers through H4H and more aggressive modifications, as well as to develop effective strategies for dealing with foreclosed-upon properties, I believe, will also help homeowners and communities. These steps are important to help stabilize our financial institutions and the housing market, and will facilitate a return to more-normal functioning and extension of credit.
Washington, DC--The following statement was made by Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke and FDIC Chairman Sheila C. Bair: Today we are taking decisive actions to protect the U.S. economy, to strengthen public confidence in our financial institutions, and to foster the robust functioning of our credit markets. These steps will ensure that the U.S. financial system performs its vital role of providing credit to households and businesses and protecting savings and investments in a manner that promotes strong economic growth in the U.S. and around the world. The overwhelming majority of banks in the United States are strong and well-capitalized. These actions will bolster public confidence in our system to restore and stabilize liquidity necessary to support economic growth. Last week, the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets announced that the U.S. government would deploy all of our tools in a strategic and collaborative manner to address the current instability in our financial markets and mitigate the risks that instability poses for broader economic growth. This past weekend, we and our G7 colleagues committed to a comprehensive global strategy to provide liquidity to markets, to strengthen financial institutions, to prevent failures that pose systemic risk, to protect savers, and to enforce investor protections. We welcomed the steps announced by our European colleagues this weekend to implement the action plan, and ensure financial institutions in Europe can finance economic growth. Today we are implementing our strategy with three important actions. First, Treasury is announcing a voluntary capital purchase program. A broad array of financial institutions is eligible to participate in this program by selling preferred shares to the U.S. government on attractive terms that protect the taxpayer. Second, after receiving a recommendation from the boards of the FDIC and the Federal Reserve, and consulting with the President, Secretary Paulson signed the systemic risk exception to the FDIC Act, enabling the FDIC to temporarily guarantee the senior debt of all FDIC-insured institutions and their holding companies, as well as deposits in non-interest bearing deposit transaction accounts. Regulators will implement an enhanced supervisory framework to assure appropriate use of this new guarantee. We are pleased to announce that nine major financial institutions have already agreed to participate in both the capital purchase program and the FDIC guarantee program. We appreciate that these healthy institutions are taking these steps to strengthen their own positions and to enhance the overall performance of the U.S. economy. By participating in these programs, these institutions, along with thousands of others to come, will have enhanced capacity to perform their vital function of lending to U.S. consumers and businesses and promoting economic growth. They have also committed to continued aggressive actions to prevent unnecessary foreclosures and preserve homeownership. Third, to further increase access to funding for businesses in all sectors of our economy, the Federal Reserve has announced further details of its Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) program, which provides a broad backstop for the commercial paper market. Beginning October 27, the CPFF will fund purchases of commercial paper of 3 month maturity from high-quality issuers. Together these three steps significantly strengthen the capital position and funding ability of U.S. financial institutions, enabling them to perform their role of underpinning overall economic growth. These actions demonstrate to market participants here and around the world the strength of the U.S. government’s commitment to take all necessary steps to unlock our credit markets and minimize the impact of the current instability on the overall U.S. economy. The actions taken today are a powerful step toward restoring the health of the global financial system. Remarks by Chairman Ben S. Bernanke at the President’s Working Group Market Stability Initiative announcement
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from August 18 through September 15, 2008. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Tuesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 16, 2008. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. Minutes of Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 16, 2008:237 KB PDF|HTML
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a Consent Order of Prohibition against John H. Lohmeier, a former Senior Vice-President, trust officer and institution-affiliated party of Hinsbrook Bank & Trust, Oakbrook, Illinois. Mr. Lohmeier, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order based on his alleged participation in unsafe and unsound banking practices, breaches of fiduciary duty and violations of law, including section 502 of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 15 U.S.C. § 6802, the Board of Governors' Regulation P, 12 C.F.R. § 216.10, and 18 U.S.C. § 656, in connection with Lohmeier's alleged use of bank funds and non-public customer information from a bank computer server to start-up his own non-depository trust company. A copy of the Order is attached.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the President's Working Group Market Stability Initiative Announcement, Washington, D.C. Over the past year, the Federal Reserve has actively used all its powers and authorities to try to help our economy through this difficult time. And central banks around the world have consulted closely and cooperated in unprecedented ways to reduce strains in financial markets and to bolster our economies. We will continue to do so. However, clearly the time had come for a more comprehensive and broad-based solution. History teaches us that government engagement in times of severe financial crisis often arrives very late, usually at a point at which most financial institutions are insolvent or nearly so. Waiting too long to act has usually led to much greater direct costs of the intervention itself and, more importantly, magnified the painful effects of financial turmoil on households and businesses. That is not the situation we face today. Fortunately, the Congress and the Administration have acted at a time when the great majority of financial institutions, though stressed by highly volatile and difficult market conditions, remain capable of fulfilling their critical function of providing new credit for our economy. The Congress's prompt and decisive action in passing the financial rescue legislation made possible the critical steps that have been announced this morning. I also find it heartening that we are seeing not just a national, but a global response to the crisis, commensurate with its global nature. Indeed, this past weekend, the finance ministers and central bankers of the Group of Seven industrialized countries announced a set of principles embodying a comprehensive approach to dealing with the crisis. The steps we are taking today are fully consistent with those principles. As in all past crises, at the root of the problem is a loss of confidence by investors and the public in the strength of key financial institutions and markets, which has had cascading and unwelcome effects on the availability of credit and the value of savings. The actions today are aimed at restoring confidence in our institutions and markets and repairing their capacity to meet the credit needs of American households and businesses. The voluntary equity purchase program will strengthen financial institutions' capacity and willingness to lend. The guarantee of the senior debt of all FDIC-insured depository institutions and their holding companies will restore the confidence of these institutions' creditors and reinvigorate the crucial inter-bank lending markets. Additionally, the Federal Reserve is pressing forward with its facility to provide a broad backstop for the commercial paper market, so vital to the functioning of our businesses. Policymakers here and around the globe have taken a series of extraordinary steps. Americans can be confident that every resource is being brought to bear: historical understanding, technical expertise, economic analysis, and political leadership. I am not suggesting the way forward will be easy. But I strongly believe that the application of these tools, together with the underlying vitality and resilience of the American economy, will help to restore confidence to our financial system and place our economy back on a path to vigorous, healthy growth.
The volume of Shared National Credits (SNC),2loan commitments of $20 million or more and held by three or more federally supervised institutions, rose 22.6 percent to $2.8 trillion, and the volume of criticized credits increased to $373.4 billion, or 13.4 percent of the SNC portfolio, according to the 2008 SNC review results released today by federal bank and thrift regulators. The results of the review--reported by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision--are based on analyses prepared in the second quarter of 2008 of credit data provided by federally supervised institutions as of December 31, 2007. The record growth in credit volume is concentrated in large syndicated loans that were underwritten in late 2006 and the first half of 2007 led by the Media and Telecom, Utilities, Finance and Insurance, and Oil and Gas industry sectors. The SNC portfolio experienced nominal growth in the last half of 2007. Criticized credits3increased $259.3 billion and represent 13.4 percent of the SNC portfolio compared with 5.0 percent in the 2007 SNC review. Credits rated special mention (potentially weak credits) increased by $167.9 billion and represent 7.5 percent of the SNC portfolio compared with 1.9 percent in the 2007 SNC review. Classified credits (credits with well-defined weaknesses) increased $91.5 billion and represent 5.8 percent of the SNC portfolio compared with 3.1 percent in the 2007 SNC review. The criticized credits and related ratios do not include the effects of hedging or other techniques that organizations often use to mitigate risk. Classified credits held by United States (U.S.) domiciled banking organizations increased to $47.2 billion from $19.2 billion, and the classified ratio increased to 4.1 percent from 2.0 percent, still low compared to the entire portfolio. Classified credits held by foreign banking organizations increased to $45.9 billion, and the classified ratio increased to 4.2 percent from 1.9 percent. Classified credits held by non-bank entities increased to $70.0 billion from $34.8 billion and represent 42.9 percent of classified credits. The volume of classified credits held by non-banks is particularly significant given their relatively small 19.9 percent share of the SNC portfolio. For the second consecutive year, the review included an assessment of underwriting standards. Examiners again found an inordinate volume of syndicated loans with structurally weak underwriting characteristics particularly in non-investment grade or leveraged transactions. Note: Figures may not add to totals due to rounding.Year dates represent the official SNC review period. Credit data is collected as of December 31 and updated through the end of the annual review. OverviewThe 2008 SNC review included 8,746 credits totaling $2.8 trillion extended to 5,742 borrowers. Credit commitments increased by a record $514 billion, or 22.6 percent, following $401 billion growth, or 21.4 percent, in the 2007 SNC Review. This represents the largest percentage growth since 1998 and reflects the merger and acquisition financing boom that continued through the first half of 2007. Total outstandings, or drawn amounts, of $1.2 trillion were up $373 billion, or 44.6 percent, and represent 43.3 percent of commitments compared with 36.7 percent in 2007. Criticized credits rose to $373.4 billion and represent 13.4 percent of the SNC portfolio compared with only 5.0 percent in the 2007 SNC review. Special mention credits increased to $210.4 billion from $42.5 billion in 2007 and represent 7.5 percent of the SNC portfolio compared with only 1.9 percent in 2007. Special mention credits also constitute a much higher percentage of total criticized credits this year at 56.4 percent compared with 37.3 percent in 2007. A large number of special mention credits support highly leveraged merger and acquisition transactions originated in 2006 and 2007 that are characterized by weak underwriting standards. Classified credits rose to $163.1 billion from $71.6 billion and represent 5.8 percent of the SNC portfolio compared with 3.1 percent in 2007. Credits classified substandard rose to $154.9 billion from the 2007 review. The severity of the classifications increased this year with doubtful and loss credits totaling $8.1 billion compared with $2.0 billion in 2007. Nonaccrual4classified credits increased to $22.3 billion from $3.9 billion, but represent a relatively low 0.80 percent of the total portfolio. Industry TrendsThe agencies are introducing an industry presentation format that aggregates industries vertically along product origination and distribution lines. The industry format places credits in seven primary groups, largely following the outline of the 2007 Census NAICS codes (SeeAppendix B). The seven primary groups are further dissected into twenty-four sectors constructed from ninety-three sub-sectors. Anindustry mapping file (92 KB PDF)is included as an attachment to the press release. Services is the largest group at $788 billion, or 28.3 percent of the total portfolio, and increased by 33.7 percent from 2007. Commodities is the second largest group at $597 billion, or 21.4 percent of the total portfolio, and increased 35.9 percent. Financial is the third largest group at $545 billion, or 19.6 percent of the total portfolio. Within the industry groups, sectors with the largest growth are Media and Telecom at $78 billion, or 36.4 percent, Utilities at $63 billion, or 38.3 percent, Finance and Insurance at $62 billion, or 13.2 percent, and Oil and Gas at $50 billion, or 36.2 percent. Eighteen of the twenty-four sectors experienced double digit growth rates. Criticized credits are concentrated in Services, $151.4 billion or 40.6 percent of total criticized credits, Commodities, $69.5 billion or 18.6 percent, and Manufacturers, $53.4 billion or 14.3 percent. Special mention credits constitute 70.4 percent and 78.0 percent of the criticized credits in the Services and Commodities groups, respectively, but only 24.7 percent of the Manufacturers group. The highest criticized industry groups by percentage are Services, 19.2 percent; Real Estate, 15.6 percent; and Manufacturers, 13.4 percent. Within the industry groups, the highest criticized sectors by percentage are Automotive, 41.5 percent; Commercial Services, 40.8 percent; Transportation Services, 24.3 percent; and Media and Telecom, 24.0 percent. Classified credits are concentrated in Services, $44.8 billion, Manufacturers, $40.2 billion, Financial, $29.9 billion, and Real Estate, $25.3 billion. Real Estate is the highest classified group at 11.4 percent followed by Manufacturers at 10.1 percent. Within the industry groups, highly classified sectors include Automotive, 34.7 percent, Food and Drug Stores, 14.0 percent, Transportation Services, 12.4 percent, and Real Estate and Construction, 11.4 percent. Special mention credits are concentrated in the Media and Telecom sector, $47.1 billion or 22.4 percent of special mention; Materials and Commodities Excluding Energy, $27.9 billion or 13.3 percent; Commercial Services, $23.8 billion or 11.3 percent; and Utilities, $23.6 billion or 11.2 percent. Trends by Entity TypeThe portion of SNC credit commitments held by U.S. domiciled banking organizations declined slightly to 41.1 percent from 42.7 percent, the fourth consecutive year of decline. Holdings by foreign banking organizations declined as well to 39 percent from 41.4 percent. Holdings by non-bank organizations, such as securitization pools, hedge funds, insurance companies, and pension funds, increased to 19.9 percent from 15.9 percent. Non-bank organizations hold the largest volume and percentage of classified credits at $70 billion, or 42.9 percent of total classified credits compared with 48.6 percent in 2007. In addition, 12.6 percent of non-bank organization credits are classified compared with only 4.1 percent of the U.S. bank portfolio and 4.2 percent of the foreign bank portfolio. Although non-bank organizations continue to hold the largest dollar volume and percentage of classified credits, the growth in classified credits over the past year was evenly distributed. Classified credits held by U.S. banks increased $28.0 billion, or 145.8 percent, with foreign banks classified credits increasing $28.3 billion and non-banks classified credits increasing $35.2 billion, or 101.2 percent. SNC UnderwritingThe SNC Review included an evaluation of underwriting standards on approximately one thousand credits booked, or funded, in 2007. Areas evaluated included structure, repayment terms, pricing, collateral, loan agreements, and financial analysis and monitoring techniques. Examiners continued to identify an inordinate volume of syndicated loans with structurally weak underwriting characteristics, particularly for credits supporting M&A transactions of highly leveraged companies. Nearly all these credits were underwritten prior to the disruptions in the credit market in mid 2007. The most commonly cited types of structurally weak underwriting were liberal repayment terms, repayment dependent on refinancing or recapitalization, and nonexistent or weak loan covenants. Examiners also found that an excessive number of loan agreements did not provide adequate warnings and allow for proactive control over the credit. The impact of the volume of syndicated loans with structurally weak underwriting characteristics is evidenced by the rise in criticized credits this year. In fact, 56 percent of the 2007 vintage credits included in this year's underwriting review were criticized special mention or substandard compared with 21 percent last year. In addition, most of the 2006 vintage credits that were analyzed during the 2007 SNC review remain outstanding, and the criticized percentage of those credits has increased to 33 percent. The agencies have longstanding guidance, particularly through theirApril 2001 Interagency Guidance on Leveraged Financing, Sound Risk Management Practices, stressing the importance of prudential underwriting for leveraged financial transactions. However, examiners have found that underwriting practices are more likely to be compromised when syndicated loans are underwritten for resale versus more prudential underwriting standards used for loans held for investment. Consequently, banks that originate syndicated loans for distribution should have risk management systems in place to ensure underwriting standards are reasonably consistent with underwriting standards used if holding the loan for investment. More specifically, banks should ensure underwriting practices include a comprehensive and realistic assessment of a borrower's capacity to repay or de-lever over a reasonable period of time. SNCs with structurally weak underwriting characteristics and borrower financial performance and projections that do not support the prospects of reasonable repayment will be subject to regulatory criticism by the agencies. In addition, syndicated pipeline commitments are expected to be periodically evaluated to determine if creditworthiness, pricing, and covenant structures provide reasonable protection in the event of a change in market credit risk appetite. Credit commitments that do not fit an institution's hold for investment criteria should be subjected to concentration limits and stress testing processes that evaluate a borrower's ability to perform under different economic scenarios. Industry Services Commitment 462.8 407.6 377.1 401.6 464.0 589.3 788.1 Classified 56.5 51.9 21.6 24.0 20.1 18.1 44.8 Special Mention 19.9 11.9 12.7 5.7 13.3 14.3 106.6 % Classified 12.2% 12.7% 5.7% 6.0% 4.3% 3.1% 5.7% % Special Mention 4.3% 2.9% 3.4% 1.4% 2.9% 2.4% 13.5% Commodities Commitment 395.1 345.7 312.0 325.6 364.1 439.6 597.4 Classified 35.2 55.3 32.7 18.0 18.3 10.7 15.3 Special Mention 26.7 26.7 15.2 8.9 7.6 7.0 54.2 % Classified 8.9% 16.0% 10.5% 5.5% 5.0% 2.4% 2.6% % Special Mention 6.8% 7.7% 4.9% 2.7% 2.1% 1.6% 9.1% Financial Commitment 414.4 381.6 372.7 363.2 431.1 506.3 545.2 Classified 12.0 9.5 4.2 0.9 2.1 19.2 29.9 Special Mention 4.7 3.7 0.6 0.5 2.9 3.3 13.9 % Classified 2.9% 2.5% 1.1% 0.3% 0.5% 3.8% 5.5% % Special Mention 1.1% 1.0% 0.2% 0.1% 0.7% 0.7% 2.5% Manufacturers Commitment 337.5 283.8 261.7 271.9 289.4 339.4 397.4 Classified 42.6 27.9 11.6 7.3 18.8 18.8 40.2 Special Mention 16.7 8.7 2.6 9.6 8.1 10.8 13.2 % Classified 12.6% 9.8% 4.4% 2.7% 6.5% 5.5% 10.1% % Special Mention 5.0% 3.1% 1.0% 3.5% 2.8% 3.2% 3.3% Real Estate Commitment 106.2 97.9 99.5 122.9 159.2 203.6 221.1 Classified 3.0 2.3 1.6 0.6 0.6 2.9 25.3 Special Mention 1.4 1.6 0.9 0.2 0.5 2.2 9.2 % Classified 2.8% 2.4% 1.6% 0.5% 0.4% 1.4% 11.4% % Special Mention 1.3% 1.6% 0.9% 0.1% 0.3% 1.1% 4.2% Distribution Commitment 129.7 112.0 108.7 122.3 146.1 175.7 206.9 Classified 8.0 5.4 2.2 1.7 1.5 1.9 7.5 Special Mention 9.5 2.6 0.9 1.0 0.9 4.7 13.2 % Classified 6.2% 4.8% 2.0% 1.4% 1.0% 1.1% 3.6% % Special Mention 7.3% 2.3% 0.8% 0.8% 0.6% 2.7% 6.4% Government Commitment 20.9 18.4 14.3 19.1 20.1 21.6 33.1 Classified 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.1 0.0 Special Mention 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 % Classified 0.9% 0.8% 0.3% 0.1% 1.8% 0.5% 0.0% % Special Mention 0.5% 0.5% 0.6% 0.0% 0.4% 0.2% 0.4% All Industries (Total) Commitment 1,866.7 1,647.0 1,546.1 1,626.6 1,873.9 2,275.4 2,789.2 Classified 157.5 152.4 74.0 52.5 61.8 71.7 163.0 Special Mention 79.1 55.3 32.8 25.9 33.4 42.4 210.4 % Classified 8.4% 9.3% 4.8% 3.2% 3.3% 3.2% 5.8% % Special Mention 4.2% 3.4% 2.1% 1.6% 1.8% 1.9% 7.5% Note: Figures may not add to totals due to rounding. Total Classifications ($ billion) Classifieds as % of Commitments Total Nonaccrual Commitments ($ billion) (*)Uninsured refers to organizations that do not take consumer deposits such as holding companies, brokerage firms, finance companies, etc.Note: Figures may not add to totals due to rounding Footnotes 1.The Shared National Credit (SNC) Program was established in 1977 by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. In 2001, the Office of Thrift Supervision became an assisting agency. The annual program seeks to provide an efficient and consistent review and classification of shared national credits.Return to text 2.A SNC is any loan and/or formal loan commitment, and any asset such as other real estate, stocks, notes, bonds and debentures taken as debts previously contracted, extended to borrowers by a supervised institution, its subsidiaries and affiliates. Further, a SNC must have an original amount that aggregates $20 million or more and either 1) is shared by three or more unaffiliated supervised institutions under a formal lending agreement or 2) a portion is sold to two or more unaffiliated supervised institutions with the purchasing institutions assuming their pro rata share of the credit risk. Credits include syndicated loans and loan commitments, letters of credit, commercial leases, as well as other forms of credit. Credit commitments include both drawn and undrawn portions of credit facilities. This release reports only the par amounts of commitments; these may differ from the amounts at which loans are carried by investors. A supervised institution is one which is subject to supervision by one of the federal bank regulatory agencies, including all FDIC-insured banks, their branches, subsidiaries, and affiliates; bank holding companies and their non-bank subsidiaries and affiliates; and federal and state-licensed branches and agencies of foreign banks.Return to text 3.Criticized credits are the total of credits classified substandard, doubtful, and loss--and credits rated special mention. Classified credits are only those rated substandard, doubtful, and loss. Under the agencies' Uniform Loan Classification Standards, classified credits have well-defined weaknesses, including default in some cases. Special mention credits exhibit potential weaknesses, which may result in further deterioration if left uncorrected. Excerpt from federal banking agencies' examination manuals defining regulatory classifications: A Substandard asset is inadequately protected by the current sound worth and paying capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if any. Assets so classified must have a well-defined weakness or weaknesses that jeopardize the liquidation of the debt. They are characterized by the distinct possibility that the institution will sustain some loss if the deficiencies are not corrected. An asset classified Doubtful has all the weaknesses inherent in one classified Substandard, with the added characteristic that the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of currently existing facts, conditions, and values, highly questionable and improbable. Assets classified Loss are considered uncollectible and of such little value that their continuance as bankable assets is not warranted. This classification does not mean that the asset has absolutely no recovery or salvage value but rather that it is not practical or desirable to defer writing off this basically worthless asset even though partial recovery may be affected in the future. Amounts classified Loss should be promptly charged off. Excerpt from the June 10, 1993 Interagency Statement on the Supervisory Definition of Special Mention Assets: A Special Mention asset has potential weaknesses that deserve management's close attention. If left uncorrected, these potential weaknesses may result in deterioration of the repayment prospects for the asset or in the institution's credit position at some future date. Special Mention assets are not adversely classified and do not expose an institution to sufficient risk to warrant adverse classification.Return to text 4.Nonaccrual loans are defined for regulatory reporting purposes as "loans and lease financing receivables that are required to be reported on a nonaccrual basis because (a) they are maintained on a cash basis due to a deterioration in the financial position of the borrower, (b) payment in full of interest or principal is not expected, or (c) principal or interest has been in default for 90 days or longer, unless the obligation is both well secured and in the process of collection."Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York Good afternoon. I am pleased once again to share a meal and some thoughts with the Economic Club of New York. I will focus today on the economic and financial challenges we face and why I believe we are well positioned to move forward. The problems now evident in the markets and in the economy are large and complex, but, in my judgment, our government now has the tools it needs to confront and solve them. Our strategy will continue to evolve and be refined as we adapt to new developments and the inevitable setbacks. But we will not stand down until we have achieved our goals of repairing and reforming our financial system and restoring prosperity. The crisis we face in the financial markets has many novel aspects, largely arising from the complexity and sophistication of today's financial institutions and instruments and the remarkable degree of global financial integration that allows financial shocks to be transmitted around the world at the speed of light. However, as a long-time student of banking and financial crises, I can attest that the current situation also has much in common with past experiences. As in all past crises, at the root of the problem is a loss of confidence by investors and the public in the strength of key financial institutions and markets. The crisis will end when comprehensive responses by political and financial leaders restore that trust, bringing investors back into the market and allowing the normal business of extending credit to households and firms to resume. In that regard, we are, in one respect at least, better off than those who dealt with earlier financial crises: Generally, during past crises, broad-based government engagement came late, usually at a point at which most financial institutions were insolvent or nearly so. Waiting too long to respond has usually led to much greater direct costs of the intervention itself and, more importantly, magnified the painful effects of financial turmoil on households and businesses. That is not the situation we face today. Fortunately, the Congress and the Administration have acted at a time when the great majority of financial institutions, though stressed by highly volatile and difficult market conditions, remain strong and capable of fulfilling their critical function of providing new credit for our economy. This prompt and decisive action by our political leaders will allow us to restore more normal market functioning much more quickly and at lower ultimate cost than would otherwise have been the case. Moreover, we are seeing not just a national response but a global response to the crisis, commensurate with its global nature. This financial crisis has been with us for more than a year. It was sparked by the end of the U.S. housing boom, which revealed the weaknesses and excesses that had occurred in subprime mortgage lending. However, as subsequent events have demonstrated, the problem was much broader than subprime lending. Large inflows of capital into the United States and other countries stimulated a reaching for yield, an underpricing of risk, excessive leverage, and the development of complex and opaque financial instruments that seemed to work well during the credit boom but have been shown to be fragile under stress. The unwinding of these developments, including a sharp deleveraging and a headlong retreat from credit risk, led to highly strained conditions in financial markets and a tightening of credit that has hamstrung economic growth. The Federal Reserve responded to these developments in two broad ways. First, following classic tenets of central banking, the Fed has provided large amounts of liquidity to the financial system to cushion the effects of tight conditions in short-term funding markets. Second, to reduce the downside risks to growth emanating from the tightening of credit, the Fed, in a series of moves that began last September, has significantly lowered its target for the federal funds rate. Indeed, last week, in an unprecedented joint action with five other major central banks and in response to the adverse implications of the deepening crisis for the economic outlook, the Federal Reserve again eased the stance of monetary policy. We will continue to use all the tools at our disposal to improve market functioning and liquidity, to reduce pressures in key credit and funding markets, and to complement the steps the Treasury and foreign governments will be taking to strengthen the financial system. Notwithstanding our efforts and those of other policymakers, the financial crisis intensified over the summer as mortgage-related assets deteriorated further, economic growth slowed, and uncertainty about the financial and economic outlook increased. As investors and creditors lost confidence in the ability of certain firms to meet their obligations, their access to capital markets as well as to short-term funding markets became increasingly impaired, and their stock prices fell sharply. Prominent companies that experienced this dynamic most acutely included the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the investment bank Lehman Brothers, and the insurance company American International Group (AIG). The Federal Reserve believes that, whenever possible, the difficulties experienced by firms in financial distress should be addressed through private-sector arrangements--for example, by raising new equity capital, as many firms have done; by negotiations leading to a merger or acquisition; or by an orderly wind-down. Government assistance should be provided with the greatest reluctance and only when the stability of the financial system, and thus the health of the broader economy, is at risk. In those cases when financial stability is broadly threatened, however, intervention to protect the public interest is not only justified but must be undertaken forcefully and without hesitation. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac present cases in point. To avoid unacceptably large dislocations in the mortgage markets, the financial sector, and the economy as a whole, the Federal Housing Finance Agency put Fannie and Freddie into conservatorship, and the Treasury, drawing on authorities recently granted by the Congress, made financial support available. The government's actions appear to have stabilized the GSEs, although, like virtually all other firms, they are experiencing effects of the current crisis. We have already seen benefits of their stabilization in the form of lower mortgage rates, which will help the housing market. The difficulties at Lehman and AIG raised different issues. Like the GSEs, both companies were large, complex, and deeply embedded in our financial system. In both cases, the Treasury and the Federal Reserve sought private-sector solutions, but none was forthcoming. A public-sector solution for Lehman proved infeasible, as the firm could not post sufficient collateral to provide reasonable assurance that a loan from the Federal Reserve would be repaid, and the Treasury did not have the authority to absorb billions of dollars of expected losses to facilitate Lehman's acquisition by another firm. Consequently, little could be done except to attempt to ameliorate the effects of Lehman's failure on the financial system. Importantly, the financial rescue legislation, which I will discuss later, will give us better choices. In the future, the Treasury will have greater resources available to prevent the failure of a financial institution when such a failure would pose unacceptable risks to the financial system as a whole. The Federal Reserve will work closely and actively with the Treasury and other authorities to minimize systemic risk. In the case of AIG, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury judged that a disorderly failure would have severely threatened global financial stability and the performance of the U.S. economy. We also judged that emergency Federal Reserve credit to AIG would be adequately secured by AIG's assets. To protect U.S. taxpayers and to mitigate the possibility that lending to AIG would encourage inappropriate risk-taking by financial firms in the future, the Federal Reserve ensured that the terms of the credit extended to AIG imposed significant costs and constraints on the firm's owners, managers, and creditors. AIG's difficulties and Lehman's failure, along with growing concerns about the U.S. economy and other economies, contributed to extraordinarily turbulent conditions in global financial markets in recent weeks. Equity prices fell sharply. Withdrawals from prime money market mutual funds led them to reduce their holdings of commercial paper--an important source of financing for the nation's nonfinancial businesses as well as for many financial firms. The cost of short-term credit, where such credit has been available, jumped for virtually all firms, and liquidity dried up in many markets. By restricting flows of credit to households, businesses, and state and local governments, the turmoil in financial markets and the funding pressures on financial firms pose a significant threat to economic growth. The Treasury and the Fed have taken a range of actions to address financial problems. To address illiquidity and impaired functioning in commercial paper markets, the Treasury implemented a temporary guarantee program for balances held in money market mutual funds to help stem the outflows from these funds. The Federal Reserve put in place a temporary lending facility that provides financing for banks to purchase high-quality asset-backed commercial paper from money market funds, thus reducing their need to sell the commercial paper into already distressed markets. Moreover, we soon will implement a new, temporary Commercial Paper Funding Facility that will provide a backstop to commercial paper markets by purchasing highly rated commercial paper directly from issuers at a term of three months when those markets are illiquid. To address ongoing problems in interbank funding markets, the Federal Reserve has significantly increased the quantity of term funds it auctions to banks and accommodated heightened demands for temporary funding from banks and primary dealers. Also, to try to mitigate dollar funding pressures worldwide, we have greatly expanded reciprocal currency arrangements (so-called swap agreements) with other central banks. Indeed, this week we agreed to extend unlimited dollar funding to the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, and the Swiss National Bank. These agreements enable foreign central banks to provide dollars to financial institutions in their jurisdictions, which helps improve the functioning of dollar funding markets globally and relieve pressures on U.S. funding markets. It bears noting that these arrangements carry no risk to the U.S. taxpayer, as our loans are to the foreign central banks themselves, who take responsibility for the extension of dollar credit within their jurisdictions. The expansion of Federal Reserve lending is helping financial firms cope with reduced access to their usual sources of funding and thus is supporting their lending to nonfinancial firms and households. Nonetheless, the intensification of the financial crisis over the past month or so made clear that a more powerful, comprehensive approach involving the fiscal authorities was needed to address these problems more effectively. On that basis, the Administration, with the support of the Federal Reserve, asked the Congress for a new program aimed at stabilizing our financial markets. The resulting legislation, the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act, provides important new tools for addressing the distress in financial markets and thus mitigating the risks to the economy. The act allows Treasury to buy troubled assets, to provide guarantees, and to inject capital to strengthen the balance sheets of financial institutions. The act also raises the limit on deposit insurance from $100,000 to $250,000 per account, effectively immediately. The Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) authorized by the legislation will allow the Treasury, under the supervision of an oversight board that I will head, to undertake two highly complementary activities. First, the Treasury will use the TARP funds to help recapitalize our banking system by purchasing non-voting equity in financial institutions. Details of this program were announced yesterday. Initially, the Treasury will dedicate $250 billion toward purchases of preferred shares in banks and thrifts of all sizes. The program is voluntary and designed both to encourage participation by healthy institutions and to make it attractive for private capital to come in along with public capital. We look to strong institutions to participate in this capital program, because today even strong institutions are reluctant to expand their balance sheets to extend credit; with fresh capital, that constraint will be eased. The terms offered under the TARP include the acquisition by the Treasury of warrants to ensure that taxpayers receive a share of the upside as the financial system recovers. Moreover, as required by the legislation, institutions that receive capital will have to meet certain standards regarding executive compensation practices. Second, the Treasury will use some of the resources provided under the bill to purchase troubled assets from banks and other financial institutions, in most cases using market-based mechanisms. Mortgage-related assets, including mortgage-backed securities and whole loans, will be the focus of the program, although the law permits flexibility in the types of assets purchased as needed to promote financial stability. Removing these assets from private balance sheets should increase liquidity and promote price discovery in the markets for these assets, thereby reducing investor uncertainty about the current value and prospects of financial institutions. Unclogging the markets for mortgage-related assets should put banks and other institutions in a better position to raise capital from the private sector and increase the willingness of counterparties to engage. With time, the provision of equity capital to the banking system and the purchase of troubled assets will help credit flow more freely, thus supporting economic growth. These measures will lead to a much stronger financial system over time, but steps are also necessary to address the immediate problem of lack of trust and confidence. Accordingly, also announced yesterday was a plan by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to provide a broad range of guarantees of the liabilities of FDIC-insured depository institutions, including their associated holding companies. The guarantee covers all newly issued senior unsecured debt, including commercial paper and interbank funding, and it will also cover all funds held in non-interest-bearing transactions accounts, such as payroll accounts. This broad guarantee will be effectively immediately, and fees for coverage will be waived for 30 days. After the 30-day grace period, banks may continue to participate in the guarantee program by paying reasonable fees. I would like to stress once again that the taxpayers' interests were very much in our minds and those of the Congress when these programs were designed. The costs of the FDIC guarantee are expected to be covered by fees and assessments on the banking system, not by the taxpayer. In the case of the TARP program, the funds allocated are not simple expenditures, but rather acquisitions of assets or equity positions, which the Treasury will be able to sell or redeem down the road. Indeed, it is possible that taxpayers could turn a profit from the program, although, given the great uncertainties, no assurances can be provided. Moreover, the program is subject to extensive controls and to oversight by several bodies. The larger point, though, is that the economic benefit of these programs to taxpayers will not be determined primarily by the financial return to TARP funds, but rather by the impact of the program on the financial markets and the economy. If the TARP, together with the other measures that have been taken, is successful in promoting financial stability and, consequently, in supporting stronger economic growth and job creation, it will have proved itself a very good investment indeed, to everyone's benefit. Stabilization of the financial markets is a critical first step, but even if they stabilize as we hope they will, broader economic recovery will not happen right away. Economic activity had been decelerating even before the recent intensification of the crisis. The housing market continues to be a primary source of weakness in the real economy as well as in the financial markets, and we have seen marked slowdowns in consumer spending, business investment, and the labor market. Credit markets will take some time to unfreeze. And with the economies of our trading partners slowing, our export sales, which have been a source of strength, very probably will slow as well. These restraining influences on economic activity, however, will be offset somewhat by the favorable effects of lower prices for oil and other commodities on household purchasing power. Ultimately, the trajectory of economic activity beyond the next few quarters will depend greatly on the extent to which financial and credit markets return to more normal functioning. Inflation has been elevated recently, reflecting the steep increases in the prices of oil, other commodities, and imports that occurred earlier this year, as well as some pass-through by firms of their higher costs of production. However, expected inflation, as measured by consumer surveys and inflation-indexed Treasury securities, has held steady or eased, and prices of imports now appear to be decelerating. These developments, together with the recent declines in prices of oil and other commodities as well as the likelihood that economic activity will fall short of potential for a time, should lead to rates of inflation more consistent with price stability. This past weekend, the finance ministers and central bank governors of the Group of Seven industrialized countries met in Washington. We committed to work together to stabilize financial markets and restore the flow of credit to support global economic growth. We agreed to use all available tools to prevent failures that pose systemic risk. We affirmed we will ensure our deposit insurance programs instill confidence in the safety of savings. We agreed to ensure that our banks and other major financial intermediaries, as needed, can raise capital from public as well as private sources. We further agreed that we would take all necessary steps to unfreeze interbank and money markets, and that we will act to restart the secondary markets for mortgages and other securitized assets. Finally, we recognized that we should take these actions in ways that protect taxpayers and avoid potentially damaging effects on other countries. I believe that these are the right principles for action, and I see the steps announced by our government yesterday as fully consistent with them. I have laid out for you today an extraordinary series of actions taken by policymakers throughout our government and around the globe. Americans can be confident that every resource is being brought to bear to address the current crisis: historical understanding, technical expertise, economic analysis, financial insight, and political leadership. I am not suggesting the way forward will be easy, but I strongly believe that we now have the tools we need to respond with the necessary force to these challenges. Although much work remains and more difficulties surely lie ahead, I remain confident that the American economy, with its great intrinsic vitality and aided by the measures now available, will emerge from this period with renewed vigor.
I applaud the action taken by the Congress. It demonstrates the government's commitment to do what it takes to support and strengthen our economy. The legislation is a critical step toward stabilizing our financial markets and ensuring an uninterrupted flow of credit to households and businesses. The Federal Reserve will continue to work closely with the Treasury as it undertakes these new initiatives. We will continue to use all of the powers at our disposal to mitigate credit market disruptions and to foster a strong, vibrant economy.
A new proposal to acquire Wachovia has emerged from Wells Fargo. The Citigroup proposal has undergone extensive review by the Federal Reserve and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. We have not yet reviewed the new Wells Fargo proposal and the issues that it raises. The regulators will be working with the parties to achieve an outcome that protects all Wachovia creditors, including depositors, insured and uninsured, and promotes market stability.
The Federal Reserve acknowledges the considerable efforts of Citigroup Inc. and Wells Fargo & Company to reach an accord regarding the acquisition of Wachovia Corporation. While no agreement between Wells Fargo and Citigroup was reached, the two parties have indicated that they will no longer seek injunctive relief to prevent a transaction. The Federal Reserve will immediately begin consideration of the filings submitted by Wells Fargo for approval to acquire Wachovia Corporation.
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the Risk Management Association Annual Risk Management Conference, Baltimore, Maryland Governor Kroszner presented identical remarks to the National Conference on the Securities Industry, New York, New York, on October 30, 2008 It is not an overstatement to say that we are in the midst of a fundamental transformation in financial services, with market-wide ramifications. At the heart of that transformation lies a much more intense emphasis on funding and liquidity. Additionally, we are all witnessing the extent to which banking and financial markets are interconnected. The current environment certainly presents some fundamental challenges for banking institutions of all types and sizes.1Their boards of directors and senior management, who bear the responsibility to set strategy and develop and maintain risk management practices, must not only address current difficulties, but must also establish a framework for the inevitable uncertainty that lies ahead. Notably, the ongoing fundamental transformation in financial services offers great potential opportunities for those institutions able to integrate strategy and risk management successfully, and I will argue that survival will hinge upon such an integration in what I will call a "strategic risk management framework." In the remainder of my remarks, I plan to discuss the necessity for institutions to improve the linkage between overall corporate strategy and risk management, and how they can develop concrete strategic risk management frameworks. I will argue that in the highly interconnected financial world, funding and liquidity need to be at the center of such frameworks. But before doing so, I will briefly review recent events. Recent Events in Financial MarketsWe are indeed witnessing dramatic shifts in the structure of financial markets. These are quite extraordinary times that have required extraordinary responses from the Federal Reserve, the Treasury, and other governmental bodies in the United States and around the world. Since last summer, there had been a continuous deterioration of conditions in financial markets, becoming much more acute since March of this year. For instance, we have seen significant disruption in several key sectors of our financial system, such as normally creditworthy companies having difficulty issuing commercial paper, dramatic increases in interbank lending rates, and significant concerns about money market funds "breaking the buck." These are sectors usually considered to be relatively low risk and quite liquid, so disruptions here have signaled the extent and depth of this turmoil and the lack of confidence among financial market participants. The Federal Reserve has responded to these developments in two broad ways. First, following classic tenets of central banking, the Federal Reserve has provided large amounts of liquidity to the financial system to cushion the effects of tight conditions in short-term funding markets. Second, to reduce the downside risks to growth emanating from the tightening of credit, the Fed, in a series of moves that began last September, has significantly lowered its target for the federal funds rate. Indeed, earlier this month, in an unprecedented joint action with five other major central banks and in response to the adverse implications of the deepening crisis for the economic outlook, the Federal Reserve again eased the stance of monetary policy. We will continue to use all the tools at our disposal to improve market functioning and liquidity, to reduce pressures in key credit and funding markets, and to complement the steps the Treasury and foreign governments will be taking to strengthen the financial system. As a result of these ongoing upheavals, we are witnessing substantial institutional changes, in which some long-standing financial institutions have either failed, sought government assistance, or were forced to merge with other institutions. What were the major U.S. investment banks have essentially disappeared, such as by merging with bank holding companies or becoming bank holding companies themselves. Other major banks and thrifts have been absorbed into other banking organizations. Financial institutions and investors have placed much more emphasis on the banking charter, likely driven by banks' more stable funding and deposit insurance, even before the recently announced government support of the banking system. Over the past year, there has been increasing concern among financial institutions and other counterparties about the health of some financial institutions. Uncertainty about the value of assets and other exposures, as well as uncertainty about the ability of institutions to sustain continued access to funding, has caused financial institutions to operate with great caution and hoard funds. What was once a healthy, active interbank market has become frozen from time to time, as some institutions feel that conditions are so uncertain that they cannot even lend to long-standing clients or counterparties. In quite a dramatic shift from just 18 months ago, there is much more scrutiny being placed on capital adequacy, with financial institutions trying to retain as much capital as they can, raise as much as possible, and demonstrate that their capital positions are not impaired. The Capital Purchase Plan by the U.S. Treasury Department under the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act is focused on improving capital adequacy and, hence, improving confidence in the interbank market. Perhaps one of the most pressing issues, as I mentioned briefly earlier, is the intense emphasis on funding. This dramatic shift in concerns about a financial institution's funding base results in much more focus on the stability of funding sources--one of the reasons that the bank charter has become so attractive. Indeed, we are seeing the emphasis on funding driving many other factors that affect financial institutions, including the viability of various aspects of firms' business models. And problems with liquidity have affected capital levels, which in turn have further exacerbated liquidity concerns. It is indeed quite remarkable how this "flight to liquidity" has brought about so many institutional and structural changes, and become essentially the most important factor (at least now) for the viability of a financial institution. Over the past year there have been a number of studies analyzing the causes of the current turmoil, which include shortcomings in the risk management practices of financial institutions.2It is absolutely clear that many financial institutions need to undertake a fundamental review of risk management. They now realize that ignoring risk management in any aspect of the banking business usually creates problems later on. Risk management shortcomings need to be addressed not only to improve the health and viability of individual institutions, but also to maintain stability for the financial system as a whole. Framework for Strategic Risk ManagementAt this time, I would like to explain a bit more about what I mean by a "strategic risk management framework." In my view, an effective overall corporate strategy combines a set of activities a firm plans to undertake with an adequate assessment of the risks included in those activities. Unfortunately, many firms have forgotten the second part of that definition. In other words, there can be no real strategic management in financial services without risk management, hence my use of the term "strategic risk management." Risk management needs to be interwoven into all aspects of the firm's business and should be part of the calculus for all decision-making. Strategic decisions about what activities to undertake should not be made unless senior management understands the risks involved; assessing potential returns without fully assessing the corresponding risks to the organization is incomplete, and potentially hazardous, strategic analysis. Ensuring that risk management permeates an entire organization may require some fundamental changes for certain firms. And this lesson applies not just to the prominent organizations mentioned in the headlines of late, but also to smaller firms. Even if smaller firms have been less affected by the recent turmoil (and perhaps have even won back some market share as customers seek more "traditional" places to put their money), their managements must understand that the financial landscape has changed and needs to be surveyed anew because events outside of their control in market-wide flight to liquidity, for example, can have direct impacts on them. Of vital importance will be incorporating into strategic risk management the lesson that funding and liquidity will be a major determinant of institutions' success going forward. Building a rigorous strategic risk management framework requires an institution to reexamine both its internal practices and its external environment, and to understand how closely the two are connected. In other words, external factors have an impact on internal practices, but those internal practices, because financial markets are so interconnected, can in turn have an impact on how the institution is viewed externally--and even have an impact on the marketplace more broadly. We have witnessed several such examples of late, in which an institution encountered severe liquidity needs, which then affected funding for other institutions. Institutions need to understand better that a number of factors affecting their business are beyond their control, and that events can have secondary or tertiary "knock-on" effects. The real art is to realize that while all institutions may be affected by external factors, each is affected in its own way. Now that I have laid out a general framework for strategic risk management, I would like to offer a few examples of its application. Funding and liquidityAs I noted, the clear driver of the fundamental transformation in financial services is the increased importance of funding and liquidity. The ability to secure funding is a fundamental task in banking, and banks have been managing expected liquidity demands since the beginning of banking itself. In times of stress, such as now, having a solid and reliable funding structure becomes much more important, in some cases so much so that it affects most other banking activities. The current turmoil has brought about substantial deleveraging in financial services. Managing this process is an immediate challenge for banking institutions, as they must consider the need to reduce leverage at their own institution as well as understand the consequences of deleveraging at other firms. This is clearly an example of external factors affecting internal practices, and vice versa. From a strategic perspective, bank directors must examine their current and future funding situation in light of recent deleveraging, its near-term prospects, and the state of overall liquidity in financial markets. Financial institutions rely on external funding in some fashion--either through retail deposits, interbank lending, or debt offerings. Therefore, they must understand that their funding can be subject to the vagaries of the market, such as sudden shortages of market liquidity or rapid swings in investor sentiment. For example, banks may benefit in the near term in attracting deposits and thereby improve their funding positions, but they also may experience more difficulty securing other sources of funds and find that situation persisting for some time. Additionally, counterparty reactions to changes in the business mix or risk profile of an institution (or even theperceivedchange in its risk profile) could suddenly hamper the ability to find funding. In recognizing the inherent leverage in the business of banking, institutions must examine longer-term implications of funding and liquidity, and begin to build those into the overall strategic plan for their organizations. The market for external funding is an international one, so liquidity troubles in one market can have repercussions in others. Accordingly, banks should be prepared for a range of adverse situations related to funding and market liquidity that can be precipitated by a range of sources. Bank directors and senior management need to anticipate potential difficulties in funding the bank, and demand that solid contingency plans are in place--and are regularly updated--for a variety of funding and liquidity problems. Such plans should include the potential for external factors to generate a funding squeeze for the institution, even if its own positions and risk profile have not materially changed. Preparing for sudden changes in the pricing and availability at any price of funding sources is something that, leading up to the current turmoil, most banks did not fully consider. Instead, their managements focused mostly on building market share, growing revenues, and realizing the short-term profitability of their activities--a telling example of banks not properly including risk management in their overall corporate strategy. As the Senior Supervisors Group Survey of major financial institutions pointed out, there have been numerous examples of failures of strategic risk management and these must be rectified going forward. Finally, strategic risk management for funding and liquidity needs to consider potential liquidity problems on both sides of the balance sheet. We saw such examples recently when there were draws on liquidity commitments to structured investment vehicles and commercial paper conduits, and when banks faced difficulty selling exposures in illiquid markets. When there is a marketwide scramble for liquidity, a bank must be prepared to manage funding challenges and unplanned asset expansions simultaneously. Developing a strong strategic risk management framework that recognizes the vital importance of funding and liquidity to both sides of the balance sheet is one way in which directors and senior management can help ensure that their institutions are ready for such outcomes. They should also ensure that they fully understand that funding and liquidity issues will drive many of the activities in which they will be able to engage, something to which I will now turn. Choice of financial services activitiesWhile the financial landscape is by no means settled, certain emerging trends will affect which activities make sense, which exposures should be assumed, and which risks should be undertaken. One immediate trend is that much of the future of business activities of banking organizations will be driven by the increased focus on funding and liquidity. Accordingly, this trend must be integrated into a strategic risk management framework. For instance, there may be less opportunity to pursue activities that were quite prolific under the previous "originate-to-distribute" model, such as securitizations, given current disruptions or longer-term uncertainties about the reliability of market liquidity. For similar reasons, other activities, such as investing in collateralized debt obligations or structured investment vehicles--which typically relied on relatively easy maturity transformation--may not be as viable in this new environment. Whether transactions take place on an organized exchange or in the so-called over the counter market is another important aspect of the strategic risk management choices undertaken by an organization. When contracts are traded on an exchange, clearing and settlement, for example, may have less uncertainty associated with them. In addition, an exchange that has a centralized counterparty--perhaps the clearinghouse of the exchange--can reduce uncertainty about counterparty risk and help to avoid market dislocations that can arise from such uncertainty, not only for an individual firm but, potentially, more broadly in that market. Thus, market infrastructure and its impact on how organizations are connected to each other can have a large impact on market confidence in times of stress. Of course, we have seen that uncertainty, fear, and lack of trust among key counterparties can dramatically affect trading in some products across markets in many countries, again an example of the impact of interconnectedness. These days, institutions are seeking more assurance that their counterparties will not default from one day to the next. Whether there is a shift to more trading on clearinghouses will be driven by firms' analysis of counterparty credit risk and the extent to which they are comfortable doing business with leveraged counterparties about which they have limited information. Firm managers should take these infrastructure and interconnectedness issues into account in undertaking their own strategic risk management choice about what activities to undertake and the risks posed by each. This is a clear example of how external structures should be taken into account in a firm's strategic planning. In their strategic risk management frameworks, institutions should also understand the broader issue of potential gravitation to a model in which most or all types of financial services are brought together in single institutions. That is, institutions have to prepare for the possibility that they could lose customers and/or be less competitive if they are unable to provide the full set of financial products. Importantly, however, bank directors and senior management, in assembling their strategic risk management framework, should fully understand the complications associated with offering multiple products and engaging in a wide array of activities--such as reputational risk. And they should not automatically assume that engaging in multiple activities in multiple geographic markets will provide so-called "natural diversification." As I just noted, different financial markets and different types of financial services are quite interconnected, and during times of stress all can experience losses concurrently. Of course, there may also be an opportunity for some institutions to benefit from more traditional, "bread-and-butter banking," with exposures and risks tied more closely to bank balance sheets. This potential opportunity for niche banking could have certain benefits, as clients and investors, because of the fear of contagion, seek institutions that are specificallynotinvolved in multiple markets and activities. And local banks can often provide more personalized service and have a better understanding of their clients' needs. In such cases, however, institutions conducting specialized or local business must understand the inherent risks, such as potential risk concentrations. CompensationAs many of you know, as an economist I am particularly interested in the impact that compensation has on incentives for bank management.3I am pleased that the industry has also begun to address this issue, as reflected in a recent report by the Institute of International Finance.4Clearly, the industry needs to better understand the link between compensation and risk management, as in the past those two areas have usually been addressed in isolation. Generally, investors analyze financial institutions on a risk-adjusted basis, interpreting profits based on the amount of risk taken. Management at financial firms should do the same thing with regard to their business units and their employees. A risk-sensitive compensation framework will help provide the right incentives for employees, and establish a better link between the actions of those employees and the firm's overall risk profile. Institutions should be particularly sensitive to employee activities that could either directly or indirectly impair access to funding or disrupt liquidity. Clearly, bank directors have an influential role to play in setting compensation, and they should exercise their authority to establish a more risk-sensitive compensation framework while embedding it in the broader strategic risk management framework of the institution. Directors should understand the consequences of providing too many short-term and one-sided incentives. There are many ways that this risk sensitivity could be accomplished, and it is up to the firms themselves to arrive at solutions. One possibility, for example, is to include more types of deferred compensation, since the risks of certain investments or trades may not manifest themselves in the near term. It makes sense to try to match the tenor of compensation with the tenor of the risk profile and, thus explicitly, take into account the longer-run performance of the portfolio or division in which the employee operates. A good risk-sensitive compensation regime, properly embedded in a strong strategic risk management framework, can bring about changes in behavior so that the firm's employees refrain from taking on risk beyond the firm's stated risk appetite. Perhaps most importantly, such a compensation regime must give the appropriate incentives to take risks fully into account during good times, when many often underestimate longer-term risks. ConclusionI have tried to lay out the importance for banking institutions to develop and maintain a strategic risk management framework that fully incorporates all the risks they face--both internal and external--when making choices about what activities and markets in which they will operate. Indeed, having a corporate strategy that does not include risk management at its core is not really a strategy at all. Market infrastructure, which affects not only the ways in which firms are connected to each other but also the types of shocks to confidence that they may encounter, is an important external factor that should be taken into account in strategic risk management. As a concluding point, I will offer a few comments on one additional area to which banking institutions must pay particular attention: the regulatory and supervisory structure in which banks operate. Banking is an industry that is subject both to market competition and considerable regulation. Therefore, banking institutions must not only evaluate potential changes in the competitive financial landscape (as I noted earlier), but must also pay attention to potential changes on the regulatory side. Over the past year, there have been a number of suggestions for possible statutory changes in U.S. financial services regulation, so bank directors must be prepared for whichever outcomes such changes might imply for the regulatory structure in the United States. For example, the Congress may wish to undertake legislative action to effect regulatory changes, or there may be changes to the existing authority and responsibility of certain regulatory bodies. In any event, there will likely be some type of adjustments in regulatory structure simply given the changes in the financial services landscape. Given the fluid situation in which we find ourselves today, bank directors and senior management in their strategic planning have to anticipate a range of potential outcomes in the regulatory sphere in both the short and long term. Since banking and financial markets are so interconnected, the fundamental transformation in financial services is affecting all types of financial institutions, even those less directly affected by recent events. Importantly, in developing strategic risk management frameworks, institutions must not only understand the direct consequences to their own firms of such shifts, but must also recognize that consequences to other firms can have effects on the broader market. The heightened importance of funding and liquidity is a clear example of a major change that has far-reaching ramifications and, thus, has to be appropriately addressed in assembling any credible strategic risk management framework in an interconnected world. Footnotes 1.In my remarks, I will use the terms "banks," "banking institutions," and "banking organizations" interchangeably.Return to text 2.One example is a report entitled “Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence,” issued by the Senior Supervisors Group, which included supervisory agencies from France, Germany, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.Return to text 3.Randall S. Kroszner, 2008, "Improving Risk Management in Light of Recent Market Events," speech delivered at the Global Association of Risk Management Professionals Annual Risk Convention, New York, February 25.Return to text 4.Institute of International Finance, 2008, "Final Report of the IIF Committee on Market Best Practices: Principles of Conduct and Best Practice Recommendations," July, http://www.iif.com/regulatory.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Wednesday the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public website,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the UC Berkeley/UCLA Symposium: The Mortgage Meltdown, the Economy, and Public Policy, Berkeley, California I appreciate the opportunity to speak at this symposium. My remarks will focus on the mortgage securitization process, how it has been affected by the financial crisis, and how it may evolve in response to this crisis. In the United States, as you know, mortgage securitization has been dominated by two government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, as well as by the combination of the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and Ginnie Mae. By contrast, private-label securitization became a significant presence in mortgage securitization only during the past decade, motivated in part by developments in financial engineering.The financial crisis has upset the linkage between mortgage borrowers and capital markets and has revealed a number of important problems in our system of mortgage finance, including weaknesses in the structure and oversight of the GSEs and perhaps in the originate-to-distribute model of credit provision itself. Private-label securitization has largely stopped, and Fannie and Freddie were placed into conservatorship by their regulator after they were judged to be operating in an unsafe and unsound manner. Our task now is to begin thinking about how to best reestablish a link between homebuyers and capital markets in a way that addresses the weaknesses of the old system. In light of the central role that the GSEs played, and still play, any such analysis must pay particular attention to how those institutions should evolve.The Mortgage Market and Mortgage Securitization in the Financial CrisisThe financial crisis that began in August 2007 has entered its second year. Its proximate cause was the end of the U.S. housing boom, which revealed serious deficiencies in the underwriting and credit rating of some mortgages, particularly subprime mortgages with adjustable interest rates. As subsequent events demonstrated, however, the boom in subprime mortgage lending was only a part of a much broader credit boom characterized by an underpricing of risk, excessive leverage, and the creation of complex and opaque financial instruments that proved fragile under stress. The unwinding of these developments is the source of the severe financial strain and tight credit that now damp economic growth.Although problems with mortgage origination were not the only cause of the crisis, mortgage markets have been deeply affected. Banks and thrifts are still making new mortgage loans, but they have tightened terms considerably, essentially closing the private market to borrowers with weaker credit histories. Importantly, with the securitization market for private-label mortgage-backed securities shut down, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae currently are the only conduits through which mortgages can be securitized and sold to investors. By contrast, in 2005, these three entities represented only about 50 percent of the securitization market.The ability of Fannie, Freddie, and Ginnie to continue to securitize mortgages has largely depended on the confidence of investors that the government stands behind these organizations. As such, it was very significant when signs emerged in midsummer that investors were beginning to lose confidence in Fannie and Freddie. As investors became increasingly concerned about the capital positions of these companies, the risk increased that they would not be able to roll over their debt as needed to finance their portfolios and purchase new loans. Eroding investor confidence in the GSEs endangered not only the U.S. mortgage market but the financial system more generally, given the enormous quantities of the companies' debt outstanding in private and public portfolios around the world.At the recommendation of the Administration, the Congress subsequently passed a bill that, among other things, created a new and stronger regulator for the GSEs, the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), and provided the Treasury with powers to purchase GSE debt and equity. The Federal Reserve worked closely with the FHFA, the Treasury, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) to assess the financial condition of Fannie and Freddie, including assessing the capacity of the firms to absorb potential losses stemming from the rapid deterioration evident in single-family mortgages and mortgage-related private-label securities. The observations of Federal Reserve and OCC staff supported the view of the director of the FHFA that both firms were operating in an unsafe and unsound condition. In light of these findings, the director of the FHFA placed Fannie and Freddie into conservatorship on September 7. At the same time, the Treasury committed to making significant capital and liquidity support available to the GSEs to ensure the continued safety of their senior and subordinated debt and their mortgage-backed securities. The Federal Reserve endorsed those actions as consistent with maintaining financial stability, supporting the housing market, and protecting the taxpayer.The initial market reactions were positive. Funding costs for the GSEs declined sharply, as did spreads related to mortgage pricing. Moreover, the process of securitizing conforming mortgages remained robust, and the tens of thousands of investors in GSE debt and mortgage-backed securities have been reassured that their investments are safe. More recently, however, markets for GSE debt and mortgages have again come under some stress because of the widespread dislocations in financial markets generally.Looking beyond the immediate concerns, I agree with Secretary Paulson that the conservatorships of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac can usefully be viewed as a "time out"‑‑one that will give everyone involved, especially the Congress, the opportunity to reconsider the appropriate roles of Fannie and Freddie in the U.S. mortgage market. Key objectives of that reconsideration include both minimizing systemic risk and putting in place the most efficient mechanism possible for providing the mortgage credit necessary to sustain homeownership and a healthy housing sector. To address these issues, we must consider both the part played by securitization in the mortgage market and the role of the government and government-sponsored entities in facilitating securitization.The ability of financial intermediaries to sell the mortgages they originate into the broader capital market by means of the securitization process serves two important purposes: First, it provides originators much wider sources of funding than they could obtain through conventional sources, such as retail deposits; second, it substantially reduces the originator's exposure to interest rate, credit, prepayment, and other risks associated with holding mortgages to maturity, thereby reducing the overall costs of providing mortgage credit.Developing an effective securitization model is not easy--according to one economic historian, mortgage securitization schemes were tried and abandoned at least six times between 1870 and 1940.1Eventually, experience provided three principles for successful mortgage securitization. First, for the ultimate investors to be willing to acquire and trade mortgage-backed securities, they must be persuaded that the credit quality of the underlying mortgages is high and that the origination-to-distribution process is managed so that originators, such as mortgage brokers and bankers, have an incentive to undertake careful underwriting. Second, because the pools of assets underlying mortgage-backed securities have highly correlated risks, including interest rate, prepayment, and credit risks, the institutions and other investors that hold these securities must have the capacity to manage their risks carefully. Finally, because mortgage-backed securities are complex amalgamations of underlying mortgages that may themselves be complex to price, transparency about both the underlying assets and the mortgage-backed security itself is essential.During the early phases of the development of the subprime mortgage market, most lenders and investors followed these principles. Investors readily understood the simple senior/subordinated structure, and substantial useful information was provided about the subprime pools. However, during the credit boom period in the United States, worldwide demand for assets of perceived high quality became intense. Incentives to properly underwrite and evaluate new mortgage credit weakened, and many investors became over-reliant on credit ratings. To meet investor demand for customized products, the securities became increasingly complex. Although highly sophisticated methods for sharing risk were developed, not enough attention was paid to the risk that housing markets might turn down sharply across a range of geographical areas. The rapid rise in early payment defaults in the fall of 2006 signaled that something had gone wrong. As investors lost confidence, significant flaws in the securitization process, including inadequate risk management and disclosure as well as excessive complexity, became apparent.Perhaps the recent mortgage cycle will be remembered as just another failed episode of financial innovation. But one feature that makes it different from previous episodes was the relative success of government-sponsored securitization. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac continued to produce and sell significant quantities of mortgage-backed securities to secondary-market investors throughout the period of turmoil. Their ability to continue to securitize when private firms could not did not appear to result from superior business models or management. Instead, investors remained willing to accept GSE mortgage-backed securities because they continued to believe that the government stood behind them. That experience suggests that, at least under the most stressed conditions, some form of government backstop may be necessary to ensure continued securitization of mortgages. However, as I will discuss, that government support can take many forms.The Future of the GSEs: Improving Upon the Existing Model?How can we ensure that, in the future, mortgage securitization will be feasible even during highly stressed financial conditions? In the remainder of my remarks, I will consider some alternative approaches that focus largely, but not exclusively, on the potential role of the GSEs.One approach would be to try to return Fannie and Freddie to their pre-conservatorship status. In considering this possibility, we should remind ourselves of the problems that have surfaced with the traditional GSE structure. First, the existing GSE model involves an inherent conflict between the objectives of the companies' private shareholders and the objectives of public policy. For example, the GSEs were reluctant earlier this year to raise capital and to expand their operations, even though this would have helped financial and macroeconomic stability at a time of much-reduced mortgage availability. The GSEs' disinclination to support the mortgage market was motivated by the fact that raising additional capital would have diluted the values of the holdings of the existing private shareholders. Second, during the past 15 years or so, the GSEs have operated with high leverage compared with other large financial institutions. This relative lack of capital ultimately proved their downfall. Of course, to the extent that the debt of the GSEs is perceived to be guaranteed by the government, it is in the shareholders' interest for the companies to increase leverage whenever possible. Third, it is also in the shareholders' interest for the GSEs to maximize the size of their portfolios to take advantage of the differential between the returns to mortgage-backed securities and the low GSE funding costs arising from the perceived guarantee. However, as the Federal Reserve has argued for many years, the enormous GSE portfolios pose risks to financial stability.As a result of the concerns I just outlined, the Federal Reserve Board in the past has advocated a three-part approach to GSE oversight: a strong regulator, capital standards adequate for the risks the GSEs assume, and an explicit and measurable public purpose for the GSEs' portfolios.2Progress has been made in meeting some of these conditions. The Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 established a strong regulator with the power to establish more-robust capital standards and with some authority over the size of GSE portfolios. In particular, the law directs the new regulator to establish criteria to ensure that the portfolios are consistent with the mission and safe and sound operations of the enterprises. However, the public purpose of the GSE portfolios, at least during times when financial conditions are relatively normal, has not been fully clarified, and systemic risks will remain as long as the portfolios remain large. Moreover, the recent legislation does not fully resolve the fundamental conflict between private shareholders and public purpose that is the source of many concerns about the GSEs. Considering some alternative forms for the GSEs (or for mortgage securitization generally) during this "time out" thus seems worthwhile. Needless to say, however, even if alternative organizational structures are considered for the future, the U.S. government's strong and effective guarantee of the obligations issued under the current GSE structure must be maintained.Linking the Mortgage Market and the Capital Markets: Some Alternative ApproachesHow might the GSEs be reorganized in the future to address the problems that have been revealed with their traditional structure? Are there approaches that do not rely on GSEs to create a robust mortgage securitization market that will function in bad times as well as good?Privatization.One option that has been discussed is to privatize the GSEs and let them compete in the market as private mortgage insurers and securitizers. To eliminate the presumption of government support and to stimulate competition, some proposals advocating privatization call for breaking up the companies into smaller units before privatizing them.Privatization would solve several problems associated with the current GSE model. It would eliminate the conflict between private shareholders and public policy and likely diminish the systemic risks as well. Other benefits are that private entities presumably would be more innovative and efficient than a government agency, and that they could operate with less interference from political interests.However, whether the GSE model is viable without at least implicit government support is an open question. From a public policy perspective, a greater concern with fully privatized GSEs is whether mortgage securitization would continue under highly stressed financial conditions. As I have noted, almost no mortgage securitization is occurring today in the absence of a government guarantee. So, if the GSEs were privatized, it would seem advisable to retain some means of providing government support to the mortgage securitization process during times of turmoil. One possible approach, suggested by Federal Reserve Board economists Diana Hancock and Wayne Passmore, is to create a government bond insurer, analogous to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).3This new agency would offer, for a premium, government-backed insurance for any form of bond financing used to provide funding to mortgage markets. For example, debt and mortgage-backed securities issued by the (privatized) GSEs as well as mortgage-backed bonds issued by banks would be eligible for the guarantee. That approach would clearly limit the government's exposure while making the benefits of explicit government support available to the market.Covered bonds. GSE-type organizations are not essential to successful mortgage financing; indeed, many other industrial countries without GSEs have achieved homeownership rates comparable to that of the United States. One device that has been widely used is covered bonds. Covered bonds are debt obligations issued by financial institutions and secured by a pool of high-quality mortgages or other assets. Today, covered bonds are the primary source of mortgage funding for European banks, with about $3 trillion outstanding. These instruments are subject to extensive statutory and supervisory regulation designed to protect the interests of covered bond investors from the risks of insolvency of the issuing bank. Legislation typically specifies the types of collateral permitted in the cover pool, defines a minimum over-collateralization level, provides certainty of principal and interest payments to investors in the case of insolvency, and requires disclosures to regulators or investors or both. In addition, the government generally provides strong assurances to investors by having bank supervisors ensure that the cover pool assets that back the bonds are of high quality and that the cover pool is well managed.Issuance of covered bonds in Europe has not been unaffected by the financial turmoil, and at times the interest rate spreads relative to government debt have risen. But generally speaking, European banks have been able to find buyers for these bonds. For example, issuance of covered bonds totaled more than $16 billion in September 2008, although this amount represents a decline of 45 percent from a year earlier. Moreover, interest rate spreads on covered bonds have typically been much narrower than the comparable spreads on senior unsecured debt and mortgage-backed securities. This relationship has continued to hold throughout the market turmoil, perhaps because of the comprehensive regulatory and statutory frameworks associated with covered bonds in most European countries.To date, not many covered bonds have been issued in the United States, for several reasons. First, the Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLB) can tap capital markets and provide cost-effective funding for mortgage assets. In addition, as a source of financing, covered bond issuance today is not generally competitive with FHLB advances. Second, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have traditionally securitized U.S. prime mortgage assets. The GSEs' implicit government backing and their scale of securitization operations have made it difficult for banks to use covered bonds to finance their own prime mortgages. Third, the United States does not have the extensive statutory and supervisory regulation designed to protect the interests of covered bond investors that exists in European countries. To this end, the recent introduction of the FDIC policy statement on covered bonds and the Treasury covered bond framework were constructive steps. Finally, the cost disadvantage of covered bonds relative to securitization through Fannie and Freddie is increased by the greater capital requirements associated with covered bond issuance.Covered bonds do help to resolve some of the difficulties associated with the originate-to-distribute model. The on-balance-sheet nature of covered bonds means that the issuing banks are exposed to the credit quality of the underlying assets, a feature that better aligns the incentives of investors and mortgage lenders than does the originate-to-distribute model of mortgage securitization. The cover pool assets are typically actively managed--non-performing assets are replaced with similar, but performing assets--ensuring that high-quality assets are in the cover pool at all times and providing a mechanism for loan modifications and workouts. The structure used for such bonds tends to be fairly simple and transparent. These features, together with the demonstrated success of covered bonds in other countries, make this approach attractive. That said, given longstanding features of the U.S. system such as the prominent role of the Federal Home Loan Banks, covered bonds may remain an unattractive option to U.S. banks.Even closer ties to the government, with or without shareholders.A third approach, besides privatization and covered bonds, is to tie the government-sponsored enterprises even more closely to the government. In doing so, the choice must be made whether to continue to allow an element of private ownership in these organizations.A public utility model offers one possibility for incorporating private ownership. In such a model, the GSE remains a corporation with shareholders but is overseen by a public board. Beyond simply monitoring safety and soundness, the regulator would also establish pricing and other rules consistent with a promised rate of return to shareholders. Public utility regulation itself, of course, has numerous challenges and drawbacks, such as reduced incentives to control costs. Nor does this model completely eliminate the private-public conflict of the current GSE structure. But a public utility model might allow the enterprise to retain some of the flexibility and innovation associated with private-sector enterprises in which management is accountable to its shareholders. And, although I have noted the problems associated with private-public conflict, that conflict is not always counterproductive; an entity with private shareholders may be better able to resist political influences, which, under some circumstances, may lead to better market outcomes.If private shareholders are excluded, several possibilities worth exploring remain. One approach would be to structure a quasi-public corporation without shareholders that would engage in the provision of mortgage insurance generally. Here, perhaps, one might envision the consolidation of the GSEs and the FHA, with all securitization undertaken by a Ginnie Mae-type organization. Private mortgage insurers could still participate in this framework, though the role of the government in supporting mortgage insurance and securitization would become more explicit than it is today. Finally, one might consider cooperative ownership structures, where the originators of mortgages must hold the capital in the government-sponsored enterprises, analogous to the current structure of the Federal Home Loan Banks.ConclusionRegardless of the organizational form, we must strive to design a housing financing system that ensures the successful funding and securitization of mortgages during times of financial stress but that does not create institutions that pose systemic risks to our financial markets and the economy. Government likely has a role to play in supporting mortgage securitization, at least during periods of high financial stress. But once government guarantees are involved, the problems of systemic risks and contingent taxpayer involvement must be dealt with clearly and credibly. Achieving the appropriate balance among these design challenges will be difficult, but it nevertheless must be high on the policy agenda for financial reform.Footnotes1.See Kenneth Snowden (1995), "Mortgage Securitization in the United States: Twentieth Century Developments in Historical Perspective," in Michael D. Bordo and Richard Sylla, eds.,Anglo-American Financial Systems: Institutions and Markets in the Twentieth Century(New York: McGraw-Hill).Return to text2.See Ben S. Bernanke (2007), "GSE Portfolios, Systemic Risk, and Affordable Housing," speech delivered at the Independent Community Bankers of America's Annual Convention and Techworld (via satellite), Honolulu, Hawaii, March 6.Return to text3.See Diana Hancock and Wayne Passmore (2008), "Three Mortgage Innovations for Enhancing the American Mortgage Market and Promoting Financial Stability," preliminary draft presented at the UC Berkeley-UCLA symposiumThe Mortgage Meltdown, the Economy, and Public Policy, Berkeley, Calif., October 31.Return to text The financial crisis has upset the linkage between mortgage borrowers and capital markets and has revealed a number of important problems in our system of mortgage finance, including weaknesses in the structure and oversight of the GSEs and perhaps in the originate-to-distribute model of credit provision itself. Private-label securitization has largely stopped, and Fannie and Freddie were placed into conservatorship by their regulator after they were judged to be operating in an unsafe and unsound manner. Our task now is to begin thinking about how to best reestablish a link between homebuyers and capital markets in a way that addresses the weaknesses of the old system. In light of the central role that the GSEs played, and still play, any such analysis must pay particular attention to how those institutions should evolve. The Mortgage Market and Mortgage Securitization in the Financial CrisisThe financial crisis that began in August 2007 has entered its second year. Its proximate cause was the end of the U.S. housing boom, which revealed serious deficiencies in the underwriting and credit rating of some mortgages, particularly subprime mortgages with adjustable interest rates. As subsequent events demonstrated, however, the boom in subprime mortgage lending was only a part of a much broader credit boom characterized by an underpricing of risk, excessive leverage, and the creation of complex and opaque financial instruments that proved fragile under stress. The unwinding of these developments is the source of the severe financial strain and tight credit that now damp economic growth. Although problems with mortgage origination were not the only cause of the crisis, mortgage markets have been deeply affected. Banks and thrifts are still making new mortgage loans, but they have tightened terms considerably, essentially closing the private market to borrowers with weaker credit histories. Importantly, with the securitization market for private-label mortgage-backed securities shut down, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae currently are the only conduits through which mortgages can be securitized and sold to investors. By contrast, in 2005, these three entities represented only about 50 percent of the securitization market. The ability of Fannie, Freddie, and Ginnie to continue to securitize mortgages has largely depended on the confidence of investors that the government stands behind these organizations. As such, it was very significant when signs emerged in midsummer that investors were beginning to lose confidence in Fannie and Freddie. As investors became increasingly concerned about the capital positions of these companies, the risk increased that they would not be able to roll over their debt as needed to finance their portfolios and purchase new loans. Eroding investor confidence in the GSEs endangered not only the U.S. mortgage market but the financial system more generally, given the enormous quantities of the companies' debt outstanding in private and public portfolios around the world. At the recommendation of the Administration, the Congress subsequently passed a bill that, among other things, created a new and stronger regulator for the GSEs, the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), and provided the Treasury with powers to purchase GSE debt and equity. The Federal Reserve worked closely with the FHFA, the Treasury, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) to assess the financial condition of Fannie and Freddie, including assessing the capacity of the firms to absorb potential losses stemming from the rapid deterioration evident in single-family mortgages and mortgage-related private-label securities. The observations of Federal Reserve and OCC staff supported the view of the director of the FHFA that both firms were operating in an unsafe and unsound condition. In light of these findings, the director of the FHFA placed Fannie and Freddie into conservatorship on September 7. At the same time, the Treasury committed to making significant capital and liquidity support available to the GSEs to ensure the continued safety of their senior and subordinated debt and their mortgage-backed securities. The Federal Reserve endorsed those actions as consistent with maintaining financial stability, supporting the housing market, and protecting the taxpayer. The initial market reactions were positive. Funding costs for the GSEs declined sharply, as did spreads related to mortgage pricing. Moreover, the process of securitizing conforming mortgages remained robust, and the tens of thousands of investors in GSE debt and mortgage-backed securities have been reassured that their investments are safe. More recently, however, markets for GSE debt and mortgages have again come under some stress because of the widespread dislocations in financial markets generally. Looking beyond the immediate concerns, I agree with Secretary Paulson that the conservatorships of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac can usefully be viewed as a "time out"‑‑one that will give everyone involved, especially the Congress, the opportunity to reconsider the appropriate roles of Fannie and Freddie in the U.S. mortgage market. Key objectives of that reconsideration include both minimizing systemic risk and putting in place the most efficient mechanism possible for providing the mortgage credit necessary to sustain homeownership and a healthy housing sector. To address these issues, we must consider both the part played by securitization in the mortgage market and the role of the government and government-sponsored entities in facilitating securitization. The ability of financial intermediaries to sell the mortgages they originate into the broader capital market by means of the securitization process serves two important purposes: First, it provides originators much wider sources of funding than they could obtain through conventional sources, such as retail deposits; second, it substantially reduces the originator's exposure to interest rate, credit, prepayment, and other risks associated with holding mortgages to maturity, thereby reducing the overall costs of providing mortgage credit. Developing an effective securitization model is not easy--according to one economic historian, mortgage securitization schemes were tried and abandoned at least six times between 1870 and 1940.1Eventually, experience provided three principles for successful mortgage securitization. First, for the ultimate investors to be willing to acquire and trade mortgage-backed securities, they must be persuaded that the credit quality of the underlying mortgages is high and that the origination-to-distribution process is managed so that originators, such as mortgage brokers and bankers, have an incentive to undertake careful underwriting. Second, because the pools of assets underlying mortgage-backed securities have highly correlated risks, including interest rate, prepayment, and credit risks, the institutions and other investors that hold these securities must have the capacity to manage their risks carefully. Finally, because mortgage-backed securities are complex amalgamations of underlying mortgages that may themselves be complex to price, transparency about both the underlying assets and the mortgage-backed security itself is essential. During the early phases of the development of the subprime mortgage market, most lenders and investors followed these principles. Investors readily understood the simple senior/subordinated structure, and substantial useful information was provided about the subprime pools. However, during the credit boom period in the United States, worldwide demand for assets of perceived high quality became intense. Incentives to properly underwrite and evaluate new mortgage credit weakened, and many investors became over-reliant on credit ratings. To meet investor demand for customized products, the securities became increasingly complex. Although highly sophisticated methods for sharing risk were developed, not enough attention was paid to the risk that housing markets might turn down sharply across a range of geographical areas. The rapid rise in early payment defaults in the fall of 2006 signaled that something had gone wrong. As investors lost confidence, significant flaws in the securitization process, including inadequate risk management and disclosure as well as excessive complexity, became apparent. Perhaps the recent mortgage cycle will be remembered as just another failed episode of financial innovation. But one feature that makes it different from previous episodes was the relative success of government-sponsored securitization. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac continued to produce and sell significant quantities of mortgage-backed securities to secondary-market investors throughout the period of turmoil. Their ability to continue to securitize when private firms could not did not appear to result from superior business models or management. Instead, investors remained willing to accept GSE mortgage-backed securities because they continued to believe that the government stood behind them. That experience suggests that, at least under the most stressed conditions, some form of government backstop may be necessary to ensure continued securitization of mortgages. However, as I will discuss, that government support can take many forms. The Future of the GSEs: Improving Upon the Existing Model?How can we ensure that, in the future, mortgage securitization will be feasible even during highly stressed financial conditions? In the remainder of my remarks, I will consider some alternative approaches that focus largely, but not exclusively, on the potential role of the GSEs. One approach would be to try to return Fannie and Freddie to their pre-conservatorship status. In considering this possibility, we should remind ourselves of the problems that have surfaced with the traditional GSE structure. First, the existing GSE model involves an inherent conflict between the objectives of the companies' private shareholders and the objectives of public policy. For example, the GSEs were reluctant earlier this year to raise capital and to expand their operations, even though this would have helped financial and macroeconomic stability at a time of much-reduced mortgage availability. The GSEs' disinclination to support the mortgage market was motivated by the fact that raising additional capital would have diluted the values of the holdings of the existing private shareholders. Second, during the past 15 years or so, the GSEs have operated with high leverage compared with other large financial institutions. This relative lack of capital ultimately proved their downfall. Of course, to the extent that the debt of the GSEs is perceived to be guaranteed by the government, it is in the shareholders' interest for the companies to increase leverage whenever possible. Third, it is also in the shareholders' interest for the GSEs to maximize the size of their portfolios to take advantage of the differential between the returns to mortgage-backed securities and the low GSE funding costs arising from the perceived guarantee. However, as the Federal Reserve has argued for many years, the enormous GSE portfolios pose risks to financial stability. As a result of the concerns I just outlined, the Federal Reserve Board in the past has advocated a three-part approach to GSE oversight: a strong regulator, capital standards adequate for the risks the GSEs assume, and an explicit and measurable public purpose for the GSEs' portfolios.2Progress has been made in meeting some of these conditions. The Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 established a strong regulator with the power to establish more-robust capital standards and with some authority over the size of GSE portfolios. In particular, the law directs the new regulator to establish criteria to ensure that the portfolios are consistent with the mission and safe and sound operations of the enterprises. However, the public purpose of the GSE portfolios, at least during times when financial conditions are relatively normal, has not been fully clarified, and systemic risks will remain as long as the portfolios remain large. Moreover, the recent legislation does not fully resolve the fundamental conflict between private shareholders and public purpose that is the source of many concerns about the GSEs. Considering some alternative forms for the GSEs (or for mortgage securitization generally) during this "time out" thus seems worthwhile. Needless to say, however, even if alternative organizational structures are considered for the future, the U.S. government's strong and effective guarantee of the obligations issued under the current GSE structure must be maintained. Linking the Mortgage Market and the Capital Markets: Some Alternative ApproachesHow might the GSEs be reorganized in the future to address the problems that have been revealed with their traditional structure? Are there approaches that do not rely on GSEs to create a robust mortgage securitization market that will function in bad times as well as good? Privatization.One option that has been discussed is to privatize the GSEs and let them compete in the market as private mortgage insurers and securitizers. To eliminate the presumption of government support and to stimulate competition, some proposals advocating privatization call for breaking up the companies into smaller units before privatizing them. Privatization would solve several problems associated with the current GSE model. It would eliminate the conflict between private shareholders and public policy and likely diminish the systemic risks as well. Other benefits are that private entities presumably would be more innovative and efficient than a government agency, and that they could operate with less interference from political interests. However, whether the GSE model is viable without at least implicit government support is an open question. From a public policy perspective, a greater concern with fully privatized GSEs is whether mortgage securitization would continue under highly stressed financial conditions. As I have noted, almost no mortgage securitization is occurring today in the absence of a government guarantee. So, if the GSEs were privatized, it would seem advisable to retain some means of providing government support to the mortgage securitization process during times of turmoil. One possible approach, suggested by Federal Reserve Board economists Diana Hancock and Wayne Passmore, is to create a government bond insurer, analogous to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).3This new agency would offer, for a premium, government-backed insurance for any form of bond financing used to provide funding to mortgage markets. For example, debt and mortgage-backed securities issued by the (privatized) GSEs as well as mortgage-backed bonds issued by banks would be eligible for the guarantee. That approach would clearly limit the government's exposure while making the benefits of explicit government support available to the market. Covered bonds. GSE-type organizations are not essential to successful mortgage financing; indeed, many other industrial countries without GSEs have achieved homeownership rates comparable to that of the United States. One device that has been widely used is covered bonds. Covered bonds are debt obligations issued by financial institutions and secured by a pool of high-quality mortgages or other assets. Today, covered bonds are the primary source of mortgage funding for European banks, with about $3 trillion outstanding. These instruments are subject to extensive statutory and supervisory regulation designed to protect the interests of covered bond investors from the risks of insolvency of the issuing bank. Legislation typically specifies the types of collateral permitted in the cover pool, defines a minimum over-collateralization level, provides certainty of principal and interest payments to investors in the case of insolvency, and requires disclosures to regulators or investors or both. In addition, the government generally provides strong assurances to investors by having bank supervisors ensure that the cover pool assets that back the bonds are of high quality and that the cover pool is well managed. Issuance of covered bonds in Europe has not been unaffected by the financial turmoil, and at times the interest rate spreads relative to government debt have risen. But generally speaking, European banks have been able to find buyers for these bonds. For example, issuance of covered bonds totaled more than $16 billion in September 2008, although this amount represents a decline of 45 percent from a year earlier. Moreover, interest rate spreads on covered bonds have typically been much narrower than the comparable spreads on senior unsecured debt and mortgage-backed securities. This relationship has continued to hold throughout the market turmoil, perhaps because of the comprehensive regulatory and statutory frameworks associated with covered bonds in most European countries. To date, not many covered bonds have been issued in the United States, for several reasons. First, the Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLB) can tap capital markets and provide cost-effective funding for mortgage assets. In addition, as a source of financing, covered bond issuance today is not generally competitive with FHLB advances. Second, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have traditionally securitized U.S. prime mortgage assets. The GSEs' implicit government backing and their scale of securitization operations have made it difficult for banks to use covered bonds to finance their own prime mortgages. Third, the United States does not have the extensive statutory and supervisory regulation designed to protect the interests of covered bond investors that exists in European countries. To this end, the recent introduction of the FDIC policy statement on covered bonds and the Treasury covered bond framework were constructive steps. Finally, the cost disadvantage of covered bonds relative to securitization through Fannie and Freddie is increased by the greater capital requirements associated with covered bond issuance. Covered bonds do help to resolve some of the difficulties associated with the originate-to-distribute model. The on-balance-sheet nature of covered bonds means that the issuing banks are exposed to the credit quality of the underlying assets, a feature that better aligns the incentives of investors and mortgage lenders than does the originate-to-distribute model of mortgage securitization. The cover pool assets are typically actively managed--non-performing assets are replaced with similar, but performing assets--ensuring that high-quality assets are in the cover pool at all times and providing a mechanism for loan modifications and workouts. The structure used for such bonds tends to be fairly simple and transparent. These features, together with the demonstrated success of covered bonds in other countries, make this approach attractive. That said, given longstanding features of the U.S. system such as the prominent role of the Federal Home Loan Banks, covered bonds may remain an unattractive option to U.S. banks. Even closer ties to the government, with or without shareholders.A third approach, besides privatization and covered bonds, is to tie the government-sponsored enterprises even more closely to the government. In doing so, the choice must be made whether to continue to allow an element of private ownership in these organizations. A public utility model offers one possibility for incorporating private ownership. In such a model, the GSE remains a corporation with shareholders but is overseen by a public board. Beyond simply monitoring safety and soundness, the regulator would also establish pricing and other rules consistent with a promised rate of return to shareholders. Public utility regulation itself, of course, has numerous challenges and drawbacks, such as reduced incentives to control costs. Nor does this model completely eliminate the private-public conflict of the current GSE structure. But a public utility model might allow the enterprise to retain some of the flexibility and innovation associated with private-sector enterprises in which management is accountable to its shareholders. And, although I have noted the problems associated with private-public conflict, that conflict is not always counterproductive; an entity with private shareholders may be better able to resist political influences, which, under some circumstances, may lead to better market outcomes. If private shareholders are excluded, several possibilities worth exploring remain. One approach would be to structure a quasi-public corporation without shareholders that would engage in the provision of mortgage insurance generally. Here, perhaps, one might envision the consolidation of the GSEs and the FHA, with all securitization undertaken by a Ginnie Mae-type organization. Private mortgage insurers could still participate in this framework, though the role of the government in supporting mortgage insurance and securitization would become more explicit than it is today. Finally, one might consider cooperative ownership structures, where the originators of mortgages must hold the capital in the government-sponsored enterprises, analogous to the current structure of the Federal Home Loan Banks. ConclusionRegardless of the organizational form, we must strive to design a housing financing system that ensures the successful funding and securitization of mortgages during times of financial stress but that does not create institutions that pose systemic risks to our financial markets and the economy. Government likely has a role to play in supporting mortgage securitization, at least during periods of high financial stress. But once government guarantees are involved, the problems of systemic risks and contingent taxpayer involvement must be dealt with clearly and credibly. Achieving the appropriate balance among these design challenges will be difficult, but it nevertheless must be high on the policy agenda for financial reform. Footnotes1.See Kenneth Snowden (1995), "Mortgage Securitization in the United States: Twentieth Century Developments in Historical Perspective," in Michael D. Bordo and Richard Sylla, eds.,Anglo-American Financial Systems: Institutions and Markets in the Twentieth Century(New York: McGraw-Hill).Return to text2.See Ben S. Bernanke (2007), "GSE Portfolios, Systemic Risk, and Affordable Housing," speech delivered at the Independent Community Bankers of America's Annual Convention and Techworld (via satellite), Honolulu, Hawaii, March 6.Return to text3.See Diana Hancock and Wayne Passmore (2008), "Three Mortgage Innovations for Enhancing the American Mortgage Market and Promoting Financial Stability," preliminary draft presented at the UC Berkeley-UCLA symposiumThe Mortgage Meltdown, the Economy, and Public Policy, Berkeley, Calif., October 31.Return to text Footnotes 1.See Kenneth Snowden (1995), "Mortgage Securitization in the United States: Twentieth Century Developments in Historical Perspective," in Michael D. Bordo and Richard Sylla, eds.,Anglo-American Financial Systems: Institutions and Markets in the Twentieth Century(New York: McGraw-Hill).Return to text 2.See Ben S. Bernanke (2007), "GSE Portfolios, Systemic Risk, and Affordable Housing," speech delivered at the Independent Community Bankers of America's Annual Convention and Techworld (via satellite), Honolulu, Hawaii, March 6.Return to text 3.See Diana Hancock and Wayne Passmore (2008), "Three Mortgage Innovations for Enhancing the American Mortgage Market and Promoting Financial Stability," preliminary draft presented at the UC Berkeley-UCLA symposiumThe Mortgage Meltdown, the Economy, and Public Policy, Berkeley, Calif., October 31.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Alliance Bancshares California, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among AmericasBank, Towson, Maryland, a state chartered member bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, and the Maryland Division of Financial Regulation. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Bank of Canton, Canton, Pennsylvania, a state chartered member bank, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Irwin Financial Corporation, Columbus, Indiana, a registered bank holding company, Irwin Union Bank and Trust Company, Columbus, Indiana, a state chartered member bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and the Indiana Department of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Remo DuQuoin LLC, Privee LLC, Republic Federal Bancorp, Inc., registered bank holding companies, Miami, Florida, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between State Holding Company, Thermopolis, Wyoming, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Warren Bancorp, Inc., a registered bank holding company, Warren Bank, a state-chartered member bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and the Michigan Office of Financial and Insurance Regulation. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.