The federal banking and thrift agencies today issued final guidance outlining the supervisory review process for banking organizations implementing the new advanced capital adequacy framework known as Basel II. The final guidance relating to supervisory review is aimed at helping banking organizations meet certain qualification requirements in the advanced approaches rule, which took effect April 1. The advanced approaches rule consists of three pillars: minimum risk-based capital requirements (Pillar 1); supervisory review of capital adequacy (Pillar 2); and market discipline through enhanced public disclosures (Pillar 3). The final Pillar 2 guidance details the agencies’ standards for ensuring that each institution subject to the advanced approaches rule has a rigorous process for assessing its overall capital adequacy in relation to its risk profile and a comprehensive strategy for maintaining appropriate capital levels. Although the guidance does not differ significantly from the proposed Pillar 2 guidance issued in February 2007, the agencies made some enhancements based on comments received and in consideration of key lessons from the events of the past year. The Pillar 2 guidance is being issued by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision. The effective date of the Pillar 2 guidance is 30 days following its publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. The final Pillar 2 guidance is attached.
The federal banking and thrift agencies today issued an interagency statement outlining the qualification process for banking organizations implementing the new advanced capital adequacy framework known as Basel II. The process consists of three major stages: adoption of an implementation plan; completion of a satisfactory parallel run; and advancement through three transitional periods. The statement updates the interagency statement on qualification issued in January 2005 to reflect the final advanced approaches rule published December 7, 2007. The statement is attached. Attachment (622 KB PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the approval of an application by Andhra Bank, Hyderabad, India, to establish a representative office in Jersey City, New Jersey. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the approval of an application byInternational Bank of Azerbaijan, Baku, Azerbaijan, to establish a representative office inNew York, New York.Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System announced Sunday that it has granted the Federal Reserve Bank of New York the authority to lend to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac should such lending prove necessary. Any lending would be at the primary credit rate and collateralized by U.S. government and federal agency securities. This authorization is intended to supplement the Treasury's existing lending authority and to help ensure the ability of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to promote the availability of home mortgage credit during a period of stress in financial markets.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday approved a final rule for home mortgage loans to better protect consumers and facilitate responsible lending. The rule prohibits unfair, abusive or deceptive home mortgage lending practices and restricts certain other mortgage practices. The final rule also establishes advertising standards and requires certain mortgage disclosures to be given to consumers earlier in the transaction. The final rule, which amends Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) and was adopted under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA), largely follows a proposal released by the Board in December 2007, with enhancements that address ensuing public comments, consumer testing, and further analysis. "The proposed final rules are intended to protect consumers from unfair or deceptive acts and practices in mortgage lending, while keeping credit available to qualified borrowers and supporting sustainable homeownership," said Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. "Importantly, the new rules will apply to all mortgage lenders, not just those supervised and examined by the Federal Reserve. Besides offering broader protection for consumers, a uniform set of rules will level the playing field for lenders and increase competition in the mortgage market, to the ultimate benefit of borrowers," the Chairman said. The final rule adds four key protections for a newly defined category of "higher-priced mortgage loans" secured by a consumer's principal dwelling. For loans in this category, these protections will: "These changes have made for better rules that will go far in protecting consumers from unfair practices and restoring confidence in our mortgage system," said Governor Randall S. Kroszner. In addition to the rules governing higher-priced loans, the rules adopt the following protections for loans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling, regardless of whether the loan is higher-priced: For all mortgages, the rule also sets additional advertising standards. Advertising rules now require additional information about rates, monthly payments, and other loan features. The final rule bans seven deceptive or misleading advertising practices, including representing that a rate or payment is "fixed" when it can change. The rule's definition of "higher-priced mortgage loans" will capture virtually all loans in the subprime market, but generally exclude loans in the prime market. To provide an index, the Federal Reserve Board will publish the "average prime offer rate," based on a survey currently published by Freddie Mac. A loan is higher-priced if it is a first-lien mortgage and has an annual percentage rate that is 1.5 percentage points or more above this index, or 3.5 percentage points if it is a subordinate-lien mortgage. This definition overcomes certain technical problems with the original proposal, but the expected market coverage is similar. One element of the original proposal has been withdrawn. The Federal Reserve Board had proposed for public comment certain requirements pertaining to so-called "yield-spread premiums." During the intervening period, the Board engaged in consumer testing that cast significant doubt on the effectiveness of the proposed rule. As part of its ongoing review of closed-end loan rules under Regulation Z, however, the Board will consider alternative approaches. In finalizing the rule, the Board carefully considered information obtained from testimony, public hearings, consumer testing, and over 4,500 comment letters submitted during the comment period. "Listening carefully to the commenters, collecting and analyzing data, and undertaking consumer testing, has led to more effective and improved final rules," Governor Kroszner said. The new rules take effect on October 1, 2009. The single exception is the escrow requirement, which will be phased in during 2010 to allow lenders to establish new systems as needed. In a related move, the Board is publishing for public comment a proposal to revise the definition of "higher-priced mortgage loan" under Regulation C (Home Mortgage Disclosure), which requires lenders to report price information for such loans, to conform to the definition the Board is adopting under Regulation Z. TheFederal Registernotices are attached. Federal Register notice, Regulation Z:565 KB PDF|HTML Federal Register notice, Regulation C:93 KB PDF|HTML Statement of Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Statement of Governor Randall S. Kroszner Highlights of Final Rule Amending Home Mortgage Provisions of Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) Consumer Testing of Mortgage Broker Disclosures, Summary of Findings (7.45 MB PDF)Open Board Meeting Materials
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the issuance on June 16, 2008 of a consent Order to Cease and Desist against First National Bank Holding Company, Scottsdale, Arizona.A copy of the Order is attached.
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Watt, Ranking Member Miller, and members of the Subcommittee, I want to thank you for this opportunity to discuss whether the collection of data by creditors on credit applicants' personal characteristics (such as race, ethnicity, and sex) for non-mortgage loans is appropriate, and if so, how this might best be accomplished. In my remarks today, I will provide background information on efforts by the Federal Reserve Board to combat credit discrimination, as required by the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA), and on the collection, reporting, and public disclosure of applicant characteristic data, as required by the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). I will also outline the Federal Reserve's fair lending examination program for non-mortgage products, and discuss the cost-benefit tradeoffs involved in collecting, reporting, and publicly disclosing applicant characteristic data for non-mortgage lending, including small business. A.Background on Credit Discrimination and Data CollectionECOA, enacted in 1974, generally prohibits creditors from discriminating against any credit applicant on any prohibited basis (such as race, national origin, religion, age or sex) in a credit transaction. ECOA is implemented by the Board's Regulation B. In fashioning Regulation B, a fundamental question for the Board was whether permitting lenders to note characteristics that, by law, they cannot consider, would advance or impede the goals of ECOA. The statute itself is silent on this issue. In 1977, the Board adopted a rule generally prohibiting creditors from collecting data on the personal characteristics of loan applicants. At the same time, however, the Board required creditors to collect applicants' race/national origin, sex, marital status, and age for home purchase and refinance loan transactions. The Board adopted this limited data collection requirement based on frequent and serious allegations of unlawful discrimination in the home mortgage market and the significant impact that access to mortgage credit can have on consumers. Collection of these data was designed to help enforcement agencies better monitor home mortgage lenders' compliance with ECOA. The Board did not, however, require reporting or public disclosure of applicant characteristic data collected in mortgage transactions. Reporting and public disclosure of the personal characteristics of individual borrowers and applicants for home mortgage loans occurred when the Congress amended HMDA in 1989, and the Board revised Regulation C to implement those amendments. HMDA is a disclosure statute that requires lenders to collect, report, and publicly disclose information about housing-related loans and applications for these loans, including several borrower or applicant personal characteristics. HMDA has three purposes. One purpose is to provide the public and government officials with data that will help show whether lenders are serving the housing needs of the neighborhoods and communities in which they are located. A second purpose is to help government officials target public investment to promote private investment where it is needed. A third purpose is to provide data that assist in identifying possible discriminatory lending patterns and facilitate the enforcement of anti-discrimination laws, such as ECOA. HMDA requires mortgage lenders to disclose annually information about each application or loan (such as the loan type and purpose); each applicant or borrower, (ethnicity, race, sex, and income); and each property. Since 2005, pursuant to Board changes to Regulation C, lenders have also been required to report certain price data on higher-priced loans. Based on cost and privacy concerns, however, HMDA data lack several factors that lenders routinely use to make credit decisions and set loan prices, such as information about the borrower's creditworthiness and loan-to-value and debt-to-income ratios. Although HMDA data alone cannot prove discrimination, the data can facilitate fair lending enforcement by helping regulators identify lenders that warrant further review. In 1999, the Board proposed to amend Regulation B to allow creditors to collect applicant characteristic data voluntarily. This proposal was very controversial. Consumer groups generally favored lifting the prohibition, but believed that voluntary collection should only be a “first step” toward mandatory data collection. Members of the industry generally opposed lifting the prohibition, fearing that voluntary collection would lead to mandatory collection and impose substantial costs and burdens on the industry. They also believed that data collected on a voluntary basis without standards would be unreliable, of questionable value, not comparable from creditor-to-creditor, and subject to misinterpretation. Some consumer groups also recognized that voluntary data collection may not produce quality data. The Board did not propose, or request comment on,mandatorycollection of applicant characteristic data or public disclosure of such data for non-mortgage loans in its 1999 proposal. In 2003, the Board adopted a final rule that retained the general prohibition on collecting applicant characteristic data for non-mortgage loans. The Board concluded that voluntary data collection would not be effective or desirable because a voluntary collection regime would not produce reliable or useful market-wide data. Under a voluntary data collection regime, the data would be incomplete because some creditors would elect not to collect. In addition, the reliability of the data could not be assured because the data would be collected using different standards, criteria, and methods. Thus, the data would not be comparable from creditor to creditor. At the same time, the Board revised the general prohibition on data collection to permit creditors to collect information about non-mortgage credit applicants' personal characteristics for the purpose of conducting a self-test in accordance with ECOA's self-test privilege.1Some industry commenters indicated that creditors likely would not collect applicant characteristic data voluntarily unless they could take advantage of the self-test privilege. B. Fair Lending Enforcement for Non-Mortgage LoansThe Board has a rigorous fair lending enforcement program that includes non-mortgage lending. This is consistent with the Board's longstanding commitment to ensuring that every bank it supervises complies fully with the federal fair lending laws (ECOA and the Fair Housing Act). Fair lending is an integral part of every consumer compliance examination. Following the Interagency Fair Lending Examination Procedures, each fair lending examination includes an assessment of the bank's fair lending risk across all types of lending, such as mortgage, consumer, auto, and business lending. Based on this assessment of risk, examiners identify specific business lines on which to focus, and in every examination they evaluate in detail at least one product or class of products. When examiners find fair lending violations, the Board takes appropriate supervisory action. If there is reason to believe that an institution has engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination under certain provisions of ECOA, the Board, like the other federal banking agencies, has a statutory obligation to refer the matter to the Department of Justice (DOJ).2 During the first six months of 2008, the Board referred two institutions to DOJ after concluding that there was reason to believe that the institutions had engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination. Both referrals involved marital status discrimination in non-mortgage lending. One referral involved illegal spousal guarantees in commercial and agricultural lending. The other referral involved illegal spousal signature practices in automobile lending. In 2007, the Board referred eight institutions to DOJ. Five of these eight matters involved non-mortgage lending, including auto, commercial, agricultural and consumer lending. One non-mortgage referral involved racial discrimination in the pricing of automobile loans. The institution purchased loans in which auto dealers had charged higher interest rates, through the use of mark-ups, based upon the race of the borrowers. This pricing was permitted by the institution, which received a share of the mark-ups. Four non-mortgage referrals involved marital status discrimination in agricultural, business, and consumer loans. In 2006, the Board referred four institutions to DOJ. Three of these four referrals involved non-mortgage lending--two non-mortgage referrals involved marital status discrimination in auto loan pricing and one involved age discrimination in consumer lending.3The Board referred a total of five matters to DOJ in 2004 and 2005, four of which involved marital status discrimination in auto and commercial lending. As these referrals demonstrate, the Board has a strong fair lending enforcement program for non-mortgage lending. To test for discrimination, Federal Reserve examiners use statistical techniques, where appropriate, and review information in loan files. When testing for discrimination in mortgage lending, examiners analyze data collected under HMDA to determine the race, ethnicity, and sex of the applicant or borrower. In non-mortgage lending, where lenders do not collect data about race, ethnicity or sex, examiners may use proxies, such as names or census tract demographic data, to ascertain this information. In both mortgage and non-mortgage lending, examiners regularly test for redlining by comparing lending patterns between minority and non-minority neighborhoods. Examiners then determine if a lender is treating neighborhoods differently based on the race or ethnicity of their residents. C. The Collection of Applicant Characteristic Data for Non-Mortgage LoansThere are four possible approaches to the collection of applicant characteristic data: a general prohibition on data collection; voluntary data collection; mandatory data collection without public disclosure; and mandatory data collection with public disclosure. I will discuss each of these approaches, and then address specific issues related to data collection for small business loans. 1. Four Approaches to Data CollectionA general prohibition on collecting applicant characteristic data is the approach followed in Regulation B for non-mortgage loans. For credit that typically is granted using automated underwriting systems and without face-to-face contact between the creditor and the consumer, such as credit cards, this approach seems clearly appropriate. There do not appear to be widespread fair lending concerns with regard to credit cards that might indicate a need for the collection of applicant characteristic data. Voluntary collection of applicant characteristic data is the approach considered, but rejected, by the Board in 2003. As discussed previously, voluntary data collection would not be effective or desirable because it would not produce reliable or useful market-wide data. Therefore, voluntary data collection does not appear to be a useful approach. Mandatory collection of applicant characteristic data without public disclosure is the approach that the Board adopted under Regulation B in 1977 for mortgage loans to obtain information for monitoring purposes. This approach can provide supervisory agencies that regularly examine creditors for fair lending compliance with additional data that can be useful in identifying possible discriminatory practices. However, many creditors, such as non-bank finance companies and auto dealers, are not subject to regular examinations for fair lending compliance. Thus, data collection without public disclosure may not enhance fair lending enforcement against creditors that are not subject to routine oversight. Moreover, a requirement to collect applicant characteristic data for non-mortgage loans would impose costs on creditors. These costs must be weighed against the benefits of collecting these data. Depending upon the complexity of the products for which data must be collected and the nature and scope of the data that must be collected to identify potential discrimination, these costs could be significant and could outweigh the benefits of requiring collection. Mandatory collection of borrower and applicant characteristic data with public disclosure is the approach used under HMDA. Public disclosure can provide heightened scrutiny of lender practices by entities other than enforcement agencies. It may be that the availability of HMDA data has led some mortgage lenders to review their loan decisions more carefully to ensure compliance with fair lending laws. The transparency provided by the 1989 amendments to HMDA, which required mandatory data collection, reporting,andpublic disclosure of borrower, applicant, and loan data, has been viewed by some to have reduced discrimination in mortgage lending more so than the requirement in Regulation B to collect applicant characteristic data for mortgage loans. It would be impossible to validate or refute that argument statistically, however. Although such an approach would provide greater transparency than mandatory collection alone, it also raises significant policy choices and cost-benefit considerations that Congress should make. A fundamental question is the proper scope of any mandatory collection, reporting, and public disclosure requirement for non-mortgage loans. Congress is in the best position to decide whether such a requirement should apply to all non-mortgage loans, or some subset of those loans. Another key issue is whether the benefits of mandating data collection and public disclosure for some or all non-mortgage loans outweigh the costs. It is questionable whether any data collection, reporting, and public disclosure requirement can be designed to conclusively show the existence of discrimination. The usefulness of a system that could identify possible discriminatory practices without conclusively proving discrimination, and justification of the costs of implementing such a system, are policy judgments for Congress to make. In summary, we believe Congress is in the best position to make the policy and cost-benefit determinations discussed above, just as Congress did when it amended HMDA in 1989 to require the collection and disclosure of borrower and applicant characteristic data for mortgages. 2. Data Collection Issues Related to Small Business LendingSmall businesses are an integral part of the U.S. economy. Ensuring equal access to small business credit for all qualified business applicants is critical to the welfare of local communities and the economy as a whole. Small business lending, however, is more complex than mortgage lending and varies across lenders much more than mortgage lending. There are many different types of small business lending, including credit lines, business credit cards, vehicle and equipment loans, mortgages, capital leases, and trade credit. There are also many different types of small business lenders, including banks, credit card companies, finance companies, and trade creditors. Small businesses in one industry may have very different credit needs than small businesses in other industries. Small business loans may be secured or unsecured, or may be supported by the personal guarantee of the owner or owners of the business. Many different types of data about business attributes and underwriting standards would have to be collected about small businesses and their owners in order to identify potential discrimination in small business lending. When evaluating small business loan applications, lenders may consider a variety of different factors about the business and its owners. Relevant factors may include: the age or longevity of the business; the track record of the business in terms of sales growth and profitability; the size of the business as measured by employment, sales, and assets; the industry in which the business operates and the risk of lending to businesses in that industry; the experience of the owners of the business; and the personal creditworthiness of the owners of the business. Therefore, it would likely be more difficult to capture the appropriate underwriting-related or pricing-related variables for small business lending than for mortgage lending. Younger and smaller businesses generally are considered more risky than larger, more established businesses. Younger firms, for example, may have difficulty borrowing from lenders that require prospective borrowers to provide several years of financial statements with their loan applications. Similarly, certain types of businesses, such as restaurants, generally are considered more risky than businesses engaged in other industries. Given the complexity of small business lending and the various factors evaluated in making loans to small businesses, it would be challenging to design a system for collecting, reporting, and publicly disclosing the personal characteristics of small business owners and other relevant information that would be useful for identifying possible discriminatory practices in small business lending. In addition, the costs to industry for implementing such a system could be quite significant. ConclusionThe Board is committed to addressing racial and ethnic gaps in the availability and affordability of credit. The availability of HMDA data has provided transparency in the mortgage market and spurred efforts to address racial and ethnic disparities. A similar requirement to collect, report, and publicly disclose race, ethnicity, and sex data for other types of lending, such as small business and auto lending, could possibly enhance fair lending enforcement. However, such a requirement would be challenging to implement, especially given the complexity of small business lending, and could impose significant costs on lenders. Just as Congress required the collection, reporting, and public disclosure of applicant characteristic data in HMDA for mortgage loans, we believe that a decision about establishing a comparable collection, reporting, and public disclosure requirement for non-mortgage loans is also a decision for Congress to make. Footnotes 1.Congress added the self-test privilege to ECOA in 1996 as a way to encourage creditors to assess voluntarily the level or effectiveness of their compliance with ECOA and Regulation B. A self-test is a program, practice, or study designed and used by the creditor specifically to determine compliance with ECOA. A report or result of the self-test is privileged and may not be obtained or used in an examination or investigation, or in any proceeding or lawsuit alleging a violation of ECOA or Regulation B.Return to text 2.After receiving an agency referral, DOJ reviews the matter and decides if further investigation is warranted. A DOJ investigation may result in a public civil enforcement action or settlement. DOJ may decide instead to return the matter to the Board for administrative enforcement. If a matter is returned to the Board for administrative enforcement, the Federal Reserve ensures that the bank corrects the problems and makes amends to the victims.Return to text 3.ECOA generally prohibits creditors from considering age when evaluating creditworthiness, except that a creditor may consider the age of an applicant 62 years or older in the applicant's favor.Return to text
Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Christopher Cox and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Chairman Ben Bernanke today signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) between the two agencies that will deepen their information sharing and cooperation, permitting both agencies to better perform their responsibilities.Under the MOU between the two agencies, the SEC and the Board would share information and cooperate across a number of important areas of common interest, including anti-money laundering, bank brokerage activities under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, clearance and settlement in the banking and securities industries, and the regulation of transfer agents. The MOU specifically covers bank holding companies and so-called Consolidated Supervised Entities that own securities firms. It builds on and formalizes the long-standing cooperative arrangements between the SEC and the Board, as well as the more recent cooperation on matters including banking and investment banking capital and liquidity following the Board's emergency opening of credit facilities to primary dealers."I am pleased with this agreement," said Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke. "It formalizes and strengthens the ongoing cooperation between our two agencies to enhance the stability of the financial system. I look forward to continuing this productive collaboration with Chairman Cox and his staff.""This agreement represents a valuable coordination of the roles of the SEC and the Fed in our capital markets," said SEC Chairman Cox. "Years ago, when the dividing lines between commercial and investment banking were bright, the high level of coordination we are establishing today was not a priority for the U.S. government. But today, the interconnectedness of mortgage and lending markets, credit derivatives, securitizations, and counterparty relationships requires the U.S. government to adopt a more coherent and coordinated approach. Just as with our similar arrangement with the CFTC, this agreement will permit the expanded sharing of information on a confidential basis, and help ensure that regulated entities receive a coherent message from Uncle Sam. This is smart government. We look forward to enhancing our collaborative relationship with the Fed within the formal framework covered by the agreement."The MOU will improve the ability of the SEC to perform its role as primary supervisor of Consolidated Supervised Entities and Primary Dealers, and improve the ability of the Federal Reserve to perform its role in overseeing the stability of the financial system. The importance of this deepened cooperation is highlighted by the recent stress in the financial markets affecting commercial and investment banks, as well as many other market participants.The SEC recently entered into a similar MOU with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. An agreement between the SEC and the Department of Labor is anticipated later this summer.
On July 14, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $75 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Stop-out rate:2.300 percentTotal propositions submitted:$93.344 billionTotal propositions accepted:$75.000 billionBid/cover ratio:1.24Number of bidders:82 Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 10.77% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on July 17, 2008, and will mature on August 14, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by noon EDT on July 15, 2008. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on July 15, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On July 28, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $75 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Stop-out rate:2.350 percentTotal propositions submitted:$90.555 billionTotal propositions accepted:$75.000 billionBid/cover ratio:1.21Number of bidders:70 Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 24.75% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on July 31, 2008, and will mature on August 28, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by noon EDT on July 29, 2008. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on July 29, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On June 30, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $75 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Stop-out rate:2.340 percentTotal propositions submitted:$90.881 billionTotal propositions accepted:$75.000 billionBid/cover ratio:1.21Number of bidders:77 Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 97.49% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on July 3, 2008, and will mature on July 31, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by noon EDT on July 1, 2008. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on July 1, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
The Federal Reserve today announced several steps to enhance the effectiveness of its existing liquidity facilities, including the introduction of longer terms to maturity in its Term Auction Facility. In association with this change, the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank are adapting the maturity of their operations.Federal Reserve ActionsActions taken by the Federal Reserve include:Extension of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) and the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) through January 30, 2009.The introduction of auctions of options on $50 billion of draws on the TSLF.The introduction of 84-day Term Auction Facility (TAF) loans as a complement to 28-day TAF loans.An increase in the Federal Reserve's swap line with the European Central Bank to $55 billion from $50 billion.These actions are described in detail below.Extension of the PDCF and TSLFIn light of continued fragile circumstances in financial markets, the Board has extended the PDCF through January 30, 2009, and the Board and the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) have extended the TSLF through that same date. These facilities would be withdrawn should the Board determine that conditions in financial markets are no longer unusual and exigent.The PDCF provides discount window loans to primary dealers, collateralized by investment-grade securities. The interest rate charged is the primary credit rate (discount rate) of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Under the TSLF, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York conducts weekly auctions of 28-day loans of Treasury securities to primary dealers. Loans under the TSLF are collateralized by a range of government and private securities.Auctions of TSLF OptionsThe FOMC has authorized the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to auction options for primary dealers to borrow Treasury securities from the TSLF. The Federal Reserve intends to offer such options for exercise in advance of periods that are typically characterized by elevated stress in financial markets, such as quarter ends. Under the options program, up to $50 billion of draws on the TSLF using options may be outstanding at any time. This amount is in addition to the $200 billion of Treasury securities that may be offered through the regular TSLF auctions. Draws on the TSLF through exercise of these options may be collateralized by the full range of TSLF Schedule 2 collateral. (Schedule 2 collateral includes Treasury securities, federal agency debt securities, mortgage-backed securities issued or guaranteed by federal agencies, and AAA/Aaa-rated private-label residential mortgage-backed, commercial mortgage-backed, and asset-backed securities.) Additional details of this program will be announced once consultations with the primary dealer community have been completed.Eighty-four-day Term Auction Facility LoansBeginning on August 11, the Federal Reserve will auction 84-day TAF loans while continuing to auction 28-day TAF funds. Specifically, the Federal Reserve will conduct biweekly TAF auctions, alternating between auctions of $75 billion of 28-day credit and auctions of $25 billion of 84-day credit. Currently, the Federal Reserve auctions $75 billion of 28-day funds every two weeks. During a transition period, the amount of 28-day credit being auctioned will be reduced to keep the amount of TAF credit outstanding at $150 billion. A schedule of TAF auctions and applicable terms and conditions can be found athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm.Under the TAF, the Federal Reserve auctions term funds to depository institutions, secured by a wide variety of collateral. All depository institutions that are judged to be in generally sound financial condition by their local Reserve Bank are eligible to participate in TAF auctions.Increase in Swap Line with European Central BankThe European Central Bank (ECB) and the Swiss National Bank (SNB) have informed the Federal Reserve that, in association with the lengthening of the maturity of the Federal Reserve's TAF loans, these central banks will also make 84-day funds, as well as 28-day funds, available at their dollar auctions. The FOMC has authorized an increase in its dollar swap line with the ECB to $55 billion from $50 billion in order to accommodate a temporary increase in the ECB’s dollar auctions as the ECB shifts some of its auctions to 84-day terms. The size of the SNB’s swap line remains at $12 billion. These swap lines are authorized through January 30, 2009.Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central BanksInformation on the actions that will be taken by other central banks is available at the following websites:European Central BankSwiss National Bank (56 KB PDF) The Federal Reserve today announced several steps to enhance the effectiveness of its existing liquidity facilities, including the introduction of longer terms to maturity in its Term Auction Facility. In association with this change, the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank are adapting the maturity of their operations. Federal Reserve ActionsActions taken by the Federal Reserve include: These actions are described in detail below. Extension of the PDCF and TSLFIn light of continued fragile circumstances in financial markets, the Board has extended the PDCF through January 30, 2009, and the Board and the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) have extended the TSLF through that same date. These facilities would be withdrawn should the Board determine that conditions in financial markets are no longer unusual and exigent. The PDCF provides discount window loans to primary dealers, collateralized by investment-grade securities. The interest rate charged is the primary credit rate (discount rate) of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Under the TSLF, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York conducts weekly auctions of 28-day loans of Treasury securities to primary dealers. Loans under the TSLF are collateralized by a range of government and private securities. Auctions of TSLF OptionsThe FOMC has authorized the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to auction options for primary dealers to borrow Treasury securities from the TSLF. The Federal Reserve intends to offer such options for exercise in advance of periods that are typically characterized by elevated stress in financial markets, such as quarter ends. Under the options program, up to $50 billion of draws on the TSLF using options may be outstanding at any time. This amount is in addition to the $200 billion of Treasury securities that may be offered through the regular TSLF auctions. Draws on the TSLF through exercise of these options may be collateralized by the full range of TSLF Schedule 2 collateral. (Schedule 2 collateral includes Treasury securities, federal agency debt securities, mortgage-backed securities issued or guaranteed by federal agencies, and AAA/Aaa-rated private-label residential mortgage-backed, commercial mortgage-backed, and asset-backed securities.) Additional details of this program will be announced once consultations with the primary dealer community have been completed. Eighty-four-day Term Auction Facility LoansBeginning on August 11, the Federal Reserve will auction 84-day TAF loans while continuing to auction 28-day TAF funds. Specifically, the Federal Reserve will conduct biweekly TAF auctions, alternating between auctions of $75 billion of 28-day credit and auctions of $25 billion of 84-day credit. Currently, the Federal Reserve auctions $75 billion of 28-day funds every two weeks. During a transition period, the amount of 28-day credit being auctioned will be reduced to keep the amount of TAF credit outstanding at $150 billion. A schedule of TAF auctions and applicable terms and conditions can be found athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm. Under the TAF, the Federal Reserve auctions term funds to depository institutions, secured by a wide variety of collateral. All depository institutions that are judged to be in generally sound financial condition by their local Reserve Bank are eligible to participate in TAF auctions. Increase in Swap Line with European Central BankThe European Central Bank (ECB) and the Swiss National Bank (SNB) have informed the Federal Reserve that, in association with the lengthening of the maturity of the Federal Reserve's TAF loans, these central banks will also make 84-day funds, as well as 28-day funds, available at their dollar auctions. The FOMC has authorized an increase in its dollar swap line with the ECB to $55 billion from $50 billion in order to accommodate a temporary increase in the ECB’s dollar auctions as the ECB shifts some of its auctions to 84-day terms. The size of the SNB’s swap line remains at $12 billion. These swap lines are authorized through January 30, 2009. Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central Banks Information on the actions that will be taken by other central banks is available at the following websites: European Central Bank Swiss National Bank (56 KB PDF)
The Federal Reserve will conduct two auctions of 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility (TAF) in July. It will offer $75 billion in an auction to be held on Monday, July 14, and $75 billion in an auction to be held on Monday, July 28.
On July 14, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $75 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm).Description of Offering and Auction ParametersOffering Amount:$75 billionTerm:28-day loanBid Submission Date:July 14, 2008Opening Time:11 a.m. EDTClosing Time:1 p.m. EDTNotification Date:July 15, 2008Settlement Date:July 17, 2008Maturity Date:August 14, 2008Minimum Bid Amount (per bid):$5 millionBid Increment:$100,000Maximum Bid Amount (per institution):$7.5 billion (10% of Offering Amount)Minimum Bid Rate:2.01 percentIncremental Bid Rate:0.001 percentMinimum Award:$10,000Maximum Award:$7.5 billion (10% of Offering Amount) Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
On July 28, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $75 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm).Description of Offering and Auction ParametersOffering Amount:$75 billionTerm:28-day loanBid Submission Date:July 28, 2008Opening Time:11 a.m. EDTClosing Time:1 p.m. EDTNotification Date:July 29, 2008Settlement Date:July 31, 2008Maturity Date:August 28, 2008Minimum Bid Amount (per bid):$5 millionBid Increment:$100,000Maximum Bid Amount (per institution):$7.5 billion (10% of Offering Amount)Minimum Bid Rate:2.01 percentIncremental Bid Rate:0.001 percentMinimum Award:$10,000Maximum Award:$7.5 billion (10% of Offering Amount) Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
Governor Randall S. Kroszner Minority Depository Institutions National Conference, Chicago, Illinois Good morning. I am delighted to be here to participate in today's discussion about how we can work together to foster and preserve the strength and vitality of minority depository institutions. These institutions serve essential roles. Most important, they extend credit--which is essential to economic development and progress--to businesses and individuals in neighborhoods that otherwise may not have ready access to loans. They also foster a spirit of entrepreneurship in their communities, offer customized financial literacy education, and create products and services that address their clients' particular needs. Taken together, such activities help entrepreneurs and emerging small businesses develop and create employment, encourage the prudent and productive use of credit, and ensure more-vibrant communities and a better quality of life. In my remarks this morning, I will focus on two important Federal Reserve initiatives. First, I will update you on our new Partnership for Progress program, which is designed to foster and support minority-owned and de novo depository institutions. Second, I plan to discuss the recent finalization of significant Federal Reserve rules implementing certain provisions of the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act. Partnership for ProgressFollowing my promise at last year's interagency conference in Miami, I am excited to announce that we have made good on our pledge to design a proactive training and technical assistance program for minority depository institutions. Our initiative, known as the Partnership for Progress, was launched nationwide on June 18. The innovative outreach and technical assistance program seeks to help minority-owned and de novo institutions confront their unique challenges, cultivate safe and sound practices, and compete more effectively in today's marketplace through a combination of one-on-one guidance, targeted workshops, and an extensive web-based resource and information center. As locally focused institutions that have deep contacts with financial professionals in their regions, the Reserve Banks have been able to ensure that we tailor the Partnership for Progress program as closely as possible to the specific needs of the institutions participating as well as the customers they serve. This program illustrates the advantages of the Federal Reserve System's unique decentralized geographical structure, which consists of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., and the twelve Reserve Banks that each represent a different region of the country. We also consulted with a number of executives from minority depository institutions to better understand the unique challenges that minority-owned depositories confront in raising capital, managing risks, and attracting the right talent. This process has been invaluable in helping us to target our efforts and to focus on designing a program that the minority depository institutions have told us is most crucial to them. In recent months, I have had an opportunity to see firsthand the challenges that communities are facing in various parts of the country, which has underscored to me the importance of programs like Partnership for Progress. I have met with local community groups, bankers, housing advocates, counseling agencies, and state and local government officials in many cities, including Atlanta, Boston, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Las Vegas, Miami, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia. As I planned for my participation in this conference, one example stood out. While in Atlanta, I visited a predominantly African-American community. In this community that spanned several miles, there were a number of vacant homes, conditions mirroring those that I have seen in other neighborhoods. However, what was different in this case, and quite disappointing, was that not a single financial institution was within view. This lack of local financial institution presence is a problem that is not unique to African-American communities. Indeed, this absence occurs far too frequently in predominantly minority communities. Our new program is intended to enhance the vital role that minority-owned institutions can play in making financial services more available and in providing access to credit in historically underserved communities. At the core of our program, we have implemented a series of web-based modules designed to assist banks in addressing three distinctive development stages: (1) starting a bank, (2) managing its transition from a start-up to an established bank, and (3) building shareholder value once a bank has been established on a sound footing. These easy-to-use modules are presented on the program's dedicated website--http://www.fedpartnership.gov/--and are available for your review and use at any time. The first module of the program, "Starting a Bank," provides useful guidance on the factors that must be considered in chartering a new bank. It includes background information that details regulatory capital requirements, discusses the steps required to file an application, and explains the responsibilities of a bank's board of directors. The module has video narratives of some of the key topics to provide additional insights into, for instance, the strategic importance of strong capital for all financial institutions. Since the program was launched, "Start a Bank" has been among the most popular pages on the website. The second module, "Managing Transition," focuses on the benefits that a bank can derive from well-planned growth. Because maintaining competitive products and services is a very important aspect of managing growth, we have included a video clip on how minority depository institutions can use the natural branding inherent in their mission to stay ahead of the competition and differentiate themselves. This module provides some examples of approaches and strategies to establishing a bank that have been successfully followed by other new institutions to achieve stable and profitable performance. The third and final module, "Growing Shareholder Value," is designed to help more-mature institutions achieve an even stronger financial footing and improve shareholder value. This module addresses key topics, such as corporate governance and performance measurement, that can help to ensure that management remains on target with the overall goals of the organization. Given that most minority depository institutions are at this stage of life-cycle development, we expect the topics in this segment, such as "Demographic Analysis," "New Product Implementation," and "Outsourcing and Vendor Management," to be particularly useful. We expect minority institutions will use the program to help them navigate three of the most challenging periods in the life cycle of any financial institution. I expect that the program, which draws on insights from economics, accounting, finance, and regulatory compliance, will become a valuable resource for institutions at different stages of their development. In order to further expand the support that we can offer to these institutions, the Federal Reserve also plans to conduct periodic training sessions for interested participants that will address topics of particular concern and relevance to minority depositories and their bank holding companies. We also have designated Partnership for Progress contacts in each of the twelve Reserve Bank districts and at the Board to answer questions and coordinate assistance for institutions requesting guidance.1I hope that you will consider contacting us for support or to provide additional suggestions for improving this evolving program. We are pleased with the initial feedback we have received since the program's launch and will continue to fine-tune and enhance the program over time. In that respect, we look forward to continuing to work with you to make this exciting program even more effective. Home Ownership and Equity Protection ActI would now like to turn to important new consumer protections that the Federal Reserve Board adopted earlier this week. These new rules, which implement HOEPA, were put into place to protect consumers and to help prevent a recurrence of the problems that we are now facing. The current wave of foreclosures is taking a very real toll on families and their communities, no place more so than in predominantly minority communities, where subprime loans were particularly common. The U.S. mortgage market has seen rapid innovation in recent years. Changes, such as automated underwriting models, the evolution of the secondary markets, and specialization, have had many positive effects. Some changes in practices, however, have not been so salutary. Abusive loans that strip borrowers' equity or cause them to lose their homes should not be tolerated. Too many homeowners and communities are suffering today because of these practices, and the Federal Reserve Board's rules will better protect consumers while preserving their access to credit as they make some of the most important financial decisions of their lives. Last December, the Board proposed changes using our authority under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act. In formulating that proposal, the Board sought a wide range of input and information through hearings and meetings throughout the country. In response, we received, and considered, over 4,500 comment letters sent to us from community groups, industry participants, consumer advocates, and other interested individuals. We engaged in outreach to commenters to get clarification of their concerns and weigh competing viewpoints. We gathered available data and conducted updated analyses. We undertook on-the-ground consumer testing, which has proven to be an invaluable tool for us in determining policy effectiveness, to gauge the practical effects of one of the proposed rules on individual consumers. Listening carefully to the commenters, collecting and analyzing data, and undertaking consumer testing, I believe, have led to more-effective and improved final rules. Our goal throughout this process has been to protect borrowers from practices that are unfair or deceptive and to preserve the availability of credit from responsible mortgage lenders. These rules expand upon interagency guidance issued last year on subprime loans. That guidance, however, only focused on certain specific subprime products, hybrid adjustable-rate mortgages, such as so called 2/28s and 3/27s, and only applied to federally supervised institutions. Our rules now apply much more broadly to cover all higher-priced mortgages, including virtually all closed-end subprime loans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling, and to all mortgage originators. These rules also cover a broad range of issues: I'd now like to focus in more detail on some key features of this wide-ranging set of rules and discuss a few of the most important changes that we have made since our proposal this past December because I think they are illustrative of how we approached these issues. On one issue, loan affordability, we proposed a rule that would have required a lender to make sure that a borrower could afford the monthly payments before a loan is made. This step sounds like common sense, but unfortunately, as some loan originators pushed off more and more of the risk to investors, they made increasingly riskier loans to people who simply could not afford them. So we proposed a rule to address that problem, and it spelled out how a lender should assess this ability to repay, building on the earlier interagency guidance on subprime loans. Lenders would have violated the proposed rule if they engaged in a pattern or practice of making loans without considering consumers' repayment ability. During the public notice period, we received a number of comments on the "pattern or practice" element of the proposed rule, and we conducted further outreach to both consumer advocates and industry participants. Many advocates objected to this heavy burden of proof, calling into question the effectiveness of the intended consumer protection. Some mortgage lenders, however, suggested that the "pattern or practice" provision did not provide a safe harbor that would ensure compliance and that their procedures for compliance would, by necessity, be equally robust under either version of the rule. At the end of the day, we agreed that this provision would have limited the intended effectiveness of the rule and that removing it, along with clarifying other requirements, would not impede the availability of credit to borrowers. Accordingly, the final rule establishes a lender's responsibility to assess a borrower's ability to repay oneveryloan originated, effectively giving wronged consumers a private right of action without demonstrating that their case was part of a broader pattern. In addition, the new rule requires that the lender take into account future, predictable changes in payments in determining repayment ability. A lender complies, in part, by assessing repayment ability based on the highest scheduled payment in the first seven years of the loan. For example, on a 5-1 ARM with a payment for the first five years based on a discounted interest rate, the lender would use the scheduled payment in the sixth and seventh years, which is based on the fully indexed rate. Another element of our proposal that received many comments was a rule limiting prepayment penalties. On the one hand, numerous commenters argued that prepayment penalties can result in lower interest rates paid by the borrower. Although there are exceptions I will mention in a moment, a number of studies have found that loans with prepayment penalties carry lower rates or annual percentage rates (APRs) than loans without prepayment penalties having similar credit risk characteristics.2On the other hand, the rate benefit was called into question by many, who asserted that prepayment penalties may lock borrowers into unaffordable loans, particularly adjustable-rate loans whose payments may change dramatically. Prepayment penalties were also criticized because of the way they reinforce another potentially abusive practice--yield spread premiums, or YSPs. Some lenders' rate sheets show that mortgage brokers can earn bigger YSPs, which are essentially commissions, by increasing consumers' interest rates, and the biggest increases are allowed only if a loan contains a prepayment penalty. After an exhaustive analysis of the issue and all available data, the Board concluded that the costs and benefits of prepayment penalty provisions on higher-priced mortgages depend, to an important extent, on the structure of the loan. It has been common in the subprime market to structure loans to have a short expected life span. This aim has been achieved by building in a significant payment increase just a few years after loan consummation. With respect to subprime loans designed to have shorter life spans, the injuries from prepayment provisions are potentially the most serious as well as the most difficult for a reasonable consumer to avoid. Moreover, according to research, the rate reduction for a prepayment penalty provision on such short-lived loans is smaller and, in absolute terms, quite limited. For these loans, therefore, the Board concluded that the injuries caused by prepayment penalty provisions outweigh their benefits, and we did ban them for these loans--specifically, loans in which the principal-and-interest payment can change within the first four years. With respect to subprime loans structured to have longer expected life spans, however, the Board concluded that the potential for harm from prepayment penalties is lower relative to potential benefits, warranting restrictions but not a ban. Our analyses indicate that for fixed-rate loans, borrowers can obtain meaningful interest-rate reductions on loans that contain provisions for prepayment penalties, and performance on these loans has typically been superior. These factors generally reduce the negative impact of prepayment penalties, so for these loans, we added a restriction limiting the length of the prepayment penalty period to no more than two years. Another change has to do with how we define the loans that we most want to cover. Our principal goal was to cover the vast bulk of the subprime market, where most of the problems have been and where consumers may need the most protection. The challenge is that there is no one accepted definition of what makes a loan "subprime." We anticipated, and received, a number of comments about this problem and sought solutions. We looked at available sources of data on mortgage rates and concluded that the best source for our purposes is a survey called the Primary Mortgage Market Survey®, published by Freddie Mac. The Federal Reserve will publish our own index, called the "average prime offer rate," that will be based on Freddie's survey and other market data, and if we need to adjust the index over time, we can. We will still cover nearly all of the subprime market plus a sizable fraction of the so-called Alt-A market, as we intended with our initial proposal, but the new approach will do so in a more accurate and consistent way, and therefore better ensure that we protect at-risk consumers without impinging on the prime market. Protecting borrowers with responsible underwriting standards can also provide a broader benefit of enhancing the integrity and proper functioning of the mortgage market by increasing investor confidence. Ensuring that ability to repay by underwriting and documenting income, for example, can help to reduce investor uncertainty about the performance of mortgage-backed securities. Effective consumer protection thus can produce a complementary benefit for consumers by helping to revive mortgage funding markets and potentially improving credit availability. Finally, I'd like to highlight one other change that shows how hard it can sometimes be to craft solutions that work. In December, we proposed a rule that we hoped would address some of the problems posed by YSPs. The heart of the rule involved an agreement that the broker and borrower would sign early on that would spell out the broker's compensation and how they are paid. As the public comment period was under way, we began consumer testing to see how this process would actually work. We engaged a firm that specializes in this testing and conducted a rapid round of tests this spring with individual consumers. The firm developed and tested a form in which the broker would agree to total compensation and make certain disclosures that we thought would help consumers make informed decisions. Throughout the testing, revisions were made to the form in an effort to improve comprehension. The testing revealed two problems. The first problem is that many participants believed, after reading the disclosure, that the broker would be obliged to find them the lowest interest rate and best terms available, which is not true. The second problem was that many participants came to believe that working through a broker would cost them more than working directly with a lender, which is not necessarily true either. The firm tried to correct these misunderstandings, but no matter what it did to change the language, the forms continued to confuse consumers more than inform them. Our consumer testing led us to the conclusion that our approach was not serving its intent--that is, to better inform consumers. We are continuing to try to find an approach that would be effective, but we did not want to hold up all the other consumer protections while we worked on it. As a result, we decided to withdraw the proposed provision on mortgage broker compensation, and we will continue to explore other approaches as part of the ongoing update of our mortgage rules already under way. Some may have preferred that we stick with our proposal, but creating a rule that informed consumers in theory, but only served to confuse them in practice, would have helped no one. ConclusionIn closing, I would like to underscore the Federal Reserve's commitment to preserving and supporting minority depository institutions. I look forward to continuing our constructive dialogue on finding the best and most practical ways to address the challenges that these banks confront. I am confident that we will be successful in ensuring that these companies remain strong and continue to provide critical financial support to their communities. I also want to stress that finalizing our HOEPA rules does not represent the end of our efforts to improve transparency and consumer protections in mortgage lending. We will continue to work diligently to determine how best to address the issue of yield spread premiums. Further, we will collaborate with our partner agencies to enforce these rules and to monitor their impact on the market to ensure that they are effective in achieving their goals of protecting borrowers from abusive practices and preserving the availability of credit from responsible mortgage lenders. Footnotes 1.On thePartnership for Progressprogram website.Return to text 2.Chris Mayer, Tomasz Piskorski, and Alexei Tchistyi (2008), "The Inefficiency of Refinancing: Why Prepayment Penalties Are Good for Risky Borrowers (357 KB PDF),"; Gregory Elliehausen, Michael E. Staten, and Jevgenijs Steinbuks (2008), "The Effect of Prepayment Penalties on the Pricing of Subprime Mortgages,"Journal of Economics and Business, vol. 60 (Jan.-Feb.), pp. 33-46; Michael LaCour-Little (2007), "Prepayment Penalties in Residential Mortgage Contracts: A Cost-Benefit Analysis," unpublished paper, January; Richard F. DeMong and James E. Burroughs, (2005), "Prepayment Fees Lead to Lower Interest Rates (64 KB PDF),";but seeKeith S. Ernst (2005), "Borrowers Gain No Interest Rate Benefits from Prepayment Penalties on Subprime Mortgages,"research report, (Durham, NC: Center for Responsible Lending, January), http://www.responsiblelending.org/pdfs/rr005-PPP_Interest_Rate-0105.pdf.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's Forum on Mortgage Lending for Low and Moderate Income Households, Arlington, Virginia I would like to thank Chairman Bair for inviting me to address this conference on mortgage lending to low- and moderate-income households. The decision to own a home is one of the most important decisions that families make. Whether owning a home is the right choice for a particular individual (or family) depends on many factors specific to the individual. However, for those who are willing and financially prepared to undertake homeownership, we look to our financial system to provide access to mortgage credit in ways appropriately tailored to each borrower's needs. Unfortunately, in the past few years, many mortgage loans were extended that were poorly underwritten or whose terms were inadequately disclosed, particularly in the subprime market. As you know, those poor lending practices have contributed to a sharp increase in mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures. The resulting costs have been felt not only by borrowers but also by entire communities, as foreclosure clusters have caused neighborhoods to deteriorate and reduced municipal tax bases. The decline in the national housing market, which has been a major cause of the broader slowdown in economic activity, was in turn greatly exacerbated by the collapse of subprime lending. And financial institutions have suffered large losses, with implications for the cost and availability of new credit. The recent experience, including the broader turmoil we have seen in the financial markets, will have--indeed, is already having--important consequences for U.S. regulatory policy. First, regulators are taking action to strengthen consumer protections. Next week, the Federal Reserve Board will issue new rules on mortgage lending, using its authorities under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act. These new rules, which will apply to all lenders and not just banks, will address some of the problems that have surfaced in recent years in mortgage lending, especially high-cost mortgage lending. We received many helpful comments on our proposal and we incorporated a number of them into the final rules. In another effort to protect consumers, the Board has also recently issued proposals to substantially improve credit card disclosures and to address a number of unfair or deceptive acts and practices in credit card lending. Second, regulatory policy can help to ensure that mortgage credit is available to qualified borrowers, including those of low and moderate incomes. In particular, I welcome recent efforts to improve the regulatory oversight of the government-sponsored enterprises, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. If these firms are strong, well-regulated, well-capitalized, and focused on their mission, they will be better able to serve their function of increasing access to mortgage credit, without posing undue risks to the financial system or the taxpayer. Policymakers are also discussing the modernization of the Federal Housing Administration and the expansion of the products and programs it might offer to make mortgage credit available and to help prevent avoidable foreclosures. Third, instability in our financial system over the past year or so has importantly affected the availability and terms of credit and the pace of economic growth. Thus, beyond actions focused on mortgage markets, regulators must consider what can be done to make the U.S. financial system itself more stable, without compromising the dynamism and innovation that has been its hallmark. Several bodies, including the President's Working Group (PWG) in the United States and the international Financial Stability Forum, have recently issued comprehensive reports on the lessons of the financial turmoil with recommendations for regulators and the private sector. Many of these recommendations are being implemented, including more stringent regulation of mortgage lending (recommended by the PWG), strengthening of regulatory capital and liquidity management requirements for banks, reforms of the credit rating agencies, and others. The Federal Reserve has been actively involved in developing and implementing these necessary reforms. In the remainder of my remarks, I would like to discuss this more general issue of promoting financial stability, including some of the lessons learned, what the Federal Reserve is already doing, and how we as a society might wish to go about strengthening our financial system for the future. The Bear Stearns Episode and Its ImplicationsAs you are aware, one of the key events in financial markets in recent months was the near-bankruptcy in March of the investment bank Bear Stearns. The collapse of Bear Stearns was triggered by a run of its creditors and customers, analogous to the run of depositors on a commercial bank. This run was surprising, however, in that Bear Stearns's borrowings were largely secured--that is, its lenders held collateral to ensure repayment even if the company itself failed. However, the illiquidity of markets in mid-March was so severe that creditors lost confidence that they could recoup their loans by selling the collateral. Hence, they refused to renew their loans and demanded repayment. Bear Stearns's contingency planning had not envisioned a sudden loss of access to secured funding, so it did not have adequate liquidity to meet those demands for repayment. If a sale of the firm could not have been arranged, it would have filed for bankruptcy. Our analyses persuaded us and our colleagues at the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Treasury that allowing Bear Stearns to fail so abruptly at a time when the financial markets were already under considerable stress would likely have had extremely adverse implications for the financial system and for the broader economy. In particular, Bear Stearns' failure under those circumstances would have seriously disrupted certain key secured funding markets and derivatives markets and possibly would have led to runs on other financial firms. To protect the financial system and the economy, the Federal Reserve facilitated the acquisition of Bear Stearns by the commercial bank JPMorgan Chase. We supplemented our actions regarding Bear Stearns by establishing the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF). Under the PDCF, the Fed stands ready to make fully collateralized loans to the remaining four major investment banks plus other broker-dealers, called primary dealers, that transact regularly with the Federal Reserve.1The Fed also created the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF), which allows primary dealers to borrow Treasury securities using other types of assets as collateral. These new facilities assured the secured creditors of primary dealers that those firms had sufficient access to liquidity, reducing the danger of runs like the one experienced by Bear Stearns. Although short-term funding markets remain strained, they have improved somewhat since March, reflecting the availability of several Fed lending facilities as well as the ongoing efforts of financial firms to repair their balance sheets and increase their liquidity. The PDCF and the TSLF were created under the Federal Reserve's emergency lending powers, with the term of the PDCF set for a period of at least six months, through mid-September. The Federal Reserve is strongly committed to supporting the stability and improved functioning of the financial system. We are currently monitoring developments in financial markets closely and considering several options, including extending the duration of our facilities for primary dealers beyond year-end, should the current unusual and exigent circumstances continue to prevail in dealer funding markets. At the same time, we are taking measures that will serve over time to strengthen the primary dealers, other financial institutions, and the overall financial system. As I will discuss, these measures include working with the SEC and the primary dealers to increase the firms' capital and liquidity buffers and cooperating with other regulators and the private sector to help make the financial infrastructure more resilient. Prudential Regulation and SupervisionIn general, our system relies on market discipline to constrain leverage and risk-taking by financial firms, supplemented by prudential oversight when government guarantees (such as deposit insurance) or risks to general financial stability are involved. However, the enormous losses and writedowns taken at financial institutions around the world since August, as well as the run on Bear Stearns, show that, in this episode, neither market discipline nor regulatory oversight succeeded in limiting leverage and risk-taking sufficiently to preserve financial stability. Working collaboratively with regulators both here and abroad as well as with the firms themselves, the Federal Reserve has redoubled its efforts to strengthen the capital positions, liquidity reserves, and risk-management practices of the institutions for which we have supervisory responsibility, including bank holding companies and state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System. Shareholders, managers, and investors are likewise taking steps to protect their interests in a period of continued market strains. From a regulatory and supervisory perspective, the investment banks and the other primary dealers raise some distinct issues. First, as I noted, neither the firms nor the regulators anticipated the possibility that investment banks would lose access to secured financing, as Bear Stearns did. Second, in the absence of countervailing regulatory measures, the Fed's decision to lend to primary dealers--although it was necessary to avoid serious financial disruptions--could tend to make market discipline less effective in the future. Going forward, the regulation and supervision of these institutions must take account of these realities. At the same time, reforms in the oversight of these firms must recognize the distinctive features of investment banking and take care neither to unduly inhibit efficiency and innovation nor to induce a migration of risk-taking activities to institutions that are less regulated or beyond our borders. Since March, the Federal Reserve has been working closely with the SEC, which is the functional supervisor of each of the primary dealers and the consolidated supervisor of the four large firms that are not affiliated with banks (the so-called investment banks). Federal Reserve examiners are in place at the four investment banks and, along with our SEC colleagues, are monitoring the conditions of the other primary dealers. In cooperation with the SEC and the investment banks themselves, we are evaluating the capital and liquidity positions of these firms with the objective of ensuring that they are strong enough to withstand severe stresses in the financial environment. In the past few months, these firms have raised capital and expanded their liquidity cushions to protect themselves against extreme events. To formalize our effective working relationship, the SEC and the Federal Reserve recently agreed to a memorandum of understanding (MOU). Under the MOU, the SEC and the Fed will freely share information and analyses pertaining to the financial conditions of primary dealers. The two agencies have also agreed to work jointly with the firms to support their continued efforts to strengthen their balance sheets, their liquidity, and their risk-management practices. Fed-SEC cooperation is taking place within the existing statutory framework with the objective of addressing the near-term situation. In the longer term, legislation may be needed to provide a more robust framework for the prudential supervision of investment banks and other large securities dealers. In particular, under current arrangements, the SEC's oversight of the holding companies of the major investment banks is based on a voluntary agreement between the SEC and those firms. Strong holding company oversight is essential and thus, in my view, the Congress should consider requiring consolidated supervision of those firms, providing the regulator the authority to set standards for capital, liquidity holdings, and risk management.2More generally, in the longer term, the Congress should consider whether our current regulatory structure needs to be modernized to address the changes that have occurred in the structure of the financial system, including the enormous growth of nonbank financial institutions and the development of new financial products. Strengthening the Financial InfrastructureThe potential vulnerability of the financial system to the collapse of Bear Stearns was exacerbated by weaknesses in the infrastructure of financial markets. For example, given current arrangements, Bear Stearns' counterparties on thousands of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives contracts would likely have had serious difficulty promptly determining their vulnerability to counterparty losses. Furthermore, their efforts to replace the hedges provided by those contracts would have placed additional pressures on markets that already were quite stressed. Likewise, providers of short-term secured funding through repurchase agreements (repos) and other forms of secured funding, including money market mutual funds and other conservative investors, could have unexpectedly found themselves holding various forms of collateral rather than the liquid funds they were expecting. These investors would probably have been hard-pressed to dispose of this collateral and to manage their liquidity needs in a highly stressed environment. More generally, in this scenario, sharply increased uncertainty about the liquidity and financial strength of a wide range of counterparties would likely have greatly reduced the willingness of financial market participants to engage in normal transactions. The Federal Reserve, together with other regulators and the private sector, is engaged in a broad effort to strengthen the financial infrastructure. In doing so, we aim not only to help make the financial system better able to withstand future shocks but also--by reducing the range of circumstances in which systemic stability concerns might prompt government intervention--to mitigate moral hazard and the problem of "too big to fail."3For example, since September 2005, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has been providing leadership for a major joint initiative by the public and private sectors to improve arrangements for clearing and settling credit default swaps (CDS) and other OTC derivatives. As a result, derivatives dealers and other market participants have taken a number of steps to enhance post-trade processing of CDS, and in 2006, they expanded the effort to OTC equity derivatives. However, the infrastructure for managing these derivatives still is not as efficient or reliable as that for more mature markets, as was evident last summer, when a surge in CDS trading volume greatly increased backlogs of unconfirmed trades. The New York Fed and other supervisors are working with market participants to fundamentally change how CDS and other OTC derivatives are processed by applying increasingly stringent targets and performance standards. They are also emphasizing that dealers must demonstrate their capability to adequately manage the failure of a major counterparty, including calculating exposures rapidly, having clear management procedures, and conducting internal stress exercises. Finally, they are encouraging the development of well-regulated and prudently managed central counterparty clearing arrangements for CDS trades. The Federal Reserve and other authorities also are focusing on enhancing the resilience of the tri-party repo markets, in which the primary dealers and other large banks and broker-dealers obtain very large amounts of secured financing from money funds and other short-term, risk-averse investors. For some time we have been working with market participants to develop a contingency plan should there ever occur a loss of confidence in either of the two clearing banks that facilitate the settlement of tri-party repos. Recent experience, including Bear Stearns' liquidity problems, demonstrates the need for additional measures to enhance the resilience of these markets, including the development of contingency plans for dealing with the sudden loss of confidence in a large tri-party borrower. Given the critical role that these markets play in our financial system, we need to proceed in a prudent manner in making changes, especially as long as the broader financial markets are experiencing stress. Nonetheless, over time, a stronger financial system may require changes in the way borrowers and lenders use these markets, as well as in the settlement infrastructure operated by the clearing banks. More generally, both the operational performance under stress of key payment and settlements systems and their ability to manage counterparty and market risks are critical to the stability of the broader financial system. Currently, the Federal Reserve relies on a patchwork of authorities, largely derived from our role as a banking supervisor, as well as on moral suasion to help ensure that the various payments and settlements systems have the necessary procedures and controls in place to manage their risks. By contrast, most major central banks around the world have an explicit statutory basis for their oversight of payment systems, and in recent years a growing number of central banks have been given statutory authority to oversee securities settlement systems as well. Given how important robust payment and settlement systems are to financial stability, a strong case can be made for granting the Federal Reserve explicit oversight authority for systemically important payment and settlement systems. Preventing or Mitigating Future CrisesThe financial turmoil is ongoing, and our efforts today are concentrated on helping the financial system return to more normal functioning. It is not too soon, however, to begin to think about the steps we might take to reduce the incidence and severity of future crises. I have already noted the importance of strengthening capital, liquidity, and risk management at major financial institutions, including both commercial banks and investment banks. These efforts are already underway on a globally coordinated basis. Together with the improvements to the financial infrastructure I have just discussed, these steps should increase the resilience of the financial system in the face of shocks. As I have noted, I believe that the Federal Reserve's actions to facilitate the acquisition of Bear Stearns, thereby preventing its bankruptcy and the disorderly liquidation of positions by its counterparties and creditors, were necessary and warranted to head off serious damage to the U.S. financial system and our economy. That said, the intended purpose of Federal Reserve lending is to provide liquidity to sound institutions. We used our lending powers to facilitate an acquisition of a failing institution only because no other tools were available to the Federal Reserve or any other government body for ensuring an orderly liquidation in a fragile market environment. As part of its review of how best to increase financial stability, and as has been suggested by Secretary Paulson, the Congress may wish to consider whether new tools are needed for ensuring an orderly liquidation of a systemically important securities firm that is on the verge of bankruptcy, together with a more formal process for deciding when to use those tools. Because the resolution of a failing securities firm might have fiscal implications, it would be appropriate for the Treasury to take a leading role in any such process, in consultation with the firm's regulator and other authorities. The details of any such tools and of the associated decisionmaking process require more study. As Chairman Bair recently pointed out, one possible model is the process currently in place under the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA) for dealing with insolvent commercial banks. The FDICIA procedures give the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) the authority to act as a receiver for an insolvent bank and to set up a bridge bank to facilitate an orderly liquidation of the firm. A bridge bank authority is an important mechanism for minimizing public losses from government intervention while imposing losses on shareholders and unsecured creditors, thereby limiting moral hazard and mitigating any adverse impact of government intervention on market discipline. The FDICIA law also requires that failing banks be resolved in a way that imposes the least cost to the government (in this case, to the deposit insurance fund), unless the Treasury, the FDIC, the Federal Reserve Board, and the President agree that following the least-cost route would entail significant systemic risk. The hurdle for using the so-called systemic risk exception is appropriately high, but the flexibility to respond in a true financial emergency is retained. Designing analogous rules for the prompt and orderly resolution of securities firms is not straightforward, as these firms differ significantly from most commercial banks in their financing, business models, and in other ways.4Despite the complexities of designing a resolution regime for securities firms, I believe it is worth the effort. In particular, by setting a high bar for such actions, the adverse effects on market discipline could be minimized. Another possible step to reduce the incidence and severity of financial crises, recently proposed in the Treasury blueprint for regulatory reform, would be to task the Federal Reserve with promoting the overall stability of financial markets. To some extent, the Fed already plays that role, and indeed its founding in 1913 was prompted largely by the desire of the Congress to address the problem of recurring financial panics. In recent decades, the Federal Reserve has figured prominently in the government's attempts to address a range of financial crises, in part because of the broad expertise derived from the Fed's wide range of activities. Moreover, the Fed is the only agency that has the power to serve as a liquidity provider of last resort, a power that has proved critical in financial crises throughout history. That said, holding the Fed more formally accountable for promoting financial stability makes sense only if the institution's powers are consistent with its responsibilities. In particular, as a practical matter, I do not think that the Fed could fully meet these objectives without the authority to directly examine banks and other financial institutions that are subject to prudential regulation. During the recent financial turmoil, the ability of the Fed to obtain information directly from key institutions and from supervisory reviews has been invaluable for understanding financial developments and their implications for the economy. To fulfill its responsibilities, the Fed would also need to have the ability to look at financial firms as a whole, much as we do today when we exercise our umbrella authority over financial holding companies, and the authority to set expectations and require corrective actions as warranted in cases in which firms' actions have potential implications for financial stability. Finally, to identify financial vulnerabilities, the Fed would need general authority to collect information on the structure and workings of financial markets. In particular, the recent experience has clearly illustrated the importance, for the purpose of promoting financial stability, of having detailed information about money markets and the activities of borrowers and lenders in those markets. If the Congress chooses to go in this direction, attention should be paid to the risk that market participants might incorrectly view the Fed as a source of unconditional support for financial institutions and markets, which could lead to an unacceptable reduction in market discipline. If the Federal Reserve's formal mandate were broadened to encompass financial stability, it would be particularly important to make clear that any government intervention to avoid the disorderly liquidation of firms on the verge of bankruptcy should use clearly defined tools and processes, along the lines I discussed earlier. ConclusionThe financial turmoil since August underscores the need to find ways to make the financial system more resilient and stable. In my remarks today, I have noted several broad areas in which constructive work might be done, including improving the regulation and supervision of financial institutions, strengthening the financial infrastructure, and the possible development of a new resolution process for securities firms. In the longer term, it is up to the Congress to determine whether still broader reforms are needed. Making that determination will raise a host of complex and challenging issues, but the stakes are commensurately high. Financial crises have occurred periodically around the world for literally hundreds of years, and it is unrealistic to hope that they can be entirely eliminated, especially while maintaining a dynamic and innovative financial system. Nonetheless, recent experience has illustrated once again that financial instability can have serious economic costs. The Federal Reserve will continue its efforts to make our financial system stronger and more resilient, so that it can continue to play its necessary role of supporting economic growth and making credit available to all qualified borrowers. Footnotes 1.Primary dealers are banks and securities broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. On behalf of the Federal Reserve System, the New York Fed's Open Market Desk engages in the trades to implement monetary policy.Return to text 2.Bank-affiliated primary dealers are already subject to mandatory consolidated supervision, but the focus of that supervision has been on limiting risks to the banks and other insured depository institutions within the holding company. Existing provisions may need to be modified to provide regulatory authority to assess and limit risks to all functionally regulated entities, including securities subsidiaries, as well.Return to text 3.On the problem of "too big to fail," see for example Gary Stern and Ron Feldman (2004),Too Big to Fail: The Hazards of Bank Bailouts, Washington: Brookings Institution Press.Return to text 4.For example, many securities firms book a large share of their assets at affiliates of the broker-dealer, including affiliates abroad that are subject to foreign bankruptcy laws.Return to text
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the Caesarea Forum of the Israel Democracy Institute, Eliat, Israel It is a great pleasure to be back in Israel. I last was here in 1971 and can see that much has changed since then. And it is a great honor to be introduced by the professor who taught me monetary theory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the 1970s. Let me also say that over the past year, as we at the Federal Reserve have had to deal with the recent problems in financial markets, I have gained an even deeper appreciation for the many contributions you made as the first deputy managing director of the International Monetary Fund, guiding its response to the Mexican crisis, the Russian default, the Asian crisis, the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management, Brazil's devaluation, and the early stages of the Argentine crisis. Your expertise in managing financial crises is surely unparalleled, and having you in the central banking world right now helps us all sleep better at night. As you well know, financial markets in the United States and Europe have been under considerable strain for almost a year now. Speaking as a central banker soon to return to the relatively tranquil ivory tower of Columbia University, I don't think it is far off the mark to characterize the turmoil of the past year as one of the worst financial shocks that the United States has confronted since the Great Depression. However, although the U.S. economy clearly has slowed, aggressive actions by the Federal Reserve and other central banks as well as fiscal stimulus have helped us weather the storm better than we would have otherwise. Let me start with a brief overview of the financial market turmoil, and then I'll briefly discuss what central banks have done to help restore health to the financial system. Finally, I'll turn to the implications for monetary policy and the economic outlook.1 The Financial TurmoilWell-functioning financial markets are crucial to maximizing sustainable economic growth because they channel funds to the people with the most productive investment opportunities. However, financial markets can do their job well only when they solve information problems that would otherwise impede the efficient allocation of credit to worthy borrowers. The history of financial development can be characterized as a process in which innovation tends to lead to improvements in the quality of information, and this, in turn, enables new financial products and markets to develop. Indeed, in the past decade or so, technological innovations and financial market liberalization improved the flow of information and capital to broader groups of people. For example, the microfinance revolution in developing countries has made capital available to many poor, small entrepreneurs. In the United States, financial innovation has recently manifested itself partly in the development of the market for subprime mortgages. While that market had serious weaknesses that eventually imposed large costs on many borrowers and their communities, it also brought considerable benefits to many others who were able to take advantage of responsible products never before available. As a result, they found themselves far better off financially than they probably would have been otherwise. As this recent experience suggests, financial liberalization and innovation bring many benefits but can also create information and incentive problems that lead to mistakes. When mistakes of this nature become evident, financial markets can seize up, with potentially significant adverse consequences for the economy. Advances in information technology and financial innovations in recent decades encouraged new lending products and faster securitization of debt. This lowered transaction costs and contributed to a "democratization of credit"--that is, the extension of credit to a wider spectrum of possible borrowers than in the past. In the United States, a potential customer with an Internet connection could quickly fill out an online form, and a mortgage broker could rapidly price a loan with the help of credit-scoring technology. The resulting mortgages were bundled together to produce mortgage-backed securities, which could then be sold off to investors. Advances in financial engineering took the securitization process even further by carving mortgage-backed securities into more-complicated structured products, such as collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), or even CDOs of CDOs, with an eye to tailoring the credit risks of various types of assets to risk profiles desired by different kinds of investors. All seemed well as long as the economy‑‑particularly, the housing market‑‑was booming, and credit became more and more available. But when the housing market turned down, substantial problems were exposed. The subprime crisis exposed problems with the securitization of mortgages. In particular, it became painfully clear how poor the underwriting and credit-risk analysis were for a wide range of products. Some appraisers, brokers, and investment banks were motivated by transaction fees and had little stake in the ultimate performance of the loans they helped to arrange. Many securitized products were complex, and the ownership structure of the underlying assets was opaque. Investors relied heavily on credit ratings instead of conducting due diligence themselves, and credit rating agencies failed to fulfill their raison d'etre. The result has been rising defaults, particularly in the subprime mortgage markets, with losses to both investors and financial institutions. The ultimate losses from the recent residential mortgage-market meltdown have been estimated by Wall Street analysts at about $500 billion--less than 3 percent of the outstanding $22 trillion in U.S. equities.2Why did a relatively small amount of losses on subprime mortgage loans lead to such broad-based financial disruption? After all, a 3 percent decline in stock market prices sometimes happens on a daily basis with hardly a ripple in the U.S. economy. In part, the outsized impact of mortgage losses on broader financial markets probably stems from the fact that they exposed a more extensive set of problems in financial intermediation that were not limited to the original subprime loans. The liquidity shock that hit us in August has been described by one of my colleagues as a global margin call on virtually all leveraged positions.3The liquidity shock quickly brought an end to the credit boom that preceded it, as a striking loss of confidence in credit ratings and an accompanying revaluation of risks led investors to pull back from a wide range of securities, especially structured credit products. Along the way, the inadequacies of the business models of many large financial institutions were exposed, and these models are now in the process of significant re-examination and rehabilitation. As has happened in the past, the long-run benefits of financial innovations were easier to anticipate than the problems. The originate-to-distribute model of securitization, unfortunately, created some severe incentive problems--or agency problems--in which the agent (the originator of the loans) did not have the incentives to act fully in the interest of the principal (the ultimate holder of the loan). Notably, the incentive structures often tied originator revenue to loan volume rather than to the quality of the loans being passed up the chain. These agency problems resulted in lower underwriting standards, giving borrowers with weaker financial positions access to larger loans than they should have had. Investors in mortgage-backed securities apparently ignored the importance of these agency problems and did not adequately understand the risk characteristics of the securities they were holding. The practices in place to align the incentives of the originators, securitizers, and resecuritizers with the underlying risks proved to be woefully inadequate. In retrospect, it is clear that investors were too reliant on credit ratings: Because many of the securities were rated very highly by the credit rating agencies, investors did not understand the underlying risk and had a false sense of safety. Many structured finance products experienced multiple-tier downgrades, a development that is unheard of for more traditional securities such as corporate bonds. This episode was a jarring wake-up call to investors regarding the risk properties of all structured finance products. The credit ratings agencies' failure to correctly assess these underlying risks further undermined investor confidence and worsened market worries about when the next shoe might drop. When these problems came to light, investors--including leveraged financial institutions--took large losses as the values of mortgage-related assets were marked down in anticipation of higher defaults on the underlying collateral. The market for newly issued subprime and alt-A mortgage-backed securities virtually closed, and the availability of jumbo mortgages dried up. Banks were caught with assets they couldn't securitize, which put further pressure on their capital positions. Central Bank ActionsAs the liquidity crisis began in August, central banks immediately responded by pumping large amounts of funds into overnight markets. The Federal Reserve conducted several large operations in the federal funds market, and the European Central Bank (ECB) conducted special operations to inject overnight liquidity at the same time, as did the Bank of Japan, the Bank of Canada, and many other central banks. The Federal Open Market Committee also began to ease monetary policy in September as it grew concerned about the impact that the contraction in housing activity and a possible credit crunch could have on economic growth more broadly. These actions quickly brought overnight interest rates down, but financial institutions remained reluctant to lend to each other for any but the very shortest maturities, prompting central banks to take several extraordinary steps to help support longer-term funding markets. Many central banks increased their longer-maturity lending and expanded the set of assets they accepted as collateral to further help banks that found themselves with suddenly illiquid assets. The ECB, which had regularly auctioned longer-term funds, increased both the size and frequency of those auctions. The Bank of England and the Bank of Canada conducted similar term funding operations in their own currencies. The Federal Reserve announced the creation of the Term Auction Facility (TAF) to provide secured term funding to eligible depository institutions, and it also established swap lines with the ECB and the Swiss National Bank, which provided dollar funds that those central banks could lend in their jurisdictions. As market conditions once again worsened in March and investors pulled back from lending against all but the safest assets, the Federal Reserve established the Term Securities Lending Facility, which allows primary dealers to swap a range of less-liquid assets for Treasury securities in the Federal Reserve's portfolio for terms of about one month.4The Bank of England introduced a similar type of facility in April as the U.K. mortgage market showed increasing signs of stress, unveiling a plan to swap securities backed by mortgages for government bonds for a period of up to three years. Finally, when the liquidity position of Bear Stearns deteriorated rapidly in mid-March, the Federal Reserve, in close consultation with the Treasury Department, judged that it was appropriate to use its emergency authority to provide secured funding to Bear Stearns through JPMorgan Chase. To address liquidity at other primary dealers, the Federal Reserve again used its emergency lending authority to create the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF), which provides a backstop source of liquidity to primary dealers similar to that available to depository institutions through the discount window. Borrowing from the PDCF to date has been fairly substantial. Weekly-average borrowing levels peaked at about $37 billion in late March but have subsequently declined. In sum, the Federal Reserve and other major central banks have taken aggressive actions that have helped us through some uncharted territory. Well-functioning, liquid financial markets are essential to economic prosperity. Had the Federal Reserve and other central banks not stepped in and acted with appropriate vigor to provide liquidity, the consequences for the real economy very likely would have been quite severe. Public liquidity, however, is only an imperfect substitute for private liquidity. Although it is critical that the Federal Reserve acts as a lender of last resort when financial stability is threatened, the efficient allocation of capital is best promoted by competitive financial markets and institutions. However, the flow of credit has been impeded by the developments I outlined previously. Financial markets and institutions will be able to resume their proper roles in allocating capital and supporting economic growth only when confidence in them recovers. And it is clear that financial institutions have some way to go toward reforming business models and practices. Large financial institutions in the United States and Europe have reported credit losses and asset write-downs amounting to more than $375 billion and have been working to repair their balance sheets by raising new capital from a wide range of sources. This process will take time, but at least we can see some progress. This discussion brings us up to the present moment. The period of extreme stress seems to have abated, and financial markets are showing some tentative signs of revival. Reflecting pressures in short-term bank funding markets, London interbank offered rates over comparable-maturity overnight index swap rates rose to near record highs in March and April; although these spreads remain high by historical standards, they have narrowed somewhat over the past two months, one indication that conditions may be improving. Spreads between yields on corporate bonds and yields on Treasury securities have also narrowed since March, as have spreads on credit default swaps for nonfinancial firms across a wide range of industries. However, significant strains persist. Banks are tightening their lending standards, and conditions could worsen again should the economic outlook deteriorate further. The Economic OutlookLet me now turn to a brief discussion of the current economic outlook and how the financial turmoil we have recently been experiencing has affected it. Unfortunately, just as the problems in financial markets have begun to abate, commodity prices have reached new heights, which clearly could take a toll on the U.S. economy as well as on the economies of our major trading partners. U.S. inflation has risen recently, largely because of these sharp increases in global commodity prices. However, thus far, the high costs of energy and other primary commodities have not led to much increase in core inflation, partly because of slackening domestic demand, and there is little evidence that these costs are feeding a wage-price spiral. Nevertheless, the latest spike up in energy and food prices has raised the upside risk to inflation and inflation expectations, which we are closely monitoring and seeking to contain. In the United States, weakness in the housing market, which has been exacerbated by the financial turmoil, has been a substantial drag on the growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) since early 2006. Declines in real residential investment subtracted about 1 percentage point from the pace of GDP growth last year, and the demand for homes has remained weak so far this year. Residential construction continues to contract, and the overhang of unsold new homes remains quite large relative to sales, although it has not risen too much further in recent months. Different measures tell somewhat different stories, but it seems clear that U.S. home prices began decelerating a while back and have been posting outright declines in recent quarters. Mortgage defaults and foreclosures are at record highs and delinquency rates are at their highest level in 29 years, which could keep downward pressure on prices for some time to come. An adverse feedback loop has emerged in the housing sector, as severe difficulties in the mortgage markets have significantly limited the availability of mortgage finance for many borrowers. The lack of mortgage credit, in turn, appears to have further driven down home sales and contributed to the decline in house prices. However, some of the slowdown in mortgage lending has been warranted. There is a distinction to be made between a normalization of credit conditions from the very easy conditions that prevailed through mid-2007 (which is a good thing from a medium-term perspective) and a full-blown credit crunch in which many clearly qualified borrowers are not provided access to credit. Notably, these sorts of results are also seen in Europe. Surveys by both the ECB and the Bank of England have indicated that banks are tightening lending standards, although credit is still flowing to at least some firms and households. Recent data suggest that the U.S. economy has proved more resilient than some had anticipated. Although the labor market has softened and consumer sentiment has declined sharply since last fall, consumer spending has thus far held up better than expected. The economy should be supported by monetary and fiscal stimulus, a reduced drag from residential construction, further progress in the repair of financial and credit markets, and still-solid demand from abroad. However, the economy faces challenges. With housing construction continuing to decline and energy prices continuing to rise, risks to growth still appear, to my eye, to be to the downside. Households face significant headwinds, including falling house prices, tighter credit, a softer job market, and higher energy prices. Businesses are also facing challenges, including rapidly escalating costs of raw materials and weaker domestic demand, although the strength of foreign demand for U.S. goods and services has offset the slowing of domestic sales to some extent. All that said, we seem to have avoided some of the worst possible outcomes so far. The economy has been quite resilient to the adverse shock from the recent financial turmoil, but the analysis of its sources I outlined earlier suggests that it will take a substantial amount of time to complete the cleanup of the financial mess and to get the financial system fully back on its feet. Although some of the most complex structured-finance products may be gone for good, securitization will only recover fully when new business models solve the agency problems that were inadequately dealt with in recent years. Development of these business models by lenders, dealers, regulators, and the credit rating agencies will take time. Furthermore, in my view, financial institutions, particularly banks, will probably play a crucial role in this process. They have the ability to originate loans and make sure that there are incentives for accurate credit assessment of the underlying risks. To restore the public's faith, they need to show that sufficient mechanisms are in place to reasonably assure investors that financial institutions have the incentives to issue good credits. Only when they have rebuilt the confidence that investors previously had in them will banks be able to distribute securities backed by these loans. There is a catch in all of this, however. Financial institutions cannot expand their activities in these markets without having the capital to do so. Unfortunately, the losses they have experienced recently have put pressure on their capital positions, and, although they are now actively raising capital, getting sufficient capital to fully take advantage of this new business will take some time. The resulting slow recovery of financial markets that I think is likely suggests that the U.S. economy will be subject to substantial headwinds for some time. Indeed, the situation may be comparable to what happened in the early 1990s when the weakened condition of the banking industry in the United States led to a relatively slow recovery in economic activity. Thus, growth could continue to be quite weak, though I would hope it would pick up next year. As I've already mentioned, the impacts of the events I've been discussing have not been limited to the United States. Although European growth has held up well so far, it now appears to be slowing, in part because the financial strains and rising commodity prices have weighed on consumer and business confidence and have weakened spending, but also as Europe's housing markets cool, especially in the United Kingdom, Ireland, and Spain. The headwinds from the financial turmoil I have described may affect them as well. In addition, monetary policy in Europe has eased considerably less as inflation has continued to rise above central banks' targets, largely driven by continued sharp increases in commodity prices. One important factor behind developments in recent years has been the rapid growth in emerging market economies such as China. On the one hand, rapid growth in Asia has stimulated strong increases in import demand, cushioning the slowdowns in the United States, Europe and Japan, but on the other hand, the rapid growth in demand has pushed up prices for commodities that are in short supply. Thus, inflation rates in many emerging economies have risen sharply. The central banks in most parts of the world are at a crucial juncture: We must all be vigilant to keep inflation expectations anchored and inflation low. ConclusionThe recent financial turmoil has brought the Federal Reserve into uncharted waters. We found it necessary to build some lifeboats, but we seem to have steered clear of the worst weather. The measures taken by the Federal Reserve and other central banks seem to have helped keep the economy afloat, but this episode of financial distress has raised important questions about the structure of financial regulation and the appropriate role of the lender of last resort. We expect to strengthen the financial system with an array of regulatory changes, which includes strengthening of capital and liquidity rules, more disclosure requirements, closer supervision of the measurement and management of firm-wide risks, and steps to increase the transparency and resilience of the financial infrastructure. Private investors and other market participants clearly also have crucial roles to play in strengthening the financial system. While the current turmoil is not yet over, we have seen some signs of improvement. We have learned much from this episode. I am confident that it will be studied for some time to come, and that we will forge a better financial system as a result. ReferencesGreenlaw, David, Jan Hatzius, Anil K. Kashyap, and Hyun Song Shin (2008). "Leveraged Losses: Lessons from the Mortgage Market Meltdown (203 KB PDF),"presentation delivered at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 29. Warsh, Kevin (2008). "Financial Market Turmoil and the Federal Reserve: The Plot Thickens," speech delivered at the New York University School of Law Global Economic Policy Forum, New York, April 14. Footnotes 1.David Bowman,Fang Cai,Linda Kole,Michael Palumbo, andDan Sichel, members of the Board's staff, contributed to the preparation of these remarks. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of other members of the Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.These figures are taken from Greenlaw and others (2008).Return to text 3.Warsh (2008).Return to text 4.Primary dealers are banks and securities broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. On behalf of the Federal Reserve System, the New York Fed's Open Market Desk engages in the trades to implement monetary policy.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings on May 19 and June 23, 2008.The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesdayreleased the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on June 24-25, 2008. A summaryof economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidentsfor the June 24-25, 2008 meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes.The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are madeavailable three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in theBoard's Annual Report. Summaries of economic projections are released on an approximatelyquarterly schedule. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in theseminutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information thatwas available to the Committee at the time of the meeting.The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's web site athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. Minutes of Federal Open Market CommitteeJune 24-25, 2008:310 KB PDF|HTML
Patrick M. Parkinson, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics Before the Subcommittee on Securities, Insurance, and Investment, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Chairman Reed, Ranking Member Allard, and members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to appear today to discuss the over-the-counter (OTC) credit derivatives market. First, I will provide some information on credit derivatives, the markets in which those instruments are traded, the risks that their use entails, and some key practices for managing those risks. Then I will discuss the oversight of the credit derivatives markets by the prudential supervisors of the firms that act as dealers in credit derivatives, including joint efforts by supervisors and market participants to strengthen the infrastructure of those markets. Finally, I will discuss the potential benefits of central counterparty (CCP) clearing as well as those of exchange trading of credit derivatives. Although the focus of this hearing is on credit derivatives, most of my remarks are applicable to OTC derivatives generally. The OTC Credit Derivatives Market Background InformationA credit derivative is a financial contract whose value is derived from the value of debt obligations issued by one or more reference entities. The predominant type of credit derivative is a credit default swap (CDS). In a CDS, a "protection buyer" pays premiums to a "protection seller." In return, in the event of a default or other specified credit event, the protection seller is obligated to pay the protection buyer the notional or par value for the debt, thereby transferring the risk of default from the buyer to the seller. Most reference entities are corporations, including corporations rated investment-grade and those with lower ratings. Over the last few years, CDS referencing mortgage-backed securities and other asset-backed securities (CDS on ABS) also have been traded. A single-name CDS references a single corporation or ABS, while a multiname CDS references a basket of reference entities or, more commonly, an index composed of many single-name CDS. Markets in Which Credit Derivatives Are TradedAlthough credit derivatives have been listed on exchanges, to date the vast majority of credit derivatives have been executed bilaterally with derivatives dealers in OTC markets. The dealers include 15 to 20 large, globally active commercial and investment banks. The principal centers for trading are London and New York. Trades typically are executed over the telephone or through voice brokers. Use of various electronic trading platforms to facilitate bilateral execution of CDS has been growing, especially in Europe, but remains fairly limited. More than half of trading in CDS is trading between dealers. Other than dealers, the most active participants in CDS markets are asset managers, including both hedge fund managers and managers of regulated investment companies. Estimates of the size of the global market for CDS indicate that the market has been growing very rapidly. Global market estimates published by the Bank for International Settlements show that the notional amount outstanding at year-end 2007 was $58 trillion, about twice the level just a year earlier. The gross replacement cost of those contracts, which measures the current market value of the protection against credit events affecting the $58 trillion of debt, was about $2 trillion at year-end. Growth of index and other multiname CDS has been especially rapid in recent years and those instruments now account for more than 40 percent of both the notional amount and the current market value of all CDS. The very rapid growth of the credit derivatives market reflects their perceived value for managing credit risks. The single-name CDS markets typically are far more liquid than the underlying bond or loan markets, in large measure because the cost of taking short positions is far lower. Fixed-income asset managers use credit derivatives to obtain or adjust their credit exposures. Portfolio managers at banks use single-name CDS to manage concentrations of risk to their largest borrowers. Furthermore, the very liquid markets for CDS indexes allow asset managers to adjust the risk profile of their entire debt portfolios much more quickly and at much lower cost than was possible before these instruments were available. The availability of CDS also facilitates underwriting and making markets in the underlying debt markets, and thereby benefits issuers and investors that do not directly use credit derivatives. Risks of Using Credit DerivativesThe use of credit derivatives entails risks as well as benefits. The types of risk are essentially the same as those associated with financial activity generally--market risk, credit risk, operational risk, legal risk, and reputational risk. Of particular importance is counterparty credit risk--that is, the risk that a counterparty to a credit derivatives contract could fail to perform its contractual obligations, resulting in losses to the nondefaulting counterparty. For example, in the case of a CDS, if the protection seller itself becomes insolvent, the protection buyer would lose the value of that protection and would need to replace it by purchasing protection from another seller. If the premiums required by the market for protection against default by the reference entity had risen since the protection had been purchased from the insolvent seller, the protection buyer would be exposed to a loss equal to the present value of the difference between the premiums paid on the new contract and the premiums paid on the original contract. Key Practices for Managing RisksParticipants in the credit derivatives market and other OTC derivatives markets manage their counterparty credit risks by carefully selecting and monitoring their counterparties, by documenting their transactions under standard legal agreements that permit them to net gains and losses across contracts with a defaulting counterparty, and by entering into agreements that require counterparty exposures to be collateralized. Market participants effectively preclude firms from acting as dealers if they are not rated A or higher. Dealers evaluate the credit worthiness of their counterparties and assign them internal credit ratings. Those whose internal ratings are equivalent to below investment grade usually are required to enter into collateral agreements that include initial margin requirements as well as variation margin requirements. Transactions with hedge funds typically are supported by collateral agreements, as are transactions between dealers. Laws in the United States and many other jurisdictions have been amended in recent years to clarify that netting and collateral agreements are legally enforceable. Still, the measurement and management of counterparty credit risks on credit derivatives are challenging. Furthermore, as I will focus on today, weaknesses in the infrastructure for the credit derivatives markets and other OTC derivatives markets have created operational risks that could undermine the effectiveness of counterparty risk-management practices. Oversight of the OTC Credit Derivatives MarketAlthough the credit derivatives market often is described as unregulated, by its nature it is subject to significant regulatory oversight. All transactions in the market are intermediated by dealers and all major dealers are commercial or investment banks that are subject to prudential regulation by U.S. or foreign banking regulators or by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The prudential supervisors devote considerable attention to the dealers' management of the risks associated with activities in the credit derivatives market and other OTC derivatives markets. In particular, they have been issuing guidance on counterparty credit risk management since the mid-1990s and have updated it several times, notably after the near failure in 1998 of Long-Term Capital Management, which was a major participant in the interest rate derivatives market. With the rapid growth of the credit derivatives market and other derivatives markets and the increasing participation of hedge funds in those markets, the management of counterparty exposures to hedge funds has been given careful attention, including a thorough review of relevant risk-management practices by the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG) in 2006. That review fed into thePrinciples and Guidelines Regarding Private Pools of Capitalthat the PWG issued in July 2007, which provided updated guidance on the management of such counterparty exposures. The volatility and illiquidity in financial markets over the past year have provided a severe test of major dealers' counterparty risk-management practices. Thus far, the results with respect to hedge fund exposures have been remarkably good. Although quite a few hedge funds have performed very poorly, counterparty credit losses to their dealer counterparties have been negligible. By contrast, the financial difficulties of some monoline financial guarantors have forced some of the firms that act as dealers to write down substantially the value of credit protection that the dealers had purchased from the guarantors on collateralized debt obligations and other structured credit products. Because the guarantors had been considered highly creditworthy and because the exposures against which they sold protection were considered to pose very little credit risk, their CDS counterparties had generally not required the guarantors to enter into collateral agreements. In light of this experience, the Financial Stability Forum's (FSF) April 2008 report to the G-7 Ministers and Central Bank Governors called on prudential supervisors to extend guidance on management of counterparty exposures to hedge funds to other large, highly leveraged counterparties, including other dealers and financial guarantors. Supervisory Efforts to Strengthen the Infrastructure of the OTC Credit Derivatives MarketIn addition to their efforts to ensure that individual derivatives dealers manage the risks associated with credit derivatives and other OTC derivatives effectively, prudential supervisors, under the leadership of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY), have been working with dealers and other market participants since September 2005 to strengthen arrangements for clearing and settling OTC derivatives transactions. For too many years, post-trade processing of OTC derivatives transactions remained decentralized and paper-based despite enormous growth in transactions volumes. Among other problems, dealers reported large backlogs of unconfirmed trades, a significant portion of which had been outstanding for 30 days or more. The failure to confirm trades promptly can exacerbate counterparty credit risks by allowing errors in counterparties' records of their transactions to go undetected, which could lead them to underestimate exposures or to fail to collect margin when due. Such backlogs also could significantly complicate and delay the close-out and replacement of trades with a defaulting counterparty. By 2005, backlogs of unconfirmed trades were especially large in the credit derivatives market, in part because market participants, including hedge funds, frequently closed out their positions in CDS through a transaction known as a novation. In a novation, one party steps out of the contract and is replaced by another party. The master agreements that govern OTC derivatives trading require the party seeking to step out to obtain the prior written consent of its counterparty, but dealers were frequently accepting novations from market participants without any evidence that they had obtained such prior consent. These sloppy practices not only contributed to backlogs of unconfirmed CDS, but also created confusion about the identities of trade counterparties and thereby undermined the effectiveness of counterparty credit risk management. With encouragement and close monitoring by their prudential supervisors, the dealers worked with market participants to address these weaknesses. By making greater use of available platforms for electronic confirmation of CDS trades, they quickly reduced the backlogs. By September 2006, the dealers reported that, in the aggregate, they had reduced confirmations outstanding more than 30 days by 85 percent. In 2006, the dealers agreed to expand their efforts to tackle backlogs in the equity derivatives market, again by making greater use of electronic confirmation services. Dealers also quickly announced their support for a novation protocol for credit and interest rate derivatives that had been developed by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association. The protocol provides that if the party initiating the novation has not received written confirmation from the original counterparty by the close of business on the date the novation is struck, it is deemed to have two contracts, one with the original counterparty and another with the counterparty that agreed to accept the novation. The protocol thereby provides the party initiating the novation a strong incentive to obtain the original counterparty's consent promptly. Although these achievements were impressive, the financial turmoil during the summer of 2007 convinced prudential supervisors and other policymakers that further improvements in the market infrastructure were needed. Specifically, CDS backlogs grew almost fivefold from June to August 2007, reversing much of the previous improvement. Although the backlogs subsequently receded, this episode demonstrated that backlog reductions were not sustainable during volume spikes. Moreover, it underscored that, in many respects, the post-trade processing performance of the OTC derivatives markets still lags significantly the performance of more mature markets and still has the potential to compromise market participants' management of counterparty credit risks and other risks. In their reports on the financial market turmoil, both the PWG and the FSF asked prudential supervisors, under the leadership of the FRBNY, to take further actions to strengthen the OTC derivatives market infrastructure. Specifically, they asked the supervisors to insist that the industry set ambitious standards for trade data submission and resolution of trade-matching errors. More timely and accurate submission of trade data is critical to avoiding the buildup of backlogs following volume spikes. They also asked supervisors to ensure that the industry promptly incorporates into standard CDS documentation a protocol that would permit cash settlement of obligations following a default or other credit event involving a reference entity, based on the results of an auction. Adoption of the cash settlement protocol is intended to address concerns that a physical settlement process for CDS could be disorderly in the event of large-scale or multiple contemporaneous defaults. Finally, the PWG and FSF also recommended that the supervisors ask the industry to develop a longer-term plan for an integrated operational infrastructure for OTC derivatives that covers all major asset classes and product types and addresses the needs of other market participants as well as dealers. The FRBNY convened a meeting of supervisors and market participants on June 9 to discuss how to address the PWG and FSF recommendations. They agreed on an agenda for bringing about further improvements in the OTC derivatives market infrastructure. With respect to credit derivatives, this agenda includes: (1) further increasing standardization and automation, with the ultimate objective of matching trades on the date of execution; (2) incorporating an auction-based cash settlement mechanism into standard documentation; (3) reducing the volume of outstanding CDS contracts via greater use of services that orchestrate multilateral terminations; and (4) developing well-designed central counterparty services to reduce systemic risks. They also agreed to extend the infrastructure improvements in the credit derivatives market over time to encompass the OTC equity, interest rate, foreign exchange, and commodity derivatives markets. Potential Benefits of Greater Centralization of Market InfrastructureCentral Counterparty Clearing of Credit DerivativesA central counterparty is an entity that offers to interpose itself between counterparties to financial contracts, becoming the buyer to the seller and the seller to the buyer. Trades on derivatives exchanges routinely are cleared through a CCP, in part so that market participants can accept the best bids or offers without considering the creditworthiness of the party making the bid or offer. Indeed, in electronic exchanges, the use of a CCP permits anonymous trading. CCP services also have been offered to counterparties in OTC derivatives markets. For example, since September 1999, LCH.Clearnet Limited has operated SwapClear, a London-based CCP for interest rate swaps between dealers. SwapClear clears almost 50 percent of global single-currency swaps between dealers. Several plans are now under development to provide CCP services to the credit derivatives market. A CCP has the potential to reduce counterparty risks to OTC derivatives market participants and risks to the financial system by achieving multilateral netting of trades and by imposing more-robust risk controls on market participants. However, a CCP concentrates risks and responsibility for risk management in the CCP. Consequently, the effectiveness of a CCP's risk controls and the adequacy of its financial resources are critical. If its controls are weak or it lacks adequate financial resources, introduction of its services to the credit derivatives market could actually increase systemic risk. A CCP that seeks to offer its services in the United States would need to obtain regulatory approval. The Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000 included provisions that permit CCP clearing of OTC derivatives and require that a CCP be supervised by an appropriate authority, such as a federal banking agency, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the SEC, or a foreign financial regulator that one of the U.S. authorities has determined to satisfy appropriate standards. A CCP for credit derivatives with standardized terms that was not regulated by the SEC might need an exemption from securities clearing agency registration requirements. If a CCP for credit derivatives sought to organize as a bank subject to regulation by the Federal Reserve or if we were consulted by any other regulator of a proposed CCP, we would evaluate the proposal against theRecommendations for Central Counterparties, a set of international standards that were agreed to in November 2004 by the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) of the central banks of the Group of Ten countries and the Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). If one or more CCPs for credit derivatives that meet the CPSS-IOSCO standards are introduced, the Federal Reserve will encourage market participants to use those services to the fullest extent possible. We would also encourage such CCPs to clear trades for a broad range of market participants, either directly or through intermediaries. Market participants should be excluded from participating only if doing so would entail risks to the CCP that it cannot mitigate effectively. Exchange Trading of Credit DerivativesAn exchange is a mechanism for executing trades that allows multiple parties to accept bids or offers from other participants. As I have already stated, trades on an exchange usually are intermediated by a CCP. Exchange trading requires a significant degree of standardization of contracts. In many cases, counterparties to OTC derivatives trades seek to customize the terms of trades to meet very specific risk-management needs, so many OTC trades are not amenable to exchange trading. However, many OTC derivatives, including many credit derivatives have become sufficiently standardized that exchange trading is feasible and the scope for exchange trading probably could be expanded by further standardization of contracts while still meeting risk-management needs. Where exchange trading of OTC credit derivatives is feasible, it can produce several benefits. First, trades executed on an exchange usually are intermediated by a CCP and, as I have discussed, a well-designed CCP can reduce risks to counterparties and the financial system. Second, an electronic exchange can be designed so that trades are locked in at execution, essentially achieving trade matching in real time and eliminating confirmation backlogs. Third, exchange trading has the potential to increase market liquidity by allowing participants to directly trade against bids and offers posted by a broader range of parties, including asset managers as well as derivatives dealers. Fourth, exchange trading has the potential to significantly increase transparency with respect to bids and offers and the depth of markets at those bids and offers. For these reasons, policymakers should encourage greater standardization of contracts, which would facilitate more trading on exchanges. However, they should not lose sight of the fact that one of the main reasons the credit derivatives market and other OTC markets have grown so rapidly is that market participants have seen substantial benefit to customizing contract terms to meet their individual risk-management needs. They must continue to be allowed to bilaterally negotiate customized contracts where they see benefits to doing so. ConclusionsThe credit derivatives market is an important innovation that provides significant benefits to the banks and asset managers that use these instruments and to the financial system generally. However, their use entails risks, including counterparty credit risks, that market participants need to manage effectively. Supervisors need to continue to pay close attention to individual dealers' management of the risks associated with intermediating the credit derivatives market and other derivatives markets. They also need to continue to foster collective actions by dealers and other market participants to move rapidly toward the goal of implementing a clearing and settlement infrastructure for the credit derivatives market and other OTC derivatives markets that is as efficient as the infrastructure for more mature markets. Supervisors and other policymakers should encourage the introduction and use of well-designed CCP clearing services for credit derivatives and should encourage greater standardization of contracts, which would facilitate more trading on exchanges.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to discuss financial regulation and financial stability. The financial turmoil that began last summer has impeded the ability of the financial system to perform its normal functions and adversely affected the broader economy. This experience indicates a clear need for careful attention to financial regulation and financial stability by the Congress and other policymakers. Regulatory authorities have been actively considering the implications of the turmoil for regulatory policy and for private-sector practices. In March, the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG) issued a report and recommendations for addressing the weaknesses revealed by recent events.1At the international level, the Financial Stability Forum has also issued a report and recommendations.2Between them, the two reports focused on a number of specific problem areas, including mortgage lending practices and their oversight, risk measurement and management at large financial institutions, the performance of credit rating agencies, accounting and valuation issues, and issues relating to the clearing and settlement of financial transactions. Many of the recommendations of these reports were directed at regulators and the private sector and are already being implemented. These reports complement the blueprint for regulatory reform issued by the Treasury in March, which focused on broader questions of regulatory architecture.3 Work is also ongoing to strengthen the framework for prudential oversight of financial institutions. Notably, recent events have led the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to consider higher capital charges for such items as certain complex structured credit products, assets in banks' trading books, and liquidity guarantees provided to off-balance sheet vehicles. New guidelines for banks' liquidity management are also being issued. Regarding implementation, the recent reports have stressed the need for supervisors to insist on strong risk-measurement and risk-management practices that allow managers to assess the risks they face on a firmwide basis. In the remainder of my remarks I will comment briefly on three issues: the supervisory oversight of primary dealers, including the major investment banks; the need to strengthen the financial infrastructure; and the possible need for new tools for facilitating the orderly liquidation of a systemically important securities firm.4 Prudential Supervision of Investment BanksSince the near-collapse of The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., in March, the Federal Reserve has been working closely with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which is the functional supervisor of each of the primary dealers and the consolidated supervisor of the four large investment banks, to help ensure that those firms have the financial strength needed to withstand conditions of extreme market stress. To formalize our effective working relationship, the SEC and the Federal Reserve this week agreed to a memorandum of understanding.5 Cooperation between the Fed and the SEC is taking place within the existing statutory framework with the objective of addressing the near-term situation. In the longer term, however, legislation may be needed to provide a more robust framework for the prudential supervision of investment banks and other large securities dealers. In particular, under current arrangements, the SEC's oversight of the holding companies of the major investment banks is based on a voluntary agreement between the SEC and those firms. Strong holding company oversight is essential, and thus, in my view, the Congress should consider requiring consolidated supervision of those firms and providing the regulator the authority to set standards for capital, liquidity holdings, and risk management.6At the same time, reforms in the oversight of these firms must recognize the distinctive features of investment banking and take care neither to unduly inhibit innovation nor to induce a migration of risk-taking activities to less-regulated or offshore institutions. Strengthening the Financial InfrastructureThe potential vulnerability of the financial system to the collapse of Bear Stearns was exacerbated by weaknesses in the infrastructure of financial markets, notably in the markets for over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives and in short-term funding markets. The Federal Reserve, together with other regulators and the private sector, is engaged in a broad effort to strengthen the financial infrastructure. For example, since September 2005, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has been leading a major joint initiative by both the public and private sectors to improve arrangements for clearing and settling credit default swaps and other OTC derivatives. The Federal Reserve and other authorities also are focusing on enhancing the resilience of the markets for tri-party repurchase agreements, in which the primary dealers and other large banks and broker-dealers obtain very large amounts of secured financing from money funds and other short-term, risk-averse investors. In these efforts, we aim not only to make the financial system better able to withstand future shocks but also to mitigate moral hazard and the problem of "too big to fail," by reducing the range of circumstances in which systemic stability concerns might prompt government intervention. More generally, the stability of the broader financial system requires key payment and settlement systems to operate smoothly under stress and to effectively manage counterparty risk. Currently, the Federal Reserve relies on a patchwork of authorities, largely derived from our role as a banking supervisor, as well as on moral suasion to help ensure that the various payment and settlement systems have the necessary procedures and controls in place to manage the risks they face. By contrast, many major central banks around the world have an explicit statutory basis for their oversight of payment and settlement systems. Because robust payment and settlement systems are vital for financial stability, the Congress should consider granting the Federal Reserve explicit oversight authority for systemically important payment and settlement systems. Preventing or Mitigating Future CrisesThe financial turmoil is ongoing, and our efforts today are concentrated on helping the financial system return to more normal functioning. It is not too soon, however, to think about steps that might be taken to reduce the incidence and severity of future crises. In particular, in light of the Bear Stearns episode, the Congress may wish to consider whether new tools are needed for ensuring an orderly liquidation of a systemically important securities firm that is on the verge of bankruptcy, together with a more formal process for deciding when to use those tools. Because the resolution of a failing securities firm might have fiscal implications, it would be appropriate for the Treasury to take a leading role in any such process, in consultation with the firm's regulator and other authorities. The details of any such tools and of the associated decisionmaking process require more study. One possible model is the process currently in place under the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA) for dealing with insolvent commercial banks. The FDICIA procedures give the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation the authority to act as a receiver for an insolvent bank and to set up a bridge bank to facilitate an orderly liquidation of the firm. The FDICIA law also requires that failing banks be resolved in a way that imposes the least cost to the government, except when the authorities, through a well-defined procedure, determine that following the least-cost route would entail significant systemic risk. To be sure, securities firms differ significantly from commercial banks in their financing, business models, and in other ways, so the FDICIA rules are not directly applicable to these firms. Although designing a resolution regime appropriate for securities firms would be a complex undertaking, I believe it would be worth the effort. In particular, by setting a high bar for such actions, the adverse effects on market discipline could be minimized. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. Footnotes 1.President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments," March 13.Return to text 2.The membership of the Financial Stability Forum consists of central bankers, regulators, and finance ministers from many countries, including the United States. Their report is available at: Financial Stability Forum (2008), "Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience (400 KB PDF)," April 7.Return to text 3.The Treasury blueprint is available at: U.S. Department of the Treasury (2008), "Blueprint for a Modernized Financial Regulatory Structure," March 31.Return to text 4.Primary dealers are banks and securities broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. On behalf of the Federal Reserve System, the New York Fed's Open Market Desk engages in the trades to implement monetary policy.Return to text 5.Under the memorandum of understanding, the SEC and the Fed will freely share information and analyses pertaining to the financial conditions of primary dealers. The two agencies have also agreed to work jointly with the firms to support their continued efforts to strengthen their balance sheets, their liquidity, and their risk-management practices. See: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Securities and Exchange Commission (2008), "Federal Reserve and SEC Issue Memorandum of Understanding to Deepen Information Sharing and Cooperation," press release, July 7.Return to text 6.Bank-affiliated primary dealers are already subject to mandatory consolidated supervision, but the focus of that supervision has been on limiting risks to the banks and other insured depository institutions within the holding company. Existing provisions may need to be modified to provide regulatory authority to assess and limit risks to all functionally regulated entities, including securities subsidiaries.Return to text
Governor Kevin Warsh At the U.S. Department of the Treasury Press Conference on Covered Bond Framework, Washington, D.C. Press ConferenceonCovered Bond Framework: On behalf of the Federal Reserve, I am pleased to join Secretary Paulson and my fellow bank supervisors today. Financial markets continue to show the ill effects of turmoil triggered by mortgage losses. The real economy is underperforming in terms of growth and job creation, a result in part of financial strains. And financial institutions themselves are affected by the generalized pullback in liquidity and deteriorating credit quality. Nearly one year after the onset of financial market distress, many financial institutions have retreated from certain business lines, limited their participation in markets for some financial products, delevered their balance sheets, and taken other actions aimed at balance sheet repair. These developments are both necessary and expected. But, the path to a new financial market architecture, however uneven and improvised, will not only be marked by the forces of retrenchment. The path should equally, in my view, be distinguished by the creative impulses that drive product and market innovation. It is perhaps too convenient to denigrate the attributes of dynamism and ingenuity, particularly late in economic cycles, when the forces of innovation can disappoint and weaken the real economy. Policymakers and market participants alike should recognize that innovation--in our product markets, labor markets, and yes, our financial markets--is likely to prove a necessary net contributor to economic growth in the coming period. We should also be reminded that financial innovation need not be equated with product complexity. While some take comfort in the presumption that global economies have decoupled, I would note that our global financial markets are more integrated than ever. Financial products successfully developed in a single geography often can be readily exported to another; readily, that is, if the new product export befits investor preferences and policymakers remove barriers to their adoption. Today's introduction of the Treasury Covered Bond Framework may be illustrative of the benefits of product innovation in globally connected financial markets. Treasury's discussions with market participants suggest that a covered bond framework may attract investor interest and facilitate greater access to mortgage credit. High-quality assets might be financed if banks are allowed to manage pools of loans, substituting new loans into the pool as others become delinquent. Newly issued covered bonds backed by high quality mortgage loans and issued by strong financial institutions may find a growing investor base in the United States. The Federal Reserve has long accepted a broad range of high-quality collateral from depository institutions at its discount window. Highly rated, high-quality covered bonds would generally fall within that broad range as eligible collateral. Private lenders also are likely to find such bonds attractive as collateral for credit extensions. Financial innovation, properly understood, can increase the diversity of funding sources, improve the distribution of risks, and provide incentives to monitor such risks--all helping to promote economic growth. The Federal Reserve seeks to encourage new and innovative sources of funding, and will continue to work with other policymakers and market participants to accomplish this important objective.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved amendments to Appendix A of Regulation CC that reflect the restructuring of the Federal Reserve's check processing operations in the First and Third Districts. Appendix A provides a routing number guide that helps depository institutions determine the maximum permissible hold periods for most deposited checks. As of September 20, 2008, the Windsor Locks office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston no longer will process checks, and banks currently served by that office will be reassigned to the head office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. To ensure that the information in Appendix A accurately describes the structure of check processing operations within the Federal Reserve System, the final rule deletes the reference in Appendix A to the Windsor Locks office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and reassigns the routing numbers listed thereunder to the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. To coincide with the effective date of the underlying check processing changes, the amendments are effective September 20, 2008. As a result of these changes, some checks deposited in the affected regions that currently are nonlocal checks will become local checks that are subject to shorter permissible hold periods. The Board's notice is attached. Federal Register notice:53 KB PDF|HTML
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Chairman Bernanke presented identical testimony before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on July 16, 2008 Chairman Dodd, Senator Shelby, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the Federal Reserve'sMonetary Policy Report to the Congress.The U.S. economy and financial system have confronted some significant challenges thus far in 2008. The contraction in housing activity that began in 2006 and the associated deterioration in mortgage markets that became evident last year have led to sizable losses at financial institutions and a sharp tightening in overall credit conditions. The effects of the housing contraction and of the financial headwinds on spending and economic activity have been compounded by rapid increases in the prices of energy and other commodities, which have sapped household purchasing power even as they have boosted inflation. Against this backdrop, economic activity has advanced at a sluggish pace during the first half of this year, while inflation has remained elevated.Following a significant reduction in its policy rate over the second half of 2007, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) eased policy considerably further through the spring to counter actual and expected weakness in economic growth and to mitigate downside risks to economic activity. In addition, the Federal Reserve expanded some of the special liquidity programs that were established last year and implemented additional facilities to support the functioning of financial markets and foster financial stability. Although these policy actions have had positive effects, the economy continues to face numerous difficulties, including ongoing strains in financial markets, declining house prices, a softening labor market, and rising prices of oil, food, and some other commodities. Let me now turn to a more detailed discussion of some of these key issues.Developments in financial markets and their implications for the macroeconomic outlook have been a focus of monetary policy makers over the past year. In the second half of 2007, the deteriorating performance of subprime mortgages in the United States triggered turbulence in domestic and international financial markets as investors became markedly less willing to bear credit risks of any type. In the first quarter of 2008, reports of further losses and write-downs at financial institutions intensified investor concerns and resulted in further sharp reductions in market liquidity. By March, many dealers and other institutions, even those that had relied heavily on short-term secured financing, were facing much more stringent borrowing conditions.In mid-March, a major investment bank, The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., was pushed to the brink of failure after suddenly losing access to short-term financing markets. The Federal Reserve judged that a disorderly failure of Bear Stearns would pose a serious threat to overall financial stability and would most likely have significant adverse implications for the U.S. economy. After discussions with the Securities and Exchange Commission and in consultation with the Treasury, we invoked emergency authorities to provide special financing to facilitate the acquisition of Bear Stearns by JPMorgan Chase & Co. In addition, the Federal Reserve used emergency authorities to establish two new facilities to provide backstop liquidity to primary dealers, with the goals of stabilizing financial conditions and increasing the availability of credit to the broader economy.1We have also taken additional steps to address liquidity pressures in the banking system, including a further easing of the terms for bank borrowing at the discount window and increases in the amount of credit made available to banks through the Term Auction Facility. The FOMC also authorized expansions of its currency swap arrangements with the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank to facilitate increased dollar lending by those institutions to banks in their jurisdictions.These steps to address liquidity pressures coupled with monetary easing seem to have been helpful in mitigating some market strains. During the second quarter, credit spreads generally narrowed, liquidity pressures ebbed, and a number of financial institutions raised new capital. However, as events in recent weeks have demonstrated, many financial markets and institutions remain under considerable stress, in part because the outlook for the economy, and thus for credit quality, remains uncertain. In recent days, investors became particularly concerned about the financial condition of the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. In view of this development, and given the importance of these firms to the mortgage market, the Treasury announced a legislative proposal to bolster their capital, access to liquidity, and regulatory oversight. As a supplement to the Treasury's existing authority to lend to the GSEs and as a bridge to the time when the Congress decides how to proceed on these matters, the Board of Governors authorized the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to lend to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, should that become necessary. Any lending would be collateralized by U.S. government and federal agency securities. In general, healthy economic growth depends on well-functioning financial markets. Consequently, helping the financial markets to return to more normal functioning will continue to be a top priority of the Federal Reserve.I turn now to current economic developments and prospects. The economy has continued to expand, but at a subdued pace. In the labor market, private payroll employment has declined this year, falling at an average pace of 94,000 jobs per month through June. Employment in the construction and manufacturing sectors has been particularly hard hit, although employment declines in a number of other sectors are evident as well. The unemployment rate has risen and now stands at 5-1/2 percent.In the housing sector, activity continues to weaken. Although sales of existing homes have been about unchanged this year, sales of new homes have continued to fall, and inventories of unsold new homes remain high. In response, homebuilders continue to scale back the pace of housing starts. Home prices are falling, particularly in regions that experienced the largest price increases earlier this decade. The declines in home prices have contributed to the rising tide of foreclosures; by adding to the stock of vacant homes for sale, these foreclosures have, in turn, intensified the downward pressure on home prices in some areas.Personal consumption expenditures have advanced at a modest pace so far this year, generally holding up somewhat better than might have been expected given the array of forces weighing on household finances and attitudes. In particular, with the labor market softening and consumer price inflation elevated, real earnings have been stagnant so far this year; declining values of equities and houses have taken their toll on household balance sheets; credit conditions have tightened; and indicators of consumer sentiment have fallen sharply. More positively, the fiscal stimulus package is providing some timely support to household incomes. Overall, consumption spending seems likely to be restrained over coming quarters.In the business sector, real outlays for equipment and software were about flat in the first quarter of the year, and construction of nonresidential structures slowed appreciably. In the second quarter, the available data suggest that business fixed investment appears to have expanded moderately. Nevertheless, surveys of capital spending plans indicate that firms remain concerned about the economic and financial environment, including sharply rising costs of inputs and indications of tightening credit, and they are likely to be cautious with spending in the second half of the year. However, strong export growth continues to be a significant boon to many U.S. companies.In conjunction with the June FOMC meeting, Board members and Reserve Bank presidents prepared economic projections covering the years 2008 through 2010. On balance, most FOMC participants expected that, over the remainder of this year, output would expand at a pace appreciably below its trend rate, primarily because of continued weakness in housing markets, elevated energy prices, and tight credit conditions. Growth is projected to pick up gradually over the next two years as residential construction bottoms out and begins a slow recovery and as credit conditions gradually improve. However, FOMC participants indicated that considerable uncertainty surrounded their outlook for economic growth and viewed the risks to their forecasts as skewed to the downside.Inflation has remained high, running at nearly a 3-1/2 percent annual rate over the first five months of this year as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures. And, with gasoline and other consumer energy prices rising in recent weeks, inflation seems likely to move temporarily higher in the near term.The elevated level of overall consumer inflation largely reflects a continued sharp run-up in the prices of many commodities, especially oil but also certain crops and metals.2The spot price of West Texas intermediate crude oil soared about 60 percent in 2007 and, thus far this year, has climbed an additional 50 percent or so. The price of oil currently stands at about five times its level toward the beginning of this decade. Our best judgment is that this surge in prices has been driven predominantly by strong growth in underlying demand and tight supply conditions in global oil markets. Over the past several years, the world economy has expanded at its fastest pace in decades, leading to substantial increases in the demand for oil. Moreover, growth has been concentrated in developing and emerging market economies, where energy consumption has been further stimulated by rapid industrialization and by government subsidies that hold down the price of energy faced by ultimate users.On the supply side, despite sharp increases in prices, the production of oil has risen only slightly in the past few years. Much of the subdued supply response reflects inadequate investment and production shortfalls in politically volatile regions where large portions of the world's oil reserves are located. Additionally, many governments have been tightening their control over oil resources, impeding foreign investment and hindering efforts to boost capacity and production. Finally, sustainable rates of production in some of the more secure and accessible oil fields, such as those in the North Sea, have been declining. In view of these factors, estimates of long-term oil supplies have been marked down in recent months. Long-dated oil futures prices have risen along with spot prices, suggesting that market participants also see oil supply conditions remaining tight for years to come.The decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar has also contributed somewhat to the increase in oil prices. The precise size of this effect is difficult to ascertain, as the causal relationships between oil prices and the dollar are complex and run in both directions. However, the price of oil has risen significantly in terms of all major currencies, suggesting that factors other than the dollar, notably shifts in the underlying global demand for and supply of oil, have been the principal drivers of the increase in prices.Another concern that has been raised is that financial speculation has added markedly to upward pressures on oil prices. Certainly, investor interest in oil and other commodities has increased substantially of late. However, if financial speculation were pushing oil prices above the levels consistent with the fundamentals of supply and demand, we would expect inventories of crude oil and petroleum products to increase as supply rose and demand fell. But in fact, available data on oil inventories show notable declines over the past year. This is not to say that useful steps could not be taken to improve the transparency and functioning of futures markets, only that such steps are unlikely to substantially affect the prices of oil or other commodities in the longer term.Although the inflationary effect of rising oil and agricultural commodity prices is evident in the retail prices of energy and food, the extent to which the high prices of oil and other raw materials have been passed through to the prices of non-energy, non-food finished goods and services seems thus far to have been limited. But with businesses facing persistently higher input prices, they may attempt to pass through such costs into prices of final goods and services more aggressively than they have so far. Moreover, as the foreign exchange value of the dollar has declined, rises in import prices have put greater upward pressure on business costs and consumer prices. In their economic projections for the June FOMC meeting, monetary policy makers marked up their forecasts for inflation during 2008 as a whole. FOMC participants continue to expect inflation to moderate in 2009 and 2010, as slower global growth leads to a cooling of commodity markets, as pressures on resource utilization decline, and as longer-term inflation expectations remain reasonably well anchored. However, in light of the persistent escalation of commodity prices in recent quarters, FOMC participants viewed the inflation outlook as unusually uncertain and cited the possibility that commodity prices will continue to rise as an important risk to the inflation forecast. Moreover, the currently high level of inflation, if sustained, might lead the public to revise up its expectations for longer-term inflation. If that were to occur, and those revised expectations were to become embedded in the domestic wage- and price-setting process, we could see an unwelcome rise in actual inflation over the longer term. A critical responsibility of monetary policy makers is to prevent that process from taking hold.At present, accurately assessing and appropriately balancing the risks to the outlook for growth and inflation is a significant challenge for monetary policy makers. The possibility of higher energy prices, tighter credit conditions, and a still-deeper contraction in housing markets all represent significant downside risks to the outlook for growth. At the same time, upside risks to the inflation outlook have intensified lately, as the rising prices of energy and some other commodities have led to a sharp pickup in inflation and some measures of inflation expectations have moved higher. Given the high degree of uncertainty, monetary policy makers will need to carefully assess incoming information bearing on the outlook for both inflation and growth. In light of the increase in upside inflation risk, we must be particularly alert to any indications, such as an erosion of longer-term inflation expectations, that the inflationary impulses from commodity prices are becoming embedded in the domestic wage- and price-setting process.I would like to conclude my remarks by providing a brief update on some of the Federal Reserve's actions in the area of consumer protection. At the time of our report last February, I described the Board's proposal to adopt comprehensive new regulations to prohibit unfair or deceptive practices in the mortgage market, using our authority under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act of 1994. After reviewing the more-than 4,500 comment letters we received on the proposed rules, the Board approved the final rules yesterday.The new rules apply to all types of mortgage lenders and will establish lending standards aimed at curbing abuses while preserving responsible subprime lending and sustainable homeownership. The final rules prohibit lenders from making higher-priced loans without due regard for consumers' ability to make the scheduled payments and require lenders to verify the income and assets on which they rely when making the credit decision. Also, for higher-priced loans, lenders now will be required to establish escrow accounts so that property taxes and insurance costs will be included in consumers' regular monthly payments. The final rules also prohibit prepayment penalties for higher-priced loans in cases in which the consumer's payment can increase during the first few years and restrict prepayment penalties on other higher-priced loans Other measures address the coercion of appraisers, servicer practices, and other issues. We believe the new rules will help to restore confidence in the mortgage market.In May, working jointly with the Office of Thrift Supervision and the National Credit Union Administration, the Board issued proposed rules under the Federal Trade Commission Act to address unfair or deceptive practices for credit card accounts and overdraft protection plans. Credit cards provide a convenient source of credit for many consumers, but the terms of credit card loans have become more complex, which has reduced transparency. Our consumer testing has persuaded us that disclosures alone cannot solve this problem. Thus, the Board's proposed rules would require card issuers to alter their practices in ways that will allow consumers to better understand how their own decisions and actions will affect their costs. Card issuers would be prohibited from increasing interest rates retroactively to cover prior purchases except under very limited circumstances. For accounts having multiple interest rates, when consumers seek to pay down their balance by paying more than the minimum, card issuers would be prohibited from maximizing interest charges by applying excess payments to the lowest rate balance first. The proposed rules dealing with bank overdraft services seek to give consumers greater control by ensuring that they have ample opportunity to opt out of automatic payments of overdrafts. The Board has already received more than 20,000 comment letters in response to the proposed rules.Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.Footnotes1.Primary dealers are financial institutions that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. On behalf of the Federal Reserve System, the New York Fed's Open Market Desk engages in the trades to implement monetary policy.Return to text2.The dominant role of commodity prices in driving the recent increase in inflation can be seen by contrasting the overall inflation rate with the so-called core measure of inflation, which excludes food and energy prices. Core inflation has been fairly steady this year at an annual rate of about 2 percent.Return to text Chairman Dodd, Senator Shelby, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the Federal Reserve'sMonetary Policy Report to the Congress. The U.S. economy and financial system have confronted some significant challenges thus far in 2008. The contraction in housing activity that began in 2006 and the associated deterioration in mortgage markets that became evident last year have led to sizable losses at financial institutions and a sharp tightening in overall credit conditions. The effects of the housing contraction and of the financial headwinds on spending and economic activity have been compounded by rapid increases in the prices of energy and other commodities, which have sapped household purchasing power even as they have boosted inflation. Against this backdrop, economic activity has advanced at a sluggish pace during the first half of this year, while inflation has remained elevated. Following a significant reduction in its policy rate over the second half of 2007, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) eased policy considerably further through the spring to counter actual and expected weakness in economic growth and to mitigate downside risks to economic activity. In addition, the Federal Reserve expanded some of the special liquidity programs that were established last year and implemented additional facilities to support the functioning of financial markets and foster financial stability. Although these policy actions have had positive effects, the economy continues to face numerous difficulties, including ongoing strains in financial markets, declining house prices, a softening labor market, and rising prices of oil, food, and some other commodities. Let me now turn to a more detailed discussion of some of these key issues. Developments in financial markets and their implications for the macroeconomic outlook have been a focus of monetary policy makers over the past year. In the second half of 2007, the deteriorating performance of subprime mortgages in the United States triggered turbulence in domestic and international financial markets as investors became markedly less willing to bear credit risks of any type. In the first quarter of 2008, reports of further losses and write-downs at financial institutions intensified investor concerns and resulted in further sharp reductions in market liquidity. By March, many dealers and other institutions, even those that had relied heavily on short-term secured financing, were facing much more stringent borrowing conditions. In mid-March, a major investment bank, The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., was pushed to the brink of failure after suddenly losing access to short-term financing markets. The Federal Reserve judged that a disorderly failure of Bear Stearns would pose a serious threat to overall financial stability and would most likely have significant adverse implications for the U.S. economy. After discussions with the Securities and Exchange Commission and in consultation with the Treasury, we invoked emergency authorities to provide special financing to facilitate the acquisition of Bear Stearns by JPMorgan Chase & Co. In addition, the Federal Reserve used emergency authorities to establish two new facilities to provide backstop liquidity to primary dealers, with the goals of stabilizing financial conditions and increasing the availability of credit to the broader economy.1We have also taken additional steps to address liquidity pressures in the banking system, including a further easing of the terms for bank borrowing at the discount window and increases in the amount of credit made available to banks through the Term Auction Facility. The FOMC also authorized expansions of its currency swap arrangements with the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank to facilitate increased dollar lending by those institutions to banks in their jurisdictions. These steps to address liquidity pressures coupled with monetary easing seem to have been helpful in mitigating some market strains. During the second quarter, credit spreads generally narrowed, liquidity pressures ebbed, and a number of financial institutions raised new capital. However, as events in recent weeks have demonstrated, many financial markets and institutions remain under considerable stress, in part because the outlook for the economy, and thus for credit quality, remains uncertain. In recent days, investors became particularly concerned about the financial condition of the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. In view of this development, and given the importance of these firms to the mortgage market, the Treasury announced a legislative proposal to bolster their capital, access to liquidity, and regulatory oversight. As a supplement to the Treasury's existing authority to lend to the GSEs and as a bridge to the time when the Congress decides how to proceed on these matters, the Board of Governors authorized the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to lend to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, should that become necessary. Any lending would be collateralized by U.S. government and federal agency securities. In general, healthy economic growth depends on well-functioning financial markets. Consequently, helping the financial markets to return to more normal functioning will continue to be a top priority of the Federal Reserve. I turn now to current economic developments and prospects. The economy has continued to expand, but at a subdued pace. In the labor market, private payroll employment has declined this year, falling at an average pace of 94,000 jobs per month through June. Employment in the construction and manufacturing sectors has been particularly hard hit, although employment declines in a number of other sectors are evident as well. The unemployment rate has risen and now stands at 5-1/2 percent. In the housing sector, activity continues to weaken. Although sales of existing homes have been about unchanged this year, sales of new homes have continued to fall, and inventories of unsold new homes remain high. In response, homebuilders continue to scale back the pace of housing starts. Home prices are falling, particularly in regions that experienced the largest price increases earlier this decade. The declines in home prices have contributed to the rising tide of foreclosures; by adding to the stock of vacant homes for sale, these foreclosures have, in turn, intensified the downward pressure on home prices in some areas. Personal consumption expenditures have advanced at a modest pace so far this year, generally holding up somewhat better than might have been expected given the array of forces weighing on household finances and attitudes. In particular, with the labor market softening and consumer price inflation elevated, real earnings have been stagnant so far this year; declining values of equities and houses have taken their toll on household balance sheets; credit conditions have tightened; and indicators of consumer sentiment have fallen sharply. More positively, the fiscal stimulus package is providing some timely support to household incomes. Overall, consumption spending seems likely to be restrained over coming quarters. In the business sector, real outlays for equipment and software were about flat in the first quarter of the year, and construction of nonresidential structures slowed appreciably. In the second quarter, the available data suggest that business fixed investment appears to have expanded moderately. Nevertheless, surveys of capital spending plans indicate that firms remain concerned about the economic and financial environment, including sharply rising costs of inputs and indications of tightening credit, and they are likely to be cautious with spending in the second half of the year. However, strong export growth continues to be a significant boon to many U.S. companies. In conjunction with the June FOMC meeting, Board members and Reserve Bank presidents prepared economic projections covering the years 2008 through 2010. On balance, most FOMC participants expected that, over the remainder of this year, output would expand at a pace appreciably below its trend rate, primarily because of continued weakness in housing markets, elevated energy prices, and tight credit conditions. Growth is projected to pick up gradually over the next two years as residential construction bottoms out and begins a slow recovery and as credit conditions gradually improve. However, FOMC participants indicated that considerable uncertainty surrounded their outlook for economic growth and viewed the risks to their forecasts as skewed to the downside. Inflation has remained high, running at nearly a 3-1/2 percent annual rate over the first five months of this year as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures. And, with gasoline and other consumer energy prices rising in recent weeks, inflation seems likely to move temporarily higher in the near term. The elevated level of overall consumer inflation largely reflects a continued sharp run-up in the prices of many commodities, especially oil but also certain crops and metals.2The spot price of West Texas intermediate crude oil soared about 60 percent in 2007 and, thus far this year, has climbed an additional 50 percent or so. The price of oil currently stands at about five times its level toward the beginning of this decade. Our best judgment is that this surge in prices has been driven predominantly by strong growth in underlying demand and tight supply conditions in global oil markets. Over the past several years, the world economy has expanded at its fastest pace in decades, leading to substantial increases in the demand for oil. Moreover, growth has been concentrated in developing and emerging market economies, where energy consumption has been further stimulated by rapid industrialization and by government subsidies that hold down the price of energy faced by ultimate users. On the supply side, despite sharp increases in prices, the production of oil has risen only slightly in the past few years. Much of the subdued supply response reflects inadequate investment and production shortfalls in politically volatile regions where large portions of the world's oil reserves are located. Additionally, many governments have been tightening their control over oil resources, impeding foreign investment and hindering efforts to boost capacity and production. Finally, sustainable rates of production in some of the more secure and accessible oil fields, such as those in the North Sea, have been declining. In view of these factors, estimates of long-term oil supplies have been marked down in recent months. Long-dated oil futures prices have risen along with spot prices, suggesting that market participants also see oil supply conditions remaining tight for years to come. The decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar has also contributed somewhat to the increase in oil prices. The precise size of this effect is difficult to ascertain, as the causal relationships between oil prices and the dollar are complex and run in both directions. However, the price of oil has risen significantly in terms of all major currencies, suggesting that factors other than the dollar, notably shifts in the underlying global demand for and supply of oil, have been the principal drivers of the increase in prices. Another concern that has been raised is that financial speculation has added markedly to upward pressures on oil prices. Certainly, investor interest in oil and other commodities has increased substantially of late. However, if financial speculation were pushing oil prices above the levels consistent with the fundamentals of supply and demand, we would expect inventories of crude oil and petroleum products to increase as supply rose and demand fell. But in fact, available data on oil inventories show notable declines over the past year. This is not to say that useful steps could not be taken to improve the transparency and functioning of futures markets, only that such steps are unlikely to substantially affect the prices of oil or other commodities in the longer term. Although the inflationary effect of rising oil and agricultural commodity prices is evident in the retail prices of energy and food, the extent to which the high prices of oil and other raw materials have been passed through to the prices of non-energy, non-food finished goods and services seems thus far to have been limited. But with businesses facing persistently higher input prices, they may attempt to pass through such costs into prices of final goods and services more aggressively than they have so far. Moreover, as the foreign exchange value of the dollar has declined, rises in import prices have put greater upward pressure on business costs and consumer prices. In their economic projections for the June FOMC meeting, monetary policy makers marked up their forecasts for inflation during 2008 as a whole. FOMC participants continue to expect inflation to moderate in 2009 and 2010, as slower global growth leads to a cooling of commodity markets, as pressures on resource utilization decline, and as longer-term inflation expectations remain reasonably well anchored. However, in light of the persistent escalation of commodity prices in recent quarters, FOMC participants viewed the inflation outlook as unusually uncertain and cited the possibility that commodity prices will continue to rise as an important risk to the inflation forecast. Moreover, the currently high level of inflation, if sustained, might lead the public to revise up its expectations for longer-term inflation. If that were to occur, and those revised expectations were to become embedded in the domestic wage- and price-setting process, we could see an unwelcome rise in actual inflation over the longer term. A critical responsibility of monetary policy makers is to prevent that process from taking hold. At present, accurately assessing and appropriately balancing the risks to the outlook for growth and inflation is a significant challenge for monetary policy makers. The possibility of higher energy prices, tighter credit conditions, and a still-deeper contraction in housing markets all represent significant downside risks to the outlook for growth. At the same time, upside risks to the inflation outlook have intensified lately, as the rising prices of energy and some other commodities have led to a sharp pickup in inflation and some measures of inflation expectations have moved higher. Given the high degree of uncertainty, monetary policy makers will need to carefully assess incoming information bearing on the outlook for both inflation and growth. In light of the increase in upside inflation risk, we must be particularly alert to any indications, such as an erosion of longer-term inflation expectations, that the inflationary impulses from commodity prices are becoming embedded in the domestic wage- and price-setting process. I would like to conclude my remarks by providing a brief update on some of the Federal Reserve's actions in the area of consumer protection. At the time of our report last February, I described the Board's proposal to adopt comprehensive new regulations to prohibit unfair or deceptive practices in the mortgage market, using our authority under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act of 1994. After reviewing the more-than 4,500 comment letters we received on the proposed rules, the Board approved the final rules yesterday. The new rules apply to all types of mortgage lenders and will establish lending standards aimed at curbing abuses while preserving responsible subprime lending and sustainable homeownership. The final rules prohibit lenders from making higher-priced loans without due regard for consumers' ability to make the scheduled payments and require lenders to verify the income and assets on which they rely when making the credit decision. Also, for higher-priced loans, lenders now will be required to establish escrow accounts so that property taxes and insurance costs will be included in consumers' regular monthly payments. The final rules also prohibit prepayment penalties for higher-priced loans in cases in which the consumer's payment can increase during the first few years and restrict prepayment penalties on other higher-priced loans Other measures address the coercion of appraisers, servicer practices, and other issues. We believe the new rules will help to restore confidence in the mortgage market. In May, working jointly with the Office of Thrift Supervision and the National Credit Union Administration, the Board issued proposed rules under the Federal Trade Commission Act to address unfair or deceptive practices for credit card accounts and overdraft protection plans. Credit cards provide a convenient source of credit for many consumers, but the terms of credit card loans have become more complex, which has reduced transparency. Our consumer testing has persuaded us that disclosures alone cannot solve this problem. Thus, the Board's proposed rules would require card issuers to alter their practices in ways that will allow consumers to better understand how their own decisions and actions will affect their costs. Card issuers would be prohibited from increasing interest rates retroactively to cover prior purchases except under very limited circumstances. For accounts having multiple interest rates, when consumers seek to pay down their balance by paying more than the minimum, card issuers would be prohibited from maximizing interest charges by applying excess payments to the lowest rate balance first. The proposed rules dealing with bank overdraft services seek to give consumers greater control by ensuring that they have ample opportunity to opt out of automatic payments of overdrafts. The Board has already received more than 20,000 comment letters in response to the proposed rules. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. Footnotes1.Primary dealers are financial institutions that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. On behalf of the Federal Reserve System, the New York Fed's Open Market Desk engages in the trades to implement monetary policy.Return to text2.The dominant role of commodity prices in driving the recent increase in inflation can be seen by contrasting the overall inflation rate with the so-called core measure of inflation, which excludes food and energy prices. Core inflation has been fairly steady this year at an annual rate of about 2 percent.Return to text Footnotes 1.Primary dealers are financial institutions that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. On behalf of the Federal Reserve System, the New York Fed's Open Market Desk engages in the trades to implement monetary policy.Return to text 2.The dominant role of commodity prices in driving the recent increase in inflation can be seen by contrasting the overall inflation rate with the so-called core measure of inflation, which excludes food and energy prices. Core inflation has been fairly steady this year at an annual rate of about 2 percent.Return to text
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. Over the years, the Federal Reserve has significantly increased the transparency of monetary policy making. For example, starting in 1979, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has included economic projections of the FOMC participants in each semiannualMonetary Report to Congress. Since 1994, the FOMC has publicly announced changes in its target for its policy instrument, the federal funds rate. Most recently, the FOMC extended the horizon for its projections in October 2007 and is now publishing these projections four times a year.1 Has the Federal Reserve gone far enough? Or would further advances in transparency be useful? I will argue here that the science of monetary policy suggests that the Federal Reserve can indeed go further in enhancing its communication strategy, and that doing so would produce important benefits in economic performance and democratic accountability. I will also outline a specific proposal of my own and address a few concerns that some might have with elements of this proposal. Before proceeding, I would like to emphasize that my remarks today reflect only my own views and not necessarily those of anyone else on the Board of Governors or the FOMC. Indeed, this disclaimer has even more meaning now since, as many of you know, I will be leaving the Federal Reserve Board at the end of August and returning to Columbia University.2 What Are the Key Scientific Principles for Monetary Policy Communication?To think about what kind of central bank communication is desirable, let's begin by considering some key scientific principles regarding the objectives of monetary policy and the benefits of central bank transparency. Objectives of Monetary PolicyThe modern science of monetary policy is based on the idea that the central bank's objective is to maximize the economic well-being of the households in the economy (Mishkin 2007d). Broadly speaking, this objective can be expressed in terms of two components: minimizing the deviations of inflation from its optimal rate and minimizing the deviations of real economic activity from its so-called natural rate, which is the efficient level determined by the productive potential of the economy. Moreover, this analytical formulation of the objectives of monetary policy captures the essential mission of the Federal Reserve System, as summarized by the Federal Reserve's dual mandate to promote price stability and maximum employment.3By the way, I believe that the Federal Reserve's role as the lender of last resort is also crucial for fostering the stability of the financial system, but I will not elaborate further on that today.4 Policymakers, academic economists, and the general public broadly agree that maintaining a low and stable inflation rate significantly benefits the economy. For example, low and predictable inflation simplifies the savings and retirement planning of households, facilitates firms' production and investment decisions, and minimizes distortions that arise because the tax system is not completely indexed to inflation. Moreover, I interpret the available economic theory and empirical evidence as indicating that a long-run average inflation rate of about 2 percent, or perhaps a bit lower, is low enough to facilitate the everyday decisions of households and businesses while also alleviating the risk of debt deflation and other pitfalls of excessively low inflation.5 The rationale for promoting maximum sustainable employment is also fairly obvious: Recessions weaken household income and business production, and unemployment hurts workers and their families. As I have outlined elsewhere, these two objectives are typically complementary and mutually reinforcing: that is, done properly, stabilizing inflation contributes to stabilizing economic activity around its sustainable level, and vice versa.6 Nevertheless, it's important to note a fundamental difference between the objectives of price stability and maximum sustainable employment. On the one hand, the long-run average rate of inflation is solely determined by the actions of the Federal Reserve.7On the other hand, the level of maximum sustainable employment isnotsomething that can be chosen by the Federal Reserve, becausenocentral bank can control the level of real economic activity or employment over the longer run.8In fact, any attempt to use stimulative monetary policy to maintain employment above its long-run sustainable level would inevitably lead to an upward spiral of inflation with severe adverse consequences for household income and employment. Recent research has also emphasized the challenges of making contemporaneous "real-time" assessments of the level of maximum sustainable employment, because this level cannot be directly observed and can be inferred only with considerable uncertainty. Thus, in making these assessments, monetary policy makers need to draw on a wide range of indicators from labor, product, and financial markets.9 Benefits of Central Bank CommunicationA central element in successful monetary policy is the establishment of a nominal anchor. Why is this so important? The expectations for inflation of households and firms are a key factor in determining the actual behavior of inflation.10In the absence of a firm nominal anchor, these expectations may wander as the private sector revises its assessment of the rate at which inflation is likely to settle, and those movements in expectations for future inflation can generate pressure on the current inflation rate. By establishing a transparent and credible commitment to a specific numerical inflation objective, monetary policy can provide a firm anchor for long-run inflation expectations, thereby directly contributing to the objective of low and stable inflation.11Additionally, the presence of a firm nominal anchor gives the central bank greater flexibility to respond decisively to adverse demand shocks. Such a commitment helps ensure that an aggressive policy easing is not misinterpreted as signaling a shift in the central bank's inflation objective and thereby minimizes the possibility that inflation expectations could move upward and lead to a rise in actual inflation. A strong nominal anchor can be especially valuable in periods of financial market stress, as we have been experiencing recently, when prompt and decisive policy action may be required to minimize the risk of a severe contraction in economic activity that could exacerbate uncertainty and financial market stress.12Thus, the establishment of an explicit numerical inflation objective can play an important role in promoting financial stability as well as the stability of employment and inflation. More broadly, it should be noted that central bank transparency contributes importantly to democratic accountability and economic prosperity.13In particular, in a democratic society, the central bank has a responsibility to provide the public and its elected representatives with a full and compelling rationale for monetary policy decisions. Clarification of the central bank's objectives and policy strategies also reduces economic and financial uncertainty and thereby facilitates efficient decisionmaking by households, businesses, and financial market participants. How Has Federal Reserve Communication Been Enhanced?The Federal Reserve has been a pioneer in a number of aspects of central bank communication, many of which I have mentioned at the beginning of these remarks. Now I would like to discuss some of the main aspects of the enhancements to the FOMC's communication strategy that were announced in November. First, the forecast horizon for the FOMC's economic projections now covers three calendar years instead of only two years. For example, the projections released after the past meeting extend to 2010. Second, the Committee now publishes these projections four times a year rather than twice a year. Third, the projections now include a forecast of overall consumer price inflation, as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), a broad price index that corresponds closely to the price stability objective in the Federal Reserve's dual mandate. These forecasts of overall inflation complement the ongoing forecasts the Committee provides of the so-called core version of the PCE price index, which excludes the prices of food and energy.14Fourth, the release of the projections now includes a narrative describing FOMC participants' views of the principal forces shaping the outlook and the sources of risks to that outlook. As I indicated last November, I believe that these enhancements provide important information that will contribute to the public's understanding of our objectives and the rationale for our policy actions and hence will facilitate the decisionmaking of households and businesses.15 As reported last week in conjunction with the minutes of the latest FOMC meeting, the projections for overall PCE inflation at a three-year horizon (which is currently 2010) fell in a range of 1.6 percent to 2.1 percent, and the central tendency of these projections was 1.8 percent to 2 percent.16Each FOMC participant's projection is made under the assumption of "appropriate" monetary policy--that is, the path of policy calibrated to achieve outcomes for economic activity and inflation that are, in the eyes of each participant, most consistent with the objectives of price stability and maximum employment. For that reason, the longer-run inflation projections provide information about each FOMC participant's assessment of the long-run inflation rate that best promotes those dual objectives--what I have referred to as the "mandate-consistent inflation rate."17The increased information that these projections convey regarding FOMC participants' views of the mandate-consistent inflation rate, combined with the FOMC's continuing commitment to keeping inflation low and stable, should help anchor inflation expectations and actual inflation more firmly. The longer-run projections of output growth and unemployment are heavily influenced by FOMC participants' assessments of the sustainable rates of output growth and employment. As a result, these projections can provide the public with useful information regarding the FOMC's estimates of the sustainable rate of output growth (often referred to as potential output growth) and of the sustainable unemployment rate (often referred to as the natural rate of unemployment). Providing projections for the short run as well as for the longer run encourages FOMC participants to think in terms of desirable paths for inflation and output, a discipline that economic research suggests will produce better policy outcomes. These projections also are useful in enabling the FOMC to explain its policy decisions and strategies more fully in the context of its medium-term objectives for economic activity and inflation as well as the risks to those objectives. As a result, the public and the Congress can better assess whether our forecasts of the economy are reasonable and whether we are pursuing a policy that is consistent with achieving the dual mandate of price stability and maximum sustainable employment. The result should be increased accountability that is consistent with basic democratic principles. Is There Room for Further Improvement?Although the enhancements to the FOMC's communication strategy last November have been a major step forward, I believe that there is some room for further improvement. Conceptual ConsiderationsAs a conceptual matter, the three-year horizon of the projections may not be long enough to provide sufficient clarity about the views of FOMC participants regarding the mandate-consistent inflation rate, the sustainable growth rate of output, or the natural rate of unemployment. Moreover, these projections do not establish a transparent and credible commitment to a specific numerical inflation objective and hence do not provide a sufficiently firm nominal anchor. In my view, the length of the forecast horizon is particularly relevant at the current juncture in considering the projections for output growth and unemployment. Because of the recent adverse shocks to the economy--including turmoil in financial markets and the sharp increase in the prices of oil--output growth in recent quarters has fallen below potential, and the unemployment rate is, as best as I can judge, above the natural rate. Similarly, sharp increases in the prices of many commodities have driven inflation above rates consistent with price stability. Even under appropriate monetary policy, Committee forecasts of inflation, output growth, and unemployment might not settle at their respective long-run rates within the three-year horizon, obscuring Committee participants' views about these key parameters. This problem may currently be somewhat less acute for the current set of inflation projections, because inflation is projected to moderate to about 2 percent or below by the end of the projection period. Nevertheless, to the extent that some slack in economic activity is projected to persist through 2010, that slack might well induce a modest further decline in inflation, implying that policymakers' projections for inflation in 2010 might be a bit higher than their assessments of the mandate-consistent inflation rate. Empirical EvidenceMy discussion of room for improvement relative to the Federal Reserve's current communication strategy has been theoretical. There is, fortunately, evidence from a number of countries that have adopted an explicit numerical goal for inflation, including Canada, New Zealand, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.18And there is also evidence from the experience of the European Central Bank (ECB), which has not adopted an explicit numerical goal but has provided a fairly precise verbal description of its commitment to keeping inflation "below, but close to, 2 percent in the medium term."19 Over the past several years, empirical work that has drawn on this international experience has found some significant benefits in anchoring inflation expectations by establishing an explicit inflation objective. For example, let's take a look at three figures from a recent paper by Beechey, Johannsen, and Levin.20Figure 1depicts the long-run inflation expectations from surveys of professional forecasters in the euro area and in the United States. Inflation expectations in both economies are relatively well anchored. The lines on the left for the euro area are extremely flat, with only tiny and occasional deviations from the ECB's inflation goal of keeping inflation just below 2 percent over the medium run. In the United States, inflation expectations as measured by the mean or median forecast in the Survey of Professional Forecasters are also quite fixed at around 2-1/2 percent for consumer price index (CPI) inflation, but those in other surveys move around somewhat more. However, there is substantially greater disagreement in long-run inflation forecasts for the United States than for the euro area. As shown infigure 2, the standard deviation of U.S. inflation forecasts at each survey date is higher than the standard deviation of corresponding euro area inflation forecasts. Moreover, the degree of dispersion in the views of individual forecasters has gradually declined towards negligible levels for the euro area but not for the United States. One obvious interpretation of these patterns is that professional forecasters in the United States are less certain about the Federal Reserve's longer-term inflation goal. That uncertainty may also explain differences in the behavior of inflation compensation as implied by the gap between nominal and real yields on long-term bonds.Figure 3depicts far-forward inflation compensation (that is, the one-year-forward rate nine years ahead) for the United States and the euro area. Inflation compensation, sometimes referred to as "breakeven inflation," reflects not only inflation expectations but also a premium that compensates for uncertainty about inflation outcomes at the specified horizon. Evidently, far-forward inflation compensation for the euro area displays much smaller fluctuations than for the United States, consistent with greater stability of inflation expectations and a lower degree of uncertainty about longer-run inflation outcomes. Moreover, regression analysis confirms that U.S. far-ahead forward inflation compensation exhibits statistically significant responses to surprises in macroeconomic data releases--consistent with the view that market participants are continuously revising their views about the longer-run outlook for U.S. inflation. In contrast, euro-area inflation compensation does not respond significantly to economic news.21 One concern might be that these benefits in anchoring inflation expectations could come at the expense of the performance of output growth. However, the empirical evidence suggests that central banks with explicit inflation goals do not have worse output performances than central banks, such as the Federal Reserve, that have not specified an explicit numerical goal for inflation.22 In addition, the international experience suggests that an explicit inflation goal does not imply that these central banks place more emphasis on stabilizing inflation to the detriment of stabilizing output.Figure 4plots the standard deviation of headline inflation (measured as the quarter-on-quarter change at an annual rate) against the standard deviation of the unemployment gap as estimated by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Note that the United States appears near the top of the graph, as the country with the highest volatility of unemployment gaps.23Moreover, a number of researchers have shown that the response of policy interest rates to economic activity and inflation in the United States and euro area is quite similar, suggesting that the Federal Reserve and the ECB place similar weights on inflation and activity.24 This overview of the evidence should not be viewed as suggesting that the steps that the FOMC has taken to improve its communications over the past couple of decades or the more recent enhancements last fall have provided no benefits. Rather, this analysis supports the view that some room for further improvement still remains. What Should Be Done? A ProposalIn light of these considerations, I would like to suggest several specific modifications to the Federal Reserve's current communication strategy. Would This Proposal Work?It is reasonable to ask a few questions about whether these proposed changes would be feasible or desirable adjustments to the Federal Reserve's communication strategy. Would This Proposal Be Consistent with the Dual Mandate?Some commentators have worried that establishing a specific numerical inflation objective might lead to an overemphasis on controlling inflation and not enough concern about stabilizing real economic activity. My proposal is, however, consistent with the dual mandate, because it has the advantage of being less likely to be misinterpreted as a commitment to control inflation within a tight range over short horizons, since it only involves a consensus on the mandate-consistent inflation rate and an agreement not to change it without scientific justification. By so doing, this proposal should enhance the ability of monetary policy to stabilize fluctuations in economic activity, and therefore support the dual objectives provided to the Federal Reserve by congressional legislation. One lesson from the experiences of foreign central banks with explicit inflation objectives is that such a goal is indeed consistent with a dual mandate for stable prices and maximum employment. Some of the central banks that have explicit inflation objectives have mandates that specifically include other objectives such as output stabilization and financial stability. For example, the regulations governing the Norwegian central bank specifically state that monetary policy should contribute to stable developments in output and employment. Similarly, the Reserve Bank of Australia aims at encouraging strong and sustainable economic growth while ensuring that consumer inflation is consistent with the explicit numerical objective over the medium run. Even at central banks where the inflation objective appears to be the primary goal, policymakers do acknowledge that the stability of economic activity is also an important objective. For instance, Charles Goodhart, a former member of the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), has emphasized that the MPC aims at stabilizing both inflation and real economic activity and that its monetary policy strategy is quite similar to that of other central banks such as the Federal Reserve.26Moreover, as I noted earlier, the empirical evidence is consistent with this view: Central banks with explicit inflation objectives do not have worse outcomes for output growth and do not appear to be favoring inflation stabilization at the expense of output stabilization. Should the Inflation Objective Be Stated as a Specific Numerical Value Rather Than a Range?Establishing a specific numerical value for the inflation objective is a crucial aspect of my proposal. As discussed in my recent speech with the whimsical title of "Comfort Zones, Shmumfort Zones," publishing a range of values for the inflation objective has a number of undesirable features.27For example, when the price stability objective is formulated in terms of an acceptable range of inflation outcomes, the policy implications may be difficult to interpret and may make it harder for a committee of policymakers to decide on an appropriate course of monetary policy. Describing inflation objectives in terms of a comfort zone could also lead to perverse expectations dynamics that leads to larger fluctuations in economic activity.28Moreover, the uncertainty associated with long-run inflation under a zone could affect the perceived long-term real interest rates faced by households and firms through differential effects on the expectations of different agents, a pitfall that seems particularly plausible given the dispersion in professional forecasters' long-run expectations for U.S. inflation, as shown in figure 2.29 Indeed, one important lesson from the international experience is that point objectives have proven more effective than ranges in anchoring inflation expectations.30And even in cases where the inflation objective is formulated in terms of a band, emphasizing the midpoint of that band helps allay concerns that the central bank will only take aggressive policy actions at the edges of the band. In light of these considerations, many foreign central banks have taken steps to move away from an inflation objective that is expressed as a range and have moved toward an objective that is expressed as a single numerical value, as does my proposal here. For example, the Bank of England initially announced an inflation objective in terms of a range from 1 percent to 4 percent for the Retail Price Index excluding mortgage interest payments (RPIX), but this range was perceived as a band of indifference that implied the Bank would be equally satisfied with inflation outcomes anywhere within the range. Perhaps partly as a result, inflation expectations and realized inflation tended to remain close to the top of the range. Thus, the objective subsequently was modified to a point target of 2-1/2 percent for RPIX inflation, where inflation above or below that value was viewed as being equally undesirable. Inflation expectations converged quickly to this new rate in surveys of both households and professional forecasters, and the move was favorably received both by the public and by financial markets.31 In another instructive example, the ECB had initially emphasized a broad objective of keeping inflation below 2 percent over the medium term, but in May 2003, the ECB clarified that policy would be aimed at maintaining inflation below, but close to, 2 percent. That clarification was welcomed by market participants and likely contributed to the firm anchoring of long-run inflation expectations. Would This Proposal Be Misinterpreted as Establishing a Goal for Maximum Employment?As I have emphasized, a central bank can determine the long-run average inflation rate but cannot choose the maximum sustainable level of employment, which is determined by the underlying structure of the real economy. Thus, one might worry whether providing longer-horizon projections for output growth and employment as well as inflation might be mistakenly interpreted as establishing specific--and ultimately infeasible--goals for real economic activity. I do not believe this potential pitfall poses a substantial risk. Because monetary policy determines the inflation rate in the long run, agreement on the mandate-consistent inflation rate among FOMC members can only lower uncertainty about future inflation. In contrast, differences in the long-run projections for output growth and unemployment across FOMC participants are inevitable, as these factors are outside of the Committee's control and inherently uncertain given our understanding of economic fluctuations. The ongoing dispersion in long-run projections for output growth and unemployment that is a feature of my proposal would help underscore that these projections are assessments of potential output growth and the natural rate of unemployment and shouldnotbe viewed as numerical objectives chosen by the FOMC. Could the Numerical Inflation Objective Be Modified if Appropriate?One might be concerned about whether the numerical inflation objective could be subsequently adjusted for sound economic reasons. However, I would again draw on the experience from other central banks and point out that changing the technical specification of the inflation goal has been very well received elsewhere. For example, in late 2003, the inflation target of the Bank of England was switched from a 2-1/2 percent target for RPIX inflation to a 2 percent target for the CPI.32Despite some concerns both from the public and the Bank about the change, it appears to have been implemented with few problems. Indeed,figure 5shows the distribution of professional forecasters' medium- to long-range inflation projections in the United Kingdom in the fourth quarter of 2001, the first quarter of 2004, and the second quarter of this year. These expectations were initially clustered relatively tightly around the inflation objective of a 2-1/2 percent rate but moved to the new value of 2 percent within a few months of the announced change and have remained firmly anchored since then, especially compared with the dispersion in views regarding the longer-term outlook for U.S. inflation (Gürkaynak, Levin, and Swanson, 2008). Similarly, as I mentioned earlier, the ECB also clarified its inflation objective, and this change was implemented smoothly. Would This Proposal Provide a Sufficient Degree of Commitment to the Nominal Anchor?By stating its intention not to modify the mandate-consistent inflation rate without a clear technical rationale, I believe that the FOMC would provide a firm nominal anchor that would not differ much in practice from some alternative commitment to a specific numerical inflation objective. In explaining this view, I want to draw on some conversations with my son, who is currently enrolled in law school, and to take advantage of the opportunity to demonstrate my erudition by using a bit of Latin. (As you may know, I've already demonstrated my command of Yiddish in another recent speech.33) In this instance, the relevant legal term isstare decisis, which means "to stand by things decided."34This concept plays a crucial role in the functioning of our legal system: When the Supreme Court makes a decision in any given case, the reasoning behind that decision serves as a precedent that guides all subsequent legal considerations, except for particular circumstances in which the Supreme Court finds compelling reasons for modifying or overturning a prior decision. The approach that I have recommended here would operate in a roughly similar way. Because the consensus on the mandate-consistent inflation rate would be very transparent, the FOMC would not be inclined to modify that consensus value except for sound economic reasons; hence, this proposal would be sufficient to provide a firm anchor for long-run inflation expectations. ConclusionWhile the recent enhancements of the Federal Reserve's communication strategy have been beneficial, I believe that the science of monetary policy indicates that the FOMC needs to go even further. Thus, I have suggested that the FOMC should lengthen the horizons of its projections, reach a consensus on a specific numerical value for the mandate-consistent inflation rate, and indicate that this consensus value would be modified only for good scientific reasons. I have argued that moving in this direction would improve economic outcomes by anchoring inflation expectations more firmly while allowing sufficient flexibility to ensure that monetary policy would continue to be fully consistent with our dual mandate of price stability and maximum employment. Of course, once I return to academia at the end of next month, I will no longer be participating in any official consideration of these issues. However, I hope that the views that I have expressed today will be useful in contributing to the continuing evolution of the Federal Reserve's communication strategy. References Ball, Laurence, and Niahm Sheridan (2003). "Does Inflation Targeting Matter?" in Ben S. Bernanke and Michael Woodford, eds.,The Inflation-Targeting Debate. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 249-76. Bank of England (2008). "Key Monetary Policy Dates Since 1990." Beechey, Meredith J., Benjamin K. Johannsen, and Andrew Levin (2008). "Are Long-Run Inflation Expectations Anchored More Firmly in the Euro Area than in the United States?" Manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Aprevious versionof this paper was issued as CEPR Discussion Paper 6536. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, October. Bernanke, Ben S. (2007). "Federal Reserve Communications," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20071114a.htm. Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999).Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Brown, Gordon (2003). "Remit for the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England and the New Inflation Target (188 KB PDF)," letter from the Chancellor of the Exchequer to the Governor of the Bank of England, andaccompanying annex (35 KB PDF). Central Bank of Chile (2007). "Monetary Policy in an Inflation Targeting Framework," January. Christiano, Lawrence, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno (2007). "Shocks, Structures or Monetary Policies? The Euro Area and US after 2001," NBER Working Paper 13521. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research. European Central Bank (2003).Background Studies for the ECB's Evaluation of its Monetary Policy Strategy. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, May. Federal Open Market Committee (2008). "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, April 29-30, 2008," released May 21. Fraser, Bernie (1993). "Some Aspects of Monetary Policy (58 KB PDF)," speech delivered to Australian Business Economists, Sydney, March 31. Friedman, Milton (1963).Inflation: Causes and Consequences. New York: Asia Publishing House. Giavazzi, Francesco, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2006). "An Evaluation of Swedish Monetary Policy Between 1995 and 2005 (1.41 MB PDF)," a report prepared for the Riksdag Committee on Finance. Stockholm: Sveriges Riksdag. Goodhart, Charles A.E. (2005). "The Monetary Policy Committee's Reaction Function: An Exercise in Estimation,"Topics in Macroeconomics, vol. 5 (no. 1), article 18. Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Eric T. Swanson (2005). "The Sensitivity of Long-Term Interest Rates to Economic News: Evidence and Implications for Macroeconomic Models,"American Economic Review, vol. 95 (March), pp. 425-36. Gürkaynak, Refet S., Andrew Levin, and Eric T. Swanson (2008). "Does Inflation Targeting Anchor Long-Run Inflation Expectations? Evidence from Long-Term Bond Yields in the U.S., U.K., and Sweden." Manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Aprevious versionwas issued as CEPR Discussion Paper5808. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, August. Gürkaynak, Refet S., Andrew Levin, Andrew N. Marder, and Eric T. Swanson (2006). "Inflation Targeting and the Anchoring of Inflation Expectations in the Western Hemisphere," in Frederic S. Mishkin and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, eds.,Inflation Targeting. Santiago: Bank of Chile. King, Mervyn (2004).Speech (108 KB PDF)delivered at the annual Birmingham Forward/CBI Business Luncheon, Aston Villa Football Club, Birmingham, United Kingdom, January 20. Levin, Andrew T., Fabio M. Natalucci, and Jeremy M. Piger (2004). "The Macroeconomic Effects of Inflation Targeting (406 KB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Review, vol. 86 (July/August), pp. 51-80. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007a). "Inflation Dynamics," speech delivered at the Annual Macro Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 23. _________ (2007b). "Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate," speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10. _________ (2007c). "Estimating Potential Output," speech delivered at the Conference on Price Measurement for Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Dallas, May 24. _________ (2007d). "Will Monetary Policy Become More of a Science?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-44. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. _________ (2007e). "Headline versus Core Inflation in the Conduct of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Business Cycles, International Transmission, and Macroeconomic Policies Conference, HEC Montreal, Montreal, Canada, October 20. _________ (2007f). "Financial Instability and the Federal Reserve as a Liquidity Provider," speech delivered at the Museum of American Finance Commemoration of the Panic of 1907, New York, October 26. _________ (2007g). "Financial Instability and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Risk USA 2007 Conference, New York, November 5. _________ (2007h). "The Federal Reserve's Enhanced Communication Strategy and the Science of Monetary Policy," speech delivered to the Undergraduate Economics Association at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., November 29. _________ (2008a). "Monetary Policy Flexibility, Risk Management, and Financial Disruptions," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, January 11. _________ (2008b). "Does Stabilizing Inflation Contribute to Stabilizing Economic Activity?" speech delivered at East Carolina University's Beta Gamma Sigma Distinguished Lecture Series, Greenville, N.C., February 25. _________ (2008c). "Comfort Zones, Shmumfort Zones," speech delivered at the Sandridge Lecture of the Virginia Association of Economists and the H. Parker Willis Lecture of Washington and Lee University, Lexington, Va., March 27. _________ (2008d). "Central Bank Commitment and Communication," speech delivered at the Princeton Center for Economic Policy Studies, New York, April 3. _________ (2008e). "How Should We Respond to Asset Price Bubbles?" speech delivered at the Wharton Financial Institutions Center and Oliver Wyman Institute's Annual Financial Risk Roundtable, Philadelphia, May 15. Mishkin, Frederic S., and Adam S. Posen (1997). "Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Four Countries," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Economic Policy Review, vol. 3 (August), pp. 9-110. Mishkin, Frederic S., and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel (2001). "One Decade of Inflation Targeting in the World: What Do We Know and What Do We Need to Know?" in Norman Loayza and Raimundo Soto, eds.,Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile, pp. 117-219. _________ (2007). "Does Inflation Targeting Make a Difference?" in Frederic S. Mishkin and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, eds.,Monetary Policy Under Inflation Targeting. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile, pp. 291-372. Mishkin, Frederic S., and Niklas J. Westelius (2008). "Inflation Band Targeting and Optimal Inflation Contracts,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 40 (June), pp. 557-82. Orphanides, Athanasios, and Volker Wieland (2000). "Inflation Zone Targeting,"European Economic Review, vol. 44 (June), pp. 1351-87. Reserve Bank of Australia and the Treasurer of Australia (1996). "Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy," August 14. Reserve Bank of Australia (2008). "About Monetary Policy." Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters (2005). "Comparing Shocks and Frictions in US and Euro Area Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach,"Journal of Applied Econometrics, vol. 20 (no. 2, Recent Developments in Business Cycle Analysis), pp. 161-83. Footnotes 1.A more detailed review of past enhancements in Federal Reserve communications can be found in Bernanke (2007) and Mishkin (2007h).Return to text 2.I appreciate assistance fromBrian Doyle,Michael Kiley, andAndrew Levinin the preparation of these remarks.Return to text 3.Mishkin (2007b).Return to text 4.Mishkin (2007f, 2007g, 2008a, 2008e) discusses the lender-of-last-resort function and reviews the Federal Reserve's recent measures for providing additional liquidity to financial markets.Return to text 5.Mishkin (2008c).Return to text 6.Mishkin (2008b).Return to text 7.This is the point of Milton Friedman's famous adage, "Inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon" (Friedman, 1963, p. 17).Return to text 8.Mishkin (2007b).Return to text 9.Mishkin (2007c).Return to text 10.Mishkin (2007a).Return to text 11.Mishkin (2008d).Return to text 12.Mishkin (2008a).Return to text 13.Bernanke (2007).Return to text 14.Mishkin (2007e) discusses several key distinctions between overall inflation and core inflation in informing the conduct of monetary policy.Return to text 15.Mishkin (2007h).Return to text 16.The range of projections from the April FOMC meeting was 1.5 percent to 2 percent for overall PCE, while the central tendency was 1.8 percent to 2 percent (FOMC, 2008).Return to text 17.This is particularly true when the underlying level of inflation is reasonably close to the mandate-consistent rate, as I believe to be the case at the present time.Return to text 18.Further details on the experiences of these countries--as well as other economies that have adopted explicit numerical inflation objectives--may be found in Mishkin and Posen (1997), Bernanke and others (1999), and Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel (2001, 2007).Return to text 19.See ECB (2003, p. 6). Indeed, the experience of other central banks confirms that establishing a specific numerical value for the inflation objective can be viewed as a technical issue that does not necessarily require any new legislation, but, of course, this depends on the political system in each country. In Sweden, for example, the government announced in 1991 that low inflation was an overriding political goal, but the Riksbank's January 1993 announcement of an explicit inflation objective did not coincide with any legislative action (Giavazzi and Mishkin, 2006). The Riksbank stated an inflation goal accompanied by a two-year start-up period, so that the goal was to become operational in January 1995. Soon after the initial announcement by the Riksbank, various changes to its legislative mandate were proposed. Many of these were adopted in 1999, when a new constitution and new Riksbank Act came into effect. Similarly, the Reserve Bank of Australia announced a numerical inflation objective in 1993, and this objective was formalized about three years later when the government and governor issued a joint "Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy" (see Fraser, 1993; Reserve Bank of Australia and the Treasurer of Australia, 1996; and Reserve Bank of Australia, 2008). And in Chile, the law establishes broad objectives for the Central Bank of Chile, but the Bank itself has elaborated that its mandate for price stability is to be interpreted at aiming for a 3 percent inflation rate at a two-year horizon (see Central Bank of Chile, 2007).Return to text 20.Beechey, Johannsen, and Levin (2008).Return to text 21.Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) demonstrated the sensitivity of U.S. far-ahead forward nominal interest rates to economic news. Gürkaynak, Levin, and Swanson (2008) examined far-ahead forward inflation compensation and found significant effects of news for the United States but not for Sweden or the United Kingdom; Gürkaynak, Levin, Marder, and Swanson (2007) obtained consistent results for Canada and Chile, and Beechey, Johannsen, and Levin (2008) found no significant effects of news on far-ahead forward inflation compensation for the euro area.Return to text 22.See Ball and Sheridan (2003) and Levin, Natalucci, and Piger (2003).Return to text 23.Of course, this evidence is only suggestive, because differences in economic structure may account for some of these differences; for example, most of the countries with explicit inflation objectives are small and relatively open economies that might be expected to have higher volatility of both unemployment and inflation. It should also be noted that the U.S. economy is closer to the center of the pack instead of an outlier when the volatility of the real economy is measured in terms of output gaps rather than unemployment gaps.Return to text 24.See Smets and Wouters (2005) and Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2007).Return to text 25.FOMC participants would work toward reaching this consensus about mandate-consistent inflation using the overall inflation rate, as measured by PCE inflation, to be consistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate. Overall and core (excluding changes in the prices of food and energy) inflation rates are likely to be at similar rates at a horizon of five or more years.Return to text 26.Goodhart (2005).Return to text 27.Mishkin (2008c).Return to text 28.Mishkin (2008c).Return to text 29.At a given point in time, the yield on a bond with a specific maturity is determined by the views of the "marginal investor" who is indifferent between buying and selling that bond. Thus, if financial market participants have heterogenous views about the central bank's inflation objective, the identity of the marginal investor might vary systematically over time in ways that influence the evolution of long-term bond yields. Another pitfall is that if a central bank places a high degree of emphasis on the boundaries of a range, then these threshold effects imply nonlinearities in the conduct of monetary policy that are likely to produce less desirable economic outcomes; see Orphanides and Wieland (2000).Return to text 30.See Mishkin and Westelius (2008) and Mishkin (2008c).Return to text 31.In June 1995, the range of 1 percent to 4 percent was dropped and the goal became an inflation rate of 2-1/2 percent or less for RPIX inflation. The goal became a point target of 2-1/2 percent on the RPIX with deviations in either direction treated symmetrically in December 1997, about seven months after the creation of the Monetary Policy Committee and the granting of Bank of England independence (Bank of England, 2008).Return to text 32.See Brown (2003) and King (2004) for the rationale behind the change.Return to text 33.Mishkin (2008c).Return to text 34.The full legal term isstare decisis et non quieta movere, and the literal translation from the Latin is as follows: "Stand by things decided and do not move that which is still."Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Capital Corp of the West, Merced, California, a registered bank holding company, its subsidiary bank, County Bank, Merced, California, a state-member bank, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.A copy of the Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among KCB Bank, Kearney, Missouri, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, and the Missouri Division of Finance.A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.