The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Trade Commission today announced proposed regulations that generally would require a creditor to provide a consumer with a risk-based pricing notice when, based in whole or in part on the consumer's credit report, the creditor offers or provides credit to the consumer on terms less favorable than the terms it offers or provides to other consumers. Risk-based pricing refers to the practice of using a consumer's credit report, which reflects his or her risk of nonpayment, in setting or adjusting the price and other terms of credit offered or extended to a particular consumer. Many creditors offer more favorable terms to consumers with better credit histories. The proposed rules would apply, with certain exceptions, to all creditors that engage in risk-based pricing. Under these rules, a risk-based pricing notice would generally be provided to the consumer after the terms of credit have been set, but before the consumer becomes contractually obligated on the credit transaction. The proposal provides a number of different approaches that creditors may use to identify the consumers to whom they must provide risk-based pricing notices. In addition, the proposed rule includes certain exceptions to the notice requirement. The most significant of the exceptions permits creditors, in lieu of providing a risk-based pricing notice to those consumers who receive less favorable terms, to provide all of their consumers with their credit scores and explanatory information. The proposal would implement section 311 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003, which amends the Fair Credit Reporting Act. The proposed rules are attached. The proposal will soon be published in the Federal Register and the comment period will end 90 days thereafter. Federal Register Notice:8.8 MB PDF|TEXTCorrection:1.54 MB PDF|TEXT Proposal for CommentFACT Act Risk-Based Pricing RuleView Comments
The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies today announced the availability of the 2008 list of distressed or underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies where bank revitalization or stabilization activities will receive Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) consideration as "community development." As in past releases, the 2008 list will incorporate a one-year lag period for geographies that were designated as distressed or underserved in 2007, but were not designated as such in the 2008 release. Geographies subject to the one-year lag period are eligible to receive consideration for community development activities for the 12 months following publication of the 2008 list. "Distressed nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies" and "underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies" are designated by the agencies in accordance with their CRA regulations. The criteria used to designate these areas are available on the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) website (http://www.ffiec.gov/cra). The 2008 list and lists from previous years can be found on the FFIEC website, along with data source information used to generate the list of distressed or underserved geographies for each year.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application of Rolling Hills Bank & Trust, Atlantic, Iowa, to establish a branch at 502 Broad Street, Adair, Iowa. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the approval of an application by SNS Property Finance B.V., Hoevelaken, the Netherlands, to establish a representative office in Arlington, Virginia.Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Richmond, Minneapolis, and Dallas, decreasing the discount rate at the Banks from 2-1/2 percent to 2-1/4 percent, effective immediately.
The Federal Reserve Board announced Wednesday that the Consumer Advisory Council will hold its next meeting on Thursday, June 19. The meeting will take place in Dining Room E, Terrace Level, in the Board's Martin Building. The session will begin at 9:00 a.m. and is open to the public. Anyone planning to attend the meeting should, for security purposes, register no later than Tuesday, June 17, by completing the form found online at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/secure/forms/cacregistration.cfmAdditionally, attendees must present photo identification to enter the building.The Council's function is to advise the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under various consumer financial services laws and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics: Reports by committees and other matters initiated by the Council members may also be discussed. The Board invites comments from the public on any of these matters.The Board's notice is attached.
The federal financial regulatory agencies today issued final illustrations for helping consumers understand certain hybrid adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) products. The agencies' Statement on Subprime Mortgage Lending (Subprime Statement), which became effective July 10, 2007, recommended that institutions provide clear, balanced, and timely information to consumers about the relative benefits and risks of hybrid ARM products. The illustrations are intended to assist institutions in providing this information. The illustrations consist of (1) an explanation of some key features of products covered by the Subprime Statement; and (2) three charts with examples of the potential payment shock accompanying these types of loans.Institutions are not required to use the illustrations. They may use them, provide information based on them, or provide consumers with information described in the guidance in an alternate format. The agencies will be posting the illustrations on their websites for downloading and printing. In particular, versions of the illustrations will be posted in English and in Spanish together with a template of the illustrations that institutions can modify to reflect the latest market conditions. The final document, Illustrations of Consumer Information for Hybrid Adjustable Rate Mortgage Products, is attached. Federal Register Notice:760 KB PDF|TEXT
On May 19, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $75 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Stop-out rate:2.100 percentTotal propositions submitted:$84.438 billionTotal propositions accepted:$75.000 billionBid/cover ratio:1.13Number of bidders:75 Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 71.65% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on May 22, 2008, and will mature on June 19, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by noon EDT on May 20, 2008. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on May 20, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On May 5, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $75 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Stop-out rate:2.220 percentTotal propositions submitted:$96.618 billionTotal propositions accepted:$75.000 billionBid/cover ratio:1.29Number of bidders:71 Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 92.52% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on May 8, 2008, and will mature on June 5, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by noon EDT on May 6, 2008. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on May 6, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday proposed rules to prohibit unfair practices regarding credit cards and overdraft services that would, among other provisions, protect consumers from unexpected increases in the rate charged on pre-existing credit card balances. The rules, proposed for public comment under the Federal Trade Commission Act (FTC Act), also would forbid banks from imposing interest charges using the "two-cycle" billing method, would require that consumers receive a reasonable amount of time to make their credit card payments, and would prohibit the use of payment allocation methods that unfairly maximize interest charges. They also include protections for consumers that use overdraft services offered by their bank. "The proposed rules are intended to establish a new baseline for fairness in how credit card plans operate," said Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. "Consumers relying on credit cards should be better able to predict how their decisions and actions will affect their costs." The proposed changes to the Board's Regulation AA (Unfair or Deceptive Acts or Practices) would be complemented by separate proposals that the Board is issuing under the Truth in Lending Act (Regulation Z) and the Truth in Savings Act (Regulation DD). The provisions addressing credit card practices are part of the Board's ongoing effort to enhance protections for consumers who use credit cards, and follow the Board's 2007 proposal to improve the credit card disclosures under the Truth in Lending Act. The FTC Act proposal includes five key protections for consumers that use credit cards: The proposal would also address subprime credit cards by limiting the fees that reduce the available credit. In addition, banks that make firm offers of credit advertising multiple rates or credit limits would be required to disclose in the solicitation the factors that determine whether a consumer will qualify for the lowest rate and highest credit limit. "Unfair practices can impose significant costs on credit card users," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Randall S. Kroszner. "The new proposed rules would provide the benefit of substantial protection against practices that can harm consumers." The Board's proposal under the FTC Act also addresses acts or practices in connection with a bank's payment of overdrafts on a deposit account, whether the overdraft is created by check, a withdrawal at an automated teller machine, a debit card purchase, or other transactions. The proposal requires institutions to provide consumers with notice and an opportunity to opt out of the payment of overdrafts, before any overdraft fees or charges may be imposed on consumers' accounts. To ensure that consumers enjoy the same protections regardless of the institution from which they obtain a credit card or receive overdraft protection, the Board's FTC Act proposal is issued concurrently with substantively similar proposals by the Office of Thrift Supervision and the National Credit Union Administration that would apply, respectively, to savings associations and federally-chartered credit unions. All threeFederal Registernotices are attached. In light of the significance of the issues raised, the comment period for the FTC Act proposal ends seventy-five days after publication of the proposal in theFederal Register, while the comment periods for the Regulation Z and DD proposals end sixty days after publication. Publication of each of the proposals is expected shortly. Highlights of Proposed Rules Regarding Credit Cards and Overdraft Services Statement by Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Statement by Governor Randall S. Kroszner Federal Register Notices Board meeting materials Proposals for Comment
The Federal Reserve will conduct three auctions of 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility (TAF) in June. It will offer $75 billion in an auction to be held on Monday, June 2, settling on Thursday, June 5, and maturing on Thursday, July 3; $75 billion in an auction to be held on Monday, June 16, settling on Thursday, June 19, and maturing on Thursday, July 17; and $75 billion in an auction to be held on Monday, June 30, settling on Thursday, July 3, and maturing on Thursday, July 31.
On May 5, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $75 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm).Description of Offering and Auction ParametersOffering Amount:$75 billionTerm:28-day loanBid Submission Date:May 5, 2008Opening Time:11 a.m. EDTClosing Time:1 p.m. EDTNotification Date:May 6, 2008Settlement Date:May 8, 2008Maturity Date:June 5, 2008Minimum Bid Amount (per bid):$5 millionBid Increment:$100,000Maximum Bid Amount(per institution):$7.5 billion (10% of Offering Amount)Minimum Bid Rate:2.00 percentIncremental Bid Rate:0.001 percentMinimum Award:$10,000Maximum Award:$7.5 billion (10% of Offering Amount) Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
On May 19, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $75 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm).Description of Offering and Auction ParametersOffering Amount:$75 billionTerm:28-day loanBid Submission Date:May 19, 2008Opening Time:11 a.m. EDTClosing Time:1 p.m. EDTNotification Date:May 20, 2008Settlement Date:May 22, 2008Maturity Date:June 19, 2008Minimum Bid Amount (per bid):$5 millionBid Increment:$100,000Maximum Bid Amount(per institution):$7.5 billion (10% of Offering Amount)Minimum Bid Rate:1.99 percentIncremental Bid Rate:0.001 percentMinimum Award:$10,000Maximum Award:$7.5 billion (10% of Offering Amount) Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
Central banks have continued to work together and to consult regularly on liquidity conditions in financial markets. In view of the persistent liquidity pressures in some term funding markets, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank are announcing an expansion of their liquidity measures. Federal Reserve ActionsThe Federal Reserve announced today an increase in the amounts auctioned to eligible depository institutions under its biweekly Term Auction Facility (TAF) from $50 billion to $75 billion, beginning with the auction on May 5. This increase will bring the amounts outstanding under the TAF to $150 billion. In conjunction with the increase in the size of the TAF, the Federal Open Market Committee has authorized further increases in its existing temporary reciprocal currency arrangements with the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Swiss National Bank (SNB). These arrangements will now provide dollars in amounts of up to $50 billion and $12 billion to the ECB and the SNB, respectively, representing increases of $20 billion and $6 billion. The FOMC extended the term of these reciprocal currency arrangements through January 30, 2009. In addition, the Federal Open Market Committee authorized an expansion of the collateral that can be pledged in the Federal Reserve's Schedule 2 Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) auctions. Primary dealers may now pledge AAA/Aaa-rated asset-backed securities, in addition to already eligible residential- and commercial-mortgage-backed securities and agency collateralized mortgage obligations, beginning with the Schedule 2 TSLF auction to be announced on May 7, 2008, and to settle on May 9, 2008. The wider pool of collateral should promote improved financing conditions in a broader range of financial markets. Treasury securities, agency securities, and agency mortgage-backed securities continue to be eligible as collateral in Schedule 1 TSLF auctions. Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central BanksInformation on the actions that will be taken by other central banks is available at the following websites: European Central BankSwiss National Bank (69 KB PDF) Term Auction FacilityTerm Securities Lending Facility
Frederic S. Mishkin submitted his resignation on Wednesday as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, effective August 31, 2008. Mishkin, who has been a member of the Board since September 5, 2006, submitted his letter of resignation to President Bush. He will return to the Graduate School of Business at Columbia University as a professor of economics and resume teaching in the fall. The Federal Open Market Committee meeting on August 5 will be his last. "Rick's contributions to the intellectual underpinnings of monetary policy at the Federal Reserve have been invaluable," said Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. "His keen insights, deep analysis and humor have enriched our deliberations. I greatly value his friendship and counsel and wish him all the best as he returns to teaching." Mishkin, 57, was appointed to the Board by President Bush to fill an unexpired term ending January 31, 2014. During his time on the Board, he served as Chairman of the Committee on Economic Affairs and as a member of the Committee on Supervisory and Regulatory Affairs and the Committee on Consumer and Community Affairs. Before joining the Board, Mishkin was the Alfred Lerner Professor of Banking and Financial Institutions at the Graduate School of Business, Columbia University, from 1999 to 2006. In addition, he has taught at the University of Chicago, Northwestern University, and Princeton University. A copy of his resignation letter is attached.
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the Wharton Financial Institutions Center and Oliver Wyman Institute's Annual Financial Risk Roundtable, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Over the centuries, economies have periodically been subject to asset price bubbles--pronounced increases in asset prices that depart from fundamental values and eventually crash resoundingly. Because economies often fare very poorly after a bubble bursts, central bankers need to think hard about how they should address such bubbles. This issue has become especially topical of late because of the rapid rise and subsequent decline in residential housing prices this decade. The recent drop in house prices in many markets around the country has been accompanied by increasing rates of defaults on mortgage loans and home foreclosures. These developments have created hardship for the families who are forced to leave their homes and have disrupted communities; in addition, the developments have contributed to a major shock to the financial system, with sharp increases in credit spreads and large losses to financial institutions. As many have pointed out, the damage to households' credit and the financial disruption have been a drag on the U.S. economy, which has led to a slowing of economic growth and a recent decline in employment. In my remarks today, I would like to return to the issue of how we should respond to possible asset price bubbles.1I will first focus on the conceptual framework I use to evaluate these issues, based on a core set of scientific principles for monetary policy.2My framing of the issues highlights the following three questions: My discussion of these conceptual issues is followed by a summary of several historical examples that illustrate the importance of focusing on the principles I have outlined. As usual, these remarks reflect only my own views and are not intended to reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System. Are Some Asset Price Bubbles More Problematic Than Others?In order to consider how monetary and other policies should address asset price bubbles, we must first examine how asset prices influence inflation and aggregate economic activity. These influences act through several channels; in particular, asset prices provide signals regarding profitable investments, affect the wealth of households, and influence the cost of capital to firms and households. For example, higher equity prices, whether driven by fundamentals such as lower interest rates or faster productivity growth or by bubble-type factors like "irrational exuberance," boost business investment by lowering the cost of capital and raise household demand by generating increased wealth. Other fluctuations in asset prices act similarly. The resulting fluctuations in resource utilization lead to changes in inflation.3 The influences of asset prices on demand and inflation through traditional wealth and cost-of-capital channels fall directly within the traditional concerns of monetary policy, a point to which I will return shortly. However, not all asset price bubbles are alike, and some bubbles raise issues outside the direct responsibility of monetary policy but within the policy concerns of the broader regulatory framework governing our financial system. In particular, some asset price bubbles can have more-significant economic effects, and thus raise additional concerns for economic policymakers, by contributing to financial instability. Financial history reveals the following typical chain of events: Because of either exuberant expectations about economic prospects or structural changes in financial markets, a credit boom begins, increasing the demand for some assets and thereby raising their prices.4The rise in asset values, in turn, encourages further lending against these assets, increasing demand, and hence their prices, even more. This feedback loop can generate a bubble, and the bubble can cause credit standards to ease as lenders become less concerned about the ability of the borrowers to repay loans and instead rely on further appreciation of the asset to shield themselves from losses. At some point, however, the bubble bursts. The collapse in asset prices then leads to a reversal of the feedback loop in which loans go sour, lenders cut back on credit supply, the demand for the assets declines further, and prices drop even more. The resulting loan losses and declines in asset prices erode the balance sheets at financial institutions, further diminishing credit and investment across a broad range of assets. The decline in lending depresses business and household spending, which weakens economic activity and increases macroeconomic risk in credit markets.5In the extreme, the interaction between asset prices and the health of financial institutions following the collapse of an asset price bubble can endanger the operation of the financial system as a whole.6 To be clear, not all asset price bubbles create these risks to the financial system. For example, the bubble in technology stocks in the late 1990s was not fueled by a feedback loop between bank lending and rising equity values; indeed, the bursting of the tech-stock bubble was not accompanied by a marked deterioration in bank balance sheets. But potential for some asset price bubbles to create larger difficulties for the financial system than others implies that our regulatory framework should be designed to address the potential challenges to the financial system created by these bubbles. How Should Monetary Policy Respond to Asset Price Bubbles?In order to think about how central banks should respond to asset prices, we need to first remember the objectives of monetary policy. The ultimate purpose of a central bank should be to promote the public good through policies that foster economic prosperity. Research in monetary economics describes this objective in terms of stabilizing both inflation and economic activity. Indeed, these objectives are exactly what is embodied in the dual mandate that the Congress has given the Federal Reserve.7 Because of their effects on prices and employment, macroeconomic fluctuations due to asset price movements are a concern for monetary policy makers. However, the macroeconomic consequences of asset price fluctuations are unlikely to have long-lasting and severe consequences for the economy as long as monetary policy responds appropriately. Whether an asset price bubble is occurring or not, as asset prices rise and boost the outlook for economic activity and inflation, monetary policy should respond by moving to a more restrictive stance. After a bubble bursts and the outlook for economic activity deteriorates, policy should become more accommodative.8As I pointed out in a paper that I presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's Jackson Hole conference in September, if monetary policy responds immediately to the decline in asset prices, the negative effects from a bursting asset price bubble to economic activity arising from the decline in wealth and increase in the cost of capital to firms and households are likely to be small.9More generally, monetary policy should react to asset price bubbles by looking to the effects of such bubbles on employment and inflation, then adjusting policy as required to achieve maximum sustainable employment and price stability. To be clear, I think that in most cases, monetary policy should not respond to asset prices per se, but rather to changes in the outlook for inflation and aggregate demand resulting from asset price movements. This point of view implies that actions, such as attempting to "prick" an asset price bubble, should be avoided. I take this view for (at least) three important reasons.10First, asset price bubbles can be hard to identify. As a result, tightening monetary policy to restrain a bubble that has been misidentified can lead to weaker economic growth than is warranted. In addition, central bank actions to influence asset prices when the central bank is uncertain about the presence or extent of a bubble can interfere with the role of asset prices in allocating resources.11 Second, even if asset price bubbles could be identified, the effect of interest rates on asset price bubbles is highly uncertain. Although some theoretical models suggest that raising interest rates can diminish the acceleration of asset prices, raising interest rates may be very ineffective in restraining the bubble, because market participants expect such high rates of return from buying bubble-driven assets.12Other research and historical examples (which I will discuss later) have suggested that raising interest rates may cause a bubble to burst more severely, thereby increasing the damage to the economy.13Another way of saying this is that bubbles are departures from normal behavior, and it is unrealistic to expect that the usual tools of monetary policy will be effective in abnormal conditions. The bottom line is that we do not know the effects of monetary policy actions on asset price bubbles. Third, there are many asset prices, and at any one time a bubble may be present in only a fraction of assets. Monetary policy actions are a very blunt instrument in such a case, as such actions would be likely to affect asset prices in general, rather than solely those in a bubble. All told, research suggests that monetary policy that does not try to prick bubbles, but instead responds solely to the inflation and aggregate demand outlook, is likely to lead to better outcomes even when bubbles might arise.14 Are Other Types of Policy Responses Appropriate?I would now like to return to the effect of asset price bubbles on the stability of the financial system. As I highlighted earlier, some, but clearly not all, asset price bubbles create risks to the financial system that could have large negative effects on the macroeconomy. As a result, it is important to examine the potential for government policies to address the type of bubble in which there is feedback between asset prices and financial stability. I would like to emphasize the importance of regulatory policy. Monetary policy--that is, the setting of overnight interest rates--is already challenged by the task of managing both price stability and maximum sustainable employment. As a result, it falls to regulatory policies and supervisory practices to help strengthen the financial system and reduce its vulnerability to both booms and busts in asset prices. Of course, some aspects of such policies are simply the usual elements of a well-functioning prudential regulatory and supervisory system. These elements include adequate disclosure and capital requirements, prompt corrective action, careful monitoring of an institution's risk-management procedures, close supervision of financial institutions to enforce compliance with regulations, and sufficient resources and accountability for supervisors. More generally, our approach to regulation should favor policies that will help prevent future feedback loops between asset price bubbles and credit supply. A few broad principles are helpful in thinking about what such policies should look like. First, regulations should be designed with an eye toward fixing market failures. Second, regulations should be designed so as not to exacerbate the interaction between asset price bubbles and credit provision. For example, research has shown that the rise in asset values that accompanies a boom results in higher capital buffers at financial institutions, supporting further lending in the context of an unchanging benchmark for capital adequacy; in the bust, the value of this capital can drop precipitously, possibly even necessitating a cut in lending.15It is important for research to continue to analyze the role of bank capital requirements in promoting financial stability, including whether capital requirements should be adjusted over the business cycle or whether other changes in our regulatory structure are necessary to ensure macroeconomic efficiency.16Finally, in general, regulatory policies are appropriately focused on the soundness of individual institutions. However, during certain periods, risks across institutions become highly correlated, and we need to consider whether such policies might need to take account of these higher-stress environments in assessing the resilience of both individual institutions and the financial system as a whole in the face of potential external shocks. Some policies to address the risks to financial stability from asset price bubbles could be made a standard part of the regulatory system and would be operational at all times--whether a bubble was in progress or not. However, because specific or new types of market failures might be driving a particular asset price bubble, some future bubbles will almost certainly create unanticipated difficulties, and, as a result, adjustments to our policy stance to limit the market failure contributing to a bubble could be very beneficial if identified and implemented at the appropriate time. Earlier, I pointed out that a bubble could be hard to identify. Indeed, I think this is especially true of bubbles in the stock market. Central banks or government officials are unlikely to have an informational advantage over market participants. If a central bank were able to identify bubbles in the stock market, wouldn't market participants be able to do so as well? If so, then a bubble would be unlikely to develop, because market participants would know that prices were getting out of line with fundamentals. However, although I believe that stock market bubbles might be hard to identify because they are typically not driven by credit booms (which also makes them less harmful because their collapse is less likely to lead to financial instability), when asset prices are rising rapidly at the same time that credit is booming, there may be a greater likelihood that asset prices are deviating from fundamentals, because laxer credit standards may be driving asset prices upward.17In this case, financial regulators at central banks and other institutions may have a greater likelihood of identifying that a bubble is in progress; for example, they might have information that lenders have weakened their underwriting standards and that credit extension is rising at abnormally high rates. The reasoning here suggests that a rapid rise in asset prices accompanied by a credit boom provides a signal that should lead central bankers and other financial supervisors to carefully scrutinize financial developments to see if market failures might be driving the asset price boom. The resulting analysis of financial developments might then lead policymakers to consider implementing policies to address the imperfections behind the market failures and thereby help reduce the magnitude of the bubble. Some Historical ExamplesI would like to now turn to a few examples from U.S. history and international experience that highlight the interaction between asset price bubbles, financial stability, and the policy framework. The Stock Market Boom of the 1920sThe Roaring Twenties and the onset of the Great Depression present a particularly drastic example. The U.S. economy thrived during the 1920s as new technologies, financial innovations, and improved business practices were introduced and contributed to a general sense of optimism. As you all know, the stock market experienced a dramatic rise during that decade until it burst during the Great Crash of 1929. A popular account of that period attributes the stock market boom to easy credit and rising speculation; the period ended with panic selling on Wall Street and triggered the beginning of the Great Depression.18According to this view, the Federal Reserve was incorrect in letting the rise in equity prices develop and should have raised interest rates to stem stock market speculation. You will guess from my proposed set of principles for monetary policy that I view this approach as mistaken. It is first very difficult to assess the extent to which the stock market was driven by nonfundamental forces at the time; by some accounts, the stock market bubble started only in March 1928.19Nonetheless, the rise in equity prices took a more prominent place during policy discussions at the Fed beginning in 1927, with Board member Adolph Miller pressing fervently for an increase in interest rates to stop the speculative use of credit. This approach was opposed by Benjamin Strong, the influential Governor of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York who feared a negative impact on the economy: "…any effort through higher rates directed especially at stock speculation would have an unfavorable effect upon business…"20However, Strong's death in 1928 opened the door for a more restrictive monetary policy aimed at curbing excesses in the stock market, even as signs of economic weakness became visible. The tightening cycle that ended in August 1929 weakened an already deteriorating economy and paved the way for the collapse of the stock market in October. The Federal Reserve's mistake in attempting to burst the bubble directly was made worse by its refusal to change course rapidly after the market collapsed and the banking system got into trouble, thereby allowing deflation to set in, which raised real interest rates to extremely high levels and further depressed growth. Japan's Asset Price Boom and the Lost DecadeAn asset price bubble also confronted the Bank of Japan (BOJ) with tough decisions starting in the mid- to late 1980s. The extent of the asset price boom in Japan in the late 1980s can be gauged by the fact that the land surrounding the Imperial Palace in Tokyo was estimated to be worth more than the whole of California at that time. Without a doubt, the 1980s was a prosperous decade in Japan with high growth, low unemployment, little inflation, and an envied business model. During that decade, equity prices rose more than 600 percent and land prices boomed more than 400 percent. Soaring equity and land prices during the 1980s, combined with relatively low interest rates, eased financing conditions for investment substantially.21The ratio of bank loans to gross domestic product surged, and investment spending became the main driver of economic activity. Because of financial deregulation, banks' risk-taking behavior also increased as they channeled more funds to real-estate-related sectors and to small firms, accepting property as collateral.22Trusting in a rising real estate market, some banks went as far as lending more than 100 percent of a property's appraisal value. As at the Fed during the Roaring Twenties, the BOJ was concerned about the rapid rise in asset prices in the mid-1980s and the possibility that a bubble was in progress. In 1989, as asset prices continued to soar and inflation moved upward, the BOJ decided to start raising rates. The stock market collapsed at the beginning of 1990, but land prices continued to rise, and the BOJ kept tightening policy. Monetary policy only gradually reversed course in the summer of 1991 as growth declined and inflation and land prices started to move down. The subsequent decade has been termed "the lost decade." During that time, Japan suffered from anemic growth and repeated bouts of very low inflation and deflation. Japan's experience re-emphasizes the importance of regulatory policies that may prevent feedback loops between asset price bubbles and credit provision. Indeed, during the boom, Japanese regulations that allowed banks to count as capital unrealized gains from equities may have contributed to banks' appetite for equities during the stock market run-up and to financial instability as the stock market collapsed. After the bursting of the bubble, policymakers did not quickly resolve the fragility of the banking sector, thereby allowing conditions to worsen as banks kept lending to inefficient, debt-ridden, so-called zombie firms. On the other hand, Japan's experience does not support the need for preemptive monetary policy actions to deflate a bubble, as some commentators have suggested.23The tightening of monetary policy during the bubble period does not appear to have led to better economic outcomes. Moreover, the BOJ did not reverse course sufficiently or rapidly enough in the aftermath of the crisis.24Research suggests that it was the slow response of monetary policy to the deterioration in the economic outlook and fall in inflation following the bursting of the bubble that contributed to the onset of deflation.25 The Recent U.S. ExperienceAs highlighted in my introduction, the issues I have discussed today are especially salient because of the recent experience with house prices in the United States. It is too early to draw firm conclusions regarding all of the factors that have contributed to the rise and decline of house prices and the impact of these developments on our financial system and the macroeconomy. But the Federal Reserve and other government agencies have already begun to address some weaknesses that emerged during this period. For example, problems arose in recent years in the chain linking the origination of mortgages to their distribution to investors through structured investment products like mortgage-backed securities. Underwriting standards became increasingly compromised at origination. In retrospect, the breakdown in underwriting can be linked to the incentives that the originate-to-distribute model, as implemented in this case, created for the originators. Notably, the incentive structures often tied originator revenue to loan volume rather than to the quality of the loans being passed up the chain. This problem was exacerbated by the bubble in house prices: Lenders began to ease standards as further appreciation in house prices was expected to ensure that risk was low, and investors failed to perform the research necessary to fully appreciate the risks in their investments, instead relying on further house price appreciation to prevent losses. The interaction between lenders' and investors' views and house prices illustrates the pernicious feedback loop I highlighted earlier. These problems became apparent only in retrospect, in part, because the growth of the originate-to-distribute model for mortgages was an ongoing innovation in financial markets; as a result, neither the market nor regulators had sufficient information for evaluating the nature of the risks involved. Looking forward, efforts to improve scrutiny of the processes that originators use and the incentives they face, better information for consumers, improved performance of the credit rating agencies, and a number of other reforms that have been recommended by the President's Working Group on Financial Markets will be important in preventing a future bubble like that in the most recent experience--steps highlighted by Chairman Bernanke in remarks earlier this year.26 ConclusionLet me conclude by reiterating the main points of the analysis here. First, not all asset price bubbles are alike. Asset price bubbles that are associated with credit booms present particular challenges, because their bursting can lead to episodes of financial instability that have damaging effects on the economy. Second, monetary policy should not try to prick possible asset price bubbles, even when they are of the variety that can contribute to financial instability. Just as doctors take the Hippocratic oath to do no harm, central banks should recognize that trying to prick asset price bubbles using monetary policy is likely to do more harm than good. Instead, monetary policy should react to asset price bubbles by looking to the effects of asset prices on employment and inflation, then adjusting policy as required to achieve maximum sustainable employment and price stability. This monetary policy response should prove sufficient to prevent adverse macroeconomic effects of some types of asset price bubbles. Third, because asset price bubbles can arise from market failures that lead to credit booms, regulation can help prevent feedback loops between asset price bubbles and credit provision. Our regulatory framework should be structured to address failures in information or market incentives that contribute to credit-driven bubbles. Moreover, we should aim to monitor the health of the financial system overall and ensure that our regulatory approach takes account of risks across institutions that are highly correlated and thus affect the strength of the financial system as a whole. We have learned many lessons from past experience in the United States and in other countries, and I am confident that continued research in these areas will help us address the new tests that will undoubtedly arise as financial innovation and the evolving structure of our financial markets present new challenges. References Ahearne, Alan, Joseph Gagnon, Jane Haltimaier, Steve Kamin, Christopher Erceg, Jon Faust, Luca Guerrieri, Carter Hemphill, Linda Kole, Jennifer Roush, John Rogers, Nathan Sheets, and Jonathan Wright (2002). "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Papers 2002-729. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Bernanke, Ben S. (2002). "Asset-Price 'Bubbles' and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the New York Chapter of the National Association for Business Economics, New York, October 15. _________ (2008). "Addressing Weaknesses in the Global Financial Markets: The Report of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Greater Richmond's Virginia Global Ambassador Award Luncheon, Richmond, Va., April 10. Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler (2001). "Should Central Banks Respond to Movements in Asset Prices?"American Economic Review, vol. 91 (May), pp. 253-57. Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999). "The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework," in J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1C. New York: Elsevier Science--North Holland, pp. 1341-93. Dupor, Bill (2005). "Stabilizing Non-fundamental Asset Price Movements under Discretion and Limited Information,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 52 (May), pp. 727-47. Galbraith, John Kenneth (1954).The Great Crash 1929. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. Goodhart, Charles, Boris Hofmann, and Miguel Segoviano (2005). "Bank Regulation and Macroeconomic Fluctuations,"OxfordReview of Economic Policy, vol. 20 (January), pp. 591-615. Goodhart, Charles (2008). "The Regulatory Response to the Financial Crisis,"CESifo Working Paper No. 2257. Munich: CESifo, March. Gordy, Michael B., and Bradley Howells (2006). "Procyclicality in Basel II: Can We Treat the Disease Without Killing the Patient?"Journal of Financial Intermediation, vol. 15 (July, Basel II: Accounting, Transparency and Bank Stability), pp. 395-417. Greenspan, Alan (2002). "Economic Volatility," speech delivered at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30. Gruen, David, Michael Plumb, and Andrew Stone (2005). "How Should Monetary Policy Respond to Asset Price Bubbles?"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 1 (December), pp. 1-31. Ito, Takatoshi, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2006). "Two Decades of Japanese Monetary Policy and the Deflation Problem," in Takatoshi Ito and Andrew Rose, eds.,Monetary Policy Under Very Low Inflation in the Pacific Rim, NBER East Asia Seminar on Economics, vol. 15. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 131-93. Kashyap, Anil, and Jeremy C. Stein (2004). "Cyclical Implications of the Basel II Capital Standards (69 KB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,Economic Perspectives, vol. 28 (First Quarter), pp. 18-31. Kindleberger, Charles P. (2000).Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises.New York: Wiley. Kohn, Donald L. (2006). "Monetary Policy and Asset Prices," speech delivered at "Monetary Policy: A Journey from Theory to Practice," a European Central Bank Colloquium held in honor of Otmar Issing, Frankfurt, Germany, March 16. Meltzer, Allan H. (2003).A History of the Federal Reserve. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Mishkin, Frederic S. (1991). "Asymmetric Information and Financial Crises: A Historical Perspective," in R. Glenn Hubbard, ed.,Financial Markets and Financial Crises.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 69-108. _________ (2007a). "Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate," speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10. _________ (2007b). "Will Monetary Policy Become More of a Science?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series2007-44. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. _________ (2007c). "Systemic Risk and the International Lender of Last Resort," speech delivered at the Tenth Annual International Banking Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, September 28. _________ (2007d). "Financial Instability and the Federal Reserve as a Liquidity Provider," speech delivered at the Museum of American Finance Commemoration of the Panic of 1907, New York, October 26. _________ (2007e). "Financial Instability and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Risk USA 2007 Conference, New York, November 5. _________ (2007f). "The Federal Reserve's Enhanced Communication Strategy and the Science of Monetary Policy," speech delivered to the Undergraduate Economics Association, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., November 29. _________ (2007g). "Housing and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism," Finance and Economics Discussion Series2007-40. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. _________ (2008). "Does Stabilizing Inflation Contribute to Stabilizing Economic Activity?" speech delivered at East Carolina University's Beta Gamma Sigma Distinguished Lecture Series, Greenville, N.C., February 25. ­­­­­­­­­­­­Mishkin, Frederic S., and Eugene N. White (2003). "U.S. Stock Market Crashes and Their Aftermath: Implications for Monetary Policy," in William Curt Hunter, George G. Kaufman, and Michael Pomerleano, eds.,Asset Price Bubbles: The Implications for Monetary, Regulatory, and International Policies. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, pp. 53-79. Okina, Kunio, Masaaki Shirakawa, and Shigenori Shiratsuka (2001). "The Asset Price Bubble and Monetary Policy: Japan's Experience in the Late 1980s and the Lessons,"Monetary and Economic Studies, vol. 19 (February, Special Edition), pp. 53-112. Posen, Adam (2003). "It Takes More Than a Bubble to Become Japan (346 KB PDF)," inAsset Prices and Monetary Policy, Reserve Bank of Australia Annual Conference. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, pp. 203-49. White, Eugene N. (1990). "The Stock Market Boom and Crash of 1929 Revisited,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 4 (Spring), pp. 67-83. Footnotes 1.I would like to thankMichael Kiley,Sylvain Leduc,Andrew Levin, Jon Greenlee,Robin Lumsdaine, David Palmer, and William Treacy of the Board's staff for their excellent assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2.I discuss these principles in detail in Mishkin (2007b, 2007f).Return to text 3.Of course, asset price bubbles have additional implications for economic efficiency. Departures of asset prices from levels implied by economic fundamentals can lead to inappropriate investments that decrease the efficiency of the economy by diverting resources toward economic activities that are supported by the bubble (for example, see Dupor, 2005). For example, during the bubble in tech stocks in the late 1990s, there was overinvestment in some types of high-tech infrastructure. Similarly, the bubble in housing prices led to too many houses being built. These distortions to activity across sectors of the economy are a drag on efficiency and hence are a matter of concern above and beyond fluctuations in overall economic activity and inflation.Return to text 4.See, for example, Mishkin (1991) and Kindleberger (2000).Return to text 5.I have previously discussed the interaction of financial markets and macroeconomic risk (for example, Mishkin, 2007d, 2007e).Return to text 6.See my earlier remarks on the subject (Mishkin, 2007c).Return to text 7.The Federal Reserve's congressional mandate is actually couched in terms of three goals: maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. However, as I have discussed (Mishkin, 2007a), the mandate is more appropriately interpreted in terms of the dual goals of price stability and maximumsustainableemployment, and this formulation is what is consistent with stabilizing both inflation and economic activity. Mishkin (2008) discusses how the pursuit of price stability can foster maximum sustainable employment.Return to text 8.Vice Chairman Kohn (2006) presented similar views on the response of monetary policy to asset prices.Return to text 9.See Mishkin (2007g).Return to text 10.An additional reason is that many crashes of asset prices which have become associated with asset price bubbles have had very limited affects on the economy. In a paper I wrote with Eugene White (Mishkin and White, 2003), we studied 15 stock market crashes that occurred in the United States from 1900 to 2001 and found that in most cases they were not followed by episodes of financial instability.Return to text 11.Chairman Bernanke (2002) has discussed this potential problem.Return to text 12.For example, see the discussion in Greenspan (2002).Return to text 13.For example, see Gruen, Plumb, and Stone (2005).Return to text 14.Research supporting this view includes Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999); Bernanke and Gertler (2001); and Gruen, Plumb, and Stone (2005).Return to text 15.For example, see Kashyap and Stein (2004) and Goodhart (2008).Return to text 16.Research to date has not reached unambiguous conclusions. See Goodhart, Hofmann, and Segoviano (2005); Kashyap and Stein (2004); and Gordy and Howells (2006) for a more thorough discussion of related issues.Return to text 17.Stock market bubbles can do more harm if stocks are held by financial institutions and these institutions are allowed to include the market value of stocks in their capital base. As described later in this speech, this practice was a feature of the Japanese bank regulatory system and is one reason why the collapse of the stock market bubble in Japan helped lead to fragility of the banking system and, as a result, was much more damaging to the economy.Return to text 18.See, among others, Galbraith (1954) and Kindleberger (2000).Return to text 19.See, for instance, Galbraith (1954) and White (1990).Return to text 20.See Meltzer (2003, p. 225).Return to text 21.The stance of monetary policy was relatively easy during the mid-1980s as the BOJ attempted to contain the rapid appreciation of the yen following the Plaza Accord of 1985 and stimulated domestic demand to correct external imbalances.Return to text 22.Corporate restrictions on funding in the securities market were lifted in the 1980s, which reduced large firms' reliance on banks' loans. Moreover, interest rate ceilings on bank deposits were also gradually removed. See Okina, Shirakawa, and Shiratsuka (2001).Return to text 23.Posen (2003) provides an extended discussion of the reasons why such a reading of the Japanese experience is mistaken.Return to text 24.For example, see Ahearne and others (2002) and Posen (2003).Return to text 25.See Ito and Mishkin (2006). The slowness with which the imbalances in Japan's banking sector were addressed was another important factor leading to the deterioration in the economic outlook and deflation after the bubble burst.Return to text 26.The speech by Chairman Bernanke on April 10, 2008, provides a more detailed description of the market and regulatory failures during this period and the recommendations of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Financial Markets Conference, Sea Island, Georgia (via satellite) Chairman Bernanke presented identical remarks to the Risk Transfer Mechanisms and Financial Stability Workshop, Basel, Switzerland, on May 29, 2008 (via videoconference) Well-functioning financial markets are an essential link in the transmission of monetary policy to the economy and a critical foundation for economic growth and stability. However, since August, severe financial strains have shaken this foundation. A sharp housing contraction has generated substantial losses on many mortgage-related assets and a broad-based tightening in credit availability. Consistent with its role as the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve has responded not only with an easing of monetary policy but also with a number of steps aimed at reducing funding pressures for depository institutions and primary securities dealers and at improving overall market liquidity and market functioning.1 In my remarks today, I will begin by reviewing the principles that should guide central banks' actions to support market liquidity. Then, in light of those principles, I will discuss the liquidity measures implemented by the Federal Reserve in response to the financial turmoil. I will conclude by offering some thoughts on liquidity regulation. The Principles Behind Central Bank Liquidity ProvisionsThe notion that a central bank should provide liquidity to the banking system in a crisis has a long intellectual lineage. Walter Bagehot'sLombard Street, published in 1873, remains one of the classic treatments of the role of the central bank in the management of financial crises. Bagehot noted that the basis of a successful credit system is confidence. In one passage, he writes, "Credit means that a certain confidence is given, and a certain trust reposed. Is that trust justified? and is that confidence wise? These are the cardinal questions" (p. 11). He pointed out that confidence is particularly important in banking and in other situations in which the lender's own liabilities are viewed as very liquid by its creditors. In such situations, as Bagehot put it, "…where the 'liabilities,' or promises to pay, are so large, and the time at which to pay them, if exacted, is so short," borrowers must demonstrate "an instant capacity to meet engagements" (p. 11). Meeting creditors' demands for payment requires holding liquidity--cash, essentially, or close equivalents. But neither individual institutions, nor the private sector as a whole, can maintain enough cash on hand to meet a demand for liquidation of all, or even a substantial fraction of, short-term liabilities. Doing so would be both unprofitable and socially undesirable. It would be unprofitable because cash pays a lower return than other investments. And it would be socially undesirable, because an excessive preference for liquid assets reduces society's ability to fund longer-term investments that carry a high return but cannot be liquidated quickly. However, holding liquid assets that are only a fraction of short-term liabilities presents an obvious risk. If most or all creditors, for lack of confidence or some other reason, demand cash at the same time, a borrower that finances longer-term assets with liquid liabilities will not be able to meet the demand. It would be forced either to defer or suspend payments or to sell some of its less-liquid assets (presumably at steep discounts) to make the payments. Either option may lead to the failure of the borrower, so that the loss of confidence, even if not originally justified by fundamentals, will tend to be self-confirming. If the loss of confidence becomes more general, a broader crisis may ensue. How should a central bank respond to a sharp increase in the demand for cash or equivalents by private creditors? Before talking about Bagehot's answer, I should note that the Bank of England in his time was a hybrid institution--it was privately owned by shareholders, but it also had a public role. To fulfill its public role, the Bank of England did not in all cases maximize its profits; notably, it held a larger share of its assets in liquid form than did other banks, thereby foregoing some return. Nevertheless, in the context of the gold standard, the Bank's stock of liquid assets was relatively modest in size, raising the possibility that even this quasi-public institution could run out of cash should the demand for liquidity become high enough.2In this context, Bagehot's advice on how the Bank of England should respond to a generalized liquidity shortage was somewhat counterintuitive. He wrote: And what are the terms at which the central bank should lend freely? Bagehot argues that "these loans should only be made at a very high rate of interest" (p. 99). Some modern commentators have rationalized Bagehot's dictum to lend at a high or "penalty" rate as a way to mitigate moral hazard--that is, to help maintain incentives for private-sector banks to provide for adequate liquidity in advance of any crisis. I will return to the issue of moral hazard later. But it is worth pointing out briefly that, in fact, the risk of moral hazard did not appear to be Bagehot's principal motivation for recommending a high rate; rather, he saw it as a tool to dissuade unnecessary borrowing and thus to help protect the Bank of England's own finite store of liquid assets.3Today, potential limitations on the central bank's lending capacity are not nearly so pressing an issue as in Bagehot's time, when the central bank's ability to provide liquidity was far more tenuous. Bagehot defined a financial crisis largely in terms of a banking panic--that is, a situation in which depositors rapidly and simultaneously attempt to withdraw funds from their bank accounts. In the 19th century, such panics were a lethal threat for banks that were financing long-term loans with demand deposits that could be called at any time. In modern financial systems, the combination of effective banking supervision and deposit insurance has substantially reduced the threat of retail deposit runs. Nonetheless, recent events demonstrate that liquidity risks are always present for institutions--banks and nonbanks alike--that finance illiquid assets with short-term liabilities. For example, since August, mortgage lenders, commercial and investment banks, and structured investment vehicles have experienced great difficulty in rolling over commercial paper backed by subprime and other mortgages. More broadly, a loss of confidence in credit ratings led to a sharp contraction in the asset-backed commercial paper market as short-term investors withdrew their funds. And remarkably, some financial institutions have even experienced pressures in rolling over maturing repurchase agreements (repos). I say "remarkably" because, until recently, short-term repos had always been regarded as virtually risk-free instruments and thus largely immune to the type of rollover or withdrawal risks associated with short-term unsecured obligations. In March, rapidly unfolding events demonstrated that even repo markets could be severely disrupted when investors believe they might need to sell the underlying collateral in illiquid markets. Such forced asset sales can set up a particularly adverse dynamic, in which further substantial price declines fan investor concerns about counterparty credit risk, which then feed back in the form of intensifying funding pressures. Recent research by Allen and Gale (2007) confirms that, in principle at least, "fire sales" forced by sharp increases in investors' liquidity preference can drive asset prices below their fundamental value, at significant cost to the financial system and the economy. Their work underscores the basic logic in Bagehot's prescription for crisis management: A central bank may be able to eliminate, or at least attenuate, adverse outcomes by making cash loans secured by borrowers' illiquid but sound assets. Thus, borrowers can avoid selling securities into an illiquid market, and the potential for economic damage--arising, for example, from the unavailability of credit for productive purposes or the inefficient liquidation of long-term investments--is substantially reduced. Liquidity Powers of Other Central BanksThis prescription for providing liquidity in a crisis is simple in theory, but, in practice, it can be far more complicated. For instance, how should the central bank distinguish between institutions whose liquidity pressures stem primarily from a breakdown in financial market functioning and those whose problems fundamentally derive from underlying concerns about their solvency? The answer, at times, is by no means straightforward. There are other complexities, too. Central banks provide liquidity through a variety of mechanisms, including open market operations and direct credit extension through standing lending facilities. The choice of tools in a crisis depends on the circumstances as well as on specific institutional factors. The European Central Bank (ECB), for example, routinely conducts open market operations with a wide range of counterparties against a broad range of collateral. In recent months, in light of intense pressures in term funding markets, the ECB has provided relatively large quantities of reserves through longer-term open market operations. Extending this strategy, the ECB also introduced a new refinancing operation with a six-month maturity. The first of these was executed on April 2 and was well received. The Bank of England has followed a similar strategy, expanding their term open market operations and accepting a wider range of collateral. Very recently, the Bank of England also initiated a special liquidity facility that allows banks to swap high-quality mortgage-backed and other securities for U.K. Treasury bills. Differences in legal and institutional structure have affected the methods used by various central banks to inject liquidity in their markets. In the United States, in ordinary circumstances only depository institutions have direct access to the discount window, and open market operations are conducted with just a small set of primary dealers against a narrow range of highly liquid collateral. In contrast, in jurisdictions with universal banking, the distinction between depository institutions and other types of financial institutions is much less relevant in defining access to central bank liquidity than is the case in the United States. Moreover, some central banks (such as the ECB) have greater flexibility than the Federal Reserve in the types of collateral they can accept in open market operations. As a result, some foreign central banks have been able to address the recent liquidity pressures within their existing frameworks without resorting to extraordinary measures. In contrast, the Federal Reserve has had to use methods it does not usually employ to address liquidity pressures across a number of markets and institutions. In effect, the Federal Reserve has had to innovate in large part to achieve what other central banks have been able to effect through existing tools. The financial distress since August has also underscored the importance of international cooperation among central banks. For some time, central banks have recognized that managing crises involving large financial institutions operating across national borders and in multiple currencies can present difficult challenges. Funding pressures can easily arise in more than one currency and in more than one jurisdiction. In such cases, central banks may find it essential to work closely together. For just this reason, the Federal Reserve, the ECB, and the Swiss National Bank have established currency swap arrangements and have coordinated their provision of dollar liquidity to international financial institutions over recent months. Federal Reserve Liquidity OperationsIn the United States, open market operations have long been the principal tool used by the Federal Reserve to manage the aggregate level of reserves in the banking system and thereby control the federal funds rate. The discount window has typically functioned as a backstop, serving as a source of reserves when conditions in the federal funds market tighten significantly or when individual depository institutions experience short-term funding pressures. Throughout much of the Federal Reserve's history, this basic structure has proven adequate to address liquidity pressures, even during some periods of market turmoil. However, it became abundantly clear that this traditional framework for liquidity provision was not up to addressing the recent strains in short-term funding markets. In particular, the efficacy of the discount window has been limited by the reluctance of depository institutions to use the window as a source of funding. The "stigma" associated with the discount window, which if anything intensifies during periods of crisis, arises primarily from banks' concerns that market participants will draw adverse inferences about their financial condition if their borrowing from the Federal Reserve were to become known. The Federal Reserve has taken steps to make discount window borrowing through the regular primary credit program more attractive. Most notably, we narrowed the spread of the primary credit rate over the target federal funds rate from 100 basis points in August to only 25 basis points today. In addition, to address the pressures in term funding markets, we now permit depositories to borrow for as long as 90 days, renewable at their discretion so long as they remain in sound financial condition. These actions have had some success in increasing depository institutions' willingness to borrow. Moreover, the existence of the option to borrow through the discount window, even if not exercised, likely has improved confidence by assuring depository institutions that backstop liquidity will be available should they need it. Still, the continuing disruptions in short-term funding markets over recent months suggested that new ways of providing liquidity were necessary. Last December, the Federal Reserve introduced the Term Auction Facility, or TAF, through which predetermined amounts of discount window credit are auctioned every two weeks to eligible borrowers for terms of 28 days. In effect, TAF auctions are very similar to open market operations, but conducted with depository institutions rather than primary dealers and against a much broader range of collateral than is accepted in standard open market operations. The TAF, apparently because of its competitive auction format and the certainty that a large amount of credit would be made available, appears to have overcome the stigma problem to a significant degree. Indeed, a large number of banks--ranging from 52 to more than 90--have participated in each of the 11 auctions held thus far. The TAF has also simplified the implementation of monetary policy by providing greater predictability of the level of borrowings by depository institutions and consequently of bank reserves. The size of individual TAF auctions has been raised over time from $20 billion at the inception of the program to $75 billion in the auctions this month. We stand ready to increase the size of the auctions further if warranted by financial developments. The recent market turmoil has also affected the liquidity positions of financial institutions that do not ordinarily have access to the discount window. In particular, prior to the recent experience, it was believed that primary dealers were not especially susceptible to runs by their creditors. Primary dealers typically rely on short-term secured financing arrangements, and the collateralization of those borrowings was thought sufficient to maintain the confidence of investors. Consequently, dealers' liquidity management policies and contingency plans were typically based on the assumption that they would not be faced with a sudden loss of financing. But these beliefs were predicated on the assumption that financial markets would always be reasonably liquid. As I have already noted, recent events have proven that assumption unwarranted, and the risk developed that liquidity pressures might force dealers to sell assets into already illiquid markets. This might have resulted in Allen and Gale's fire sale scenario that I mentioned earlier, in which a cascade of failures and liquidations sharply depresses asset prices, with adverse financial and economic implications. This heightened risk led the Federal Reserve to expand its ability to supply liquidity to primary dealers. In March, to ease strains that had developed in the agency mortgage-backed securities market, the Federal Reserve initiated as part of its open-market operations a series of single-tranche repurchase transactions with terms of roughly 28 days and cumulating to up to $100 billion. For the purposes of these transactions, primary dealers can deliver as collateral any securities eligible in conventional open market operations. Additionally, the Federal Reserve introduced the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF), which allows primary dealers to exchange less-liquid securities for Treasury securities for terms of 28 days at an auction-determined fee. Recently, the Federal Reserve expanded the list of securities eligible for such transactions to include all AAA/Aaa-rated asset-backed securities. By mid-March, however, the pressures in short-term financing markets intensified, and market participants were speculating about the financial condition of Bear Stearns, a prominent investment bank. On March 13, Bear advised the Federal Reserve and other government agencies that its liquidity position had significantly deteriorated, and that it would be forced to file for bankruptcy the next day unless alternative sources of funds became available. A bankruptcy filing would have forced Bear's secured creditors and counterparties to liquidate the underlying collateral and, given the illiquidity of markets, those creditors and counterparties might well have sustained losses. If they responded to losses or the unexpected illiquidity of their holdings by pulling back from providing secured financing to other firms, a much broader liquidity crisis would have ensued. In such circumstances, the Federal Reserve Board judged that it was appropriate to use its emergency lending authorities under the Federal Reserve Act to avoid a disorderly closure of Bear. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve, in close consultation with the Treasury Department, agreed to provide short-term funding to Bear Stearns through JPMorgan Chase. Over the following weekend, JPMorgan Chase agreed to purchase Bear Stearns and assumed the company's financial obligations. The Federal Reserve, again in close consultation with the Treasury Department, agreed to supply term funding, secured by $30 billion in Bear Stearns assets, to facilitate the purchase. In a further effort to short-circuit a possible downward spiral in financing markets, the Federal Reserve used its emergency authorities to create the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF). The PDCF allows primary dealers to borrow at the same rate at which depository institutions can access the discount window, with the borrowings able to be secured by a broad range of investment-grade securities. In effect, the PDCF provides primary dealers with a liquidity backstop similar to the discount window for depository institutions in generally sound financial condition. To date, our liquidity measures appear to have contributed to some improvement in financing markets. The existence of the PDCF seems to have bolstered confidence among primary dealers' counterparties (including the clearing banks, which provide the dealers with critical intra-day secured credit). In addition, conditions in the Treasury repo market, which became very strained around mid-March, have improved substantially. Liquidity is better in several other markets as well. For example, spreads on agency mortgage-backed securities have dropped in recent weeks after reaching very high levels in mid-March, as have spreads between conforming fixed-rate mortgage rates and Treasury rates. Spreads on jumbo mortgage loans have retraced a portion of their earlier large increases, but recent regulatory and legislative changes make it difficult to assess the impact of liquidity measures in that segment of the market. Corporate debt spreads have also declined somewhat from recent highs. These are welcome signs, of course, but at this stage conditions in financial markets are still far from normal. A number of securitization markets remain moribund, risk spreads--although off their recent peaks--generally remain quite elevated, and pressures in short-term funding markets persist. Spreads of term dollar Libor over comparable-maturity overnight index swap rates have receded some from their recent peaks but remain abnormally high.4Funding pressures have also been evident in the strong participation at recent TAF auctions even after the recent expansions in auction sizes, and, of late, depository institutions have borrowed significant amounts under the primary credit program for terms of up to 90 days. Ultimately, market participants themselves must address the fundamental sources of financial strains--through deleveraging, raising new capital, and improving risk management--and this process is likely to take some time. The Federal Reserve's various liquidity measures should help facilitate that process indirectly by boosting investor confidence and by reducing the risks of severe disruption during the period of adjustment. Once financial conditions become more normal, the extraordinary provision of liquidity by the Federal Reserve will no longer be needed. As Bagehot would surely advise, under normal conditions financial institutions should look to private counterparties and not central banks as a source of ongoing funding. Liquidity Regulation and Moral HazardThe provision of liquidity by a central bank can help mitigate a financial crisis. However, central banks face a tradeoff when deciding to provide extraordinary liquidity support. A central bank that is too quick to act as liquidity provider of last resort risks inducing moral hazard; specifically, if market participants come to believe that the Federal Reserve or other central banks will take such measures whenever financial stress develops, financial institutions and their creditors would have less incentive to pursue suitable strategies for managing liquidity risk and more incentive to take such risks. Although central banks should give careful consideration to their criteria for invoking extraordinary liquidity measures, the problem of moral hazard can perhaps be most effectively addressed by prudential supervision and regulation that ensures that financial institutions manage their liquidity risks effectively in advance of the crisis. Recall Bagehot's advice: "The time for economy and for accumulation is before. A good banker will have accumulated in ordinary times the reserve he is to make use of in extraordinary times" (p. 24). Indeed, under the international Basel II capital accord, supervisors are expected to require that institutions have adequate processes in place to measure and manage risk, importantly including liquidity risk. In light of the recent experience, and following the recommendations of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), the Federal Reserve and other supervisors are reviewing their policies and guidance regarding liquidity risk management to determine what improvements can be made. In particular, future liquidity planning will have to take into account the possibility of a sudden loss of substantial amounts of secured financing. Of course, even the most carefully crafted regulations cannot ensure that liquidity crises will not happen again. But, if moral hazard is effectively mitigated, and if financial institutions and investors draw appropriate lessons from the recent experience about the need for strong liquidity risk management practices, the frequency and severity of future crises should be significantly reduced. References Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale (2007).Understanding Financial Crises, Clarendon Lectures in Finance. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Bagehot, Walter (1873).Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market.London: King. Reprint, Gloucester, U.K.: Dodo Press, 2006. Clapham, John (1945).The Bank of England: A History. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press. President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008). "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)," March. Footnotes 1.Primary securities dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The New York Fed's Open Market Desk engages in the trades on behalf of the Federal Reserve System to implement monetary policy.Return to text 2.Such a circumstance could arise in two ways: The banking reserve--that is, the liquid assets backing deposits at the Bank of England--could fall to a low level as a result of heavy discounting or the issue reserve--that is gold bullion backing Bank of England notes--could run short because of substantial redemptions by note holders. Indeed, the Bank of England's gold reserves, its ultimate store of liquidity, along with the gold in circulation, were quite small relative to total sterling deposits in the U.K. banking system. This implied, as English historian Sir John Clapham (1945) noted, that there was just a "thin film of gold" (p. 299) tying the pound to the gold standard.Return to text 3.A high rate, Bagehot (1873) wrote, "will prevent the greatest number of applications by persons who do not require it" (p. 99) and ensure that "no one may borrow out of idle precaution without paying well for it; that the [Bank of England's] reserve may be protected as far as possible" (p. 99). Moreover, as Clapham (1945) observed, higher interest rates during a period of crisis would draw in gold from abroad, easing strains on the Bank.Return to text 4.Libor is the London interbank offered rate, a standard measure of the cost of funds in the interbank market.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Financial Markets Conference, Sea Island, Georgia (via satellite) Chairman Bernanke presented identical remarks to the Risk Transfer Mechanisms and Financial Stability Workshop, Basel, Switzerland, on May 29, 2008 (via videoconference) Well-functioning financial markets are an essential link in the transmission of monetary policy to the economy and a critical foundation for economic growth and stability. However, since August, severe financial strains have shaken this foundation. A sharp housing contraction has generated substantial losses on many mortgage-related assets and a broad-based tightening in credit availability. Consistent with its role as the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve has responded not only with an easing of monetary policy but also with a number of steps aimed at reducing funding pressures for depository institutions and primary securities dealers and at improving overall market liquidity and market functioning.1 In my remarks today, I will begin by reviewing the principles that should guide central banks' actions to support market liquidity. Then, in light of those principles, I will discuss the liquidity measures implemented by the Federal Reserve in response to the financial turmoil. I will conclude by offering some thoughts on liquidity regulation. The Principles Behind Central Bank Liquidity ProvisionsThe notion that a central bank should provide liquidity to the banking system in a crisis has a long intellectual lineage. Walter Bagehot'sLombard Street, published in 1873, remains one of the classic treatments of the role of the central bank in the management of financial crises. Bagehot noted that the basis of a successful credit system is confidence. In one passage, he writes, "Credit means that a certain confidence is given, and a certain trust reposed. Is that trust justified? and is that confidence wise? These are the cardinal questions" (p. 11). He pointed out that confidence is particularly important in banking and in other situations in which the lender's own liabilities are viewed as very liquid by its creditors. In such situations, as Bagehot put it, "…where the 'liabilities,' or promises to pay, are so large, and the time at which to pay them, if exacted, is so short," borrowers must demonstrate "an instant capacity to meet engagements" (p. 11). Meeting creditors' demands for payment requires holding liquidity--cash, essentially, or close equivalents. But neither individual institutions, nor the private sector as a whole, can maintain enough cash on hand to meet a demand for liquidation of all, or even a substantial fraction of, short-term liabilities. Doing so would be both unprofitable and socially undesirable. It would be unprofitable because cash pays a lower return than other investments. And it would be socially undesirable, because an excessive preference for liquid assets reduces society's ability to fund longer-term investments that carry a high return but cannot be liquidated quickly. However, holding liquid assets that are only a fraction of short-term liabilities presents an obvious risk. If most or all creditors, for lack of confidence or some other reason, demand cash at the same time, a borrower that finances longer-term assets with liquid liabilities will not be able to meet the demand. It would be forced either to defer or suspend payments or to sell some of its less-liquid assets (presumably at steep discounts) to make the payments. Either option may lead to the failure of the borrower, so that the loss of confidence, even if not originally justified by fundamentals, will tend to be self-confirming. If the loss of confidence becomes more general, a broader crisis may ensue. How should a central bank respond to a sharp increase in the demand for cash or equivalents by private creditors? Before talking about Bagehot's answer, I should note that the Bank of England in his time was a hybrid institution--it was privately owned by shareholders, but it also had a public role. To fulfill its public role, the Bank of England did not in all cases maximize its profits; notably, it held a larger share of its assets in liquid form than did other banks, thereby foregoing some return. Nevertheless, in the context of the gold standard, the Bank's stock of liquid assets was relatively modest in size, raising the possibility that even this quasi-public institution could run out of cash should the demand for liquidity become high enough.2In this context, Bagehot's advice on how the Bank of England should respond to a generalized liquidity shortage was somewhat counterintuitive. He wrote: And what are the terms at which the central bank should lend freely? Bagehot argues that "these loans should only be made at a very high rate of interest" (p. 99). Some modern commentators have rationalized Bagehot's dictum to lend at a high or "penalty" rate as a way to mitigate moral hazard--that is, to help maintain incentives for private-sector banks to provide for adequate liquidity in advance of any crisis. I will return to the issue of moral hazard later. But it is worth pointing out briefly that, in fact, the risk of moral hazard did not appear to be Bagehot's principal motivation for recommending a high rate; rather, he saw it as a tool to dissuade unnecessary borrowing and thus to help protect the Bank of England's own finite store of liquid assets.3Today, potential limitations on the central bank's lending capacity are not nearly so pressing an issue as in Bagehot's time, when the central bank's ability to provide liquidity was far more tenuous. Bagehot defined a financial crisis largely in terms of a banking panic--that is, a situation in which depositors rapidly and simultaneously attempt to withdraw funds from their bank accounts. In the 19th century, such panics were a lethal threat for banks that were financing long-term loans with demand deposits that could be called at any time. In modern financial systems, the combination of effective banking supervision and deposit insurance has substantially reduced the threat of retail deposit runs. Nonetheless, recent events demonstrate that liquidity risks are always present for institutions--banks and nonbanks alike--that finance illiquid assets with short-term liabilities. For example, since August, mortgage lenders, commercial and investment banks, and structured investment vehicles have experienced great difficulty in rolling over commercial paper backed by subprime and other mortgages. More broadly, a loss of confidence in credit ratings led to a sharp contraction in the asset-backed commercial paper market as short-term investors withdrew their funds. And remarkably, some financial institutions have even experienced pressures in rolling over maturing repurchase agreements (repos). I say "remarkably" because, until recently, short-term repos had always been regarded as virtually risk-free instruments and thus largely immune to the type of rollover or withdrawal risks associated with short-term unsecured obligations. In March, rapidly unfolding events demonstrated that even repo markets could be severely disrupted when investors believe they might need to sell the underlying collateral in illiquid markets. Such forced asset sales can set up a particularly adverse dynamic, in which further substantial price declines fan investor concerns about counterparty credit risk, which then feed back in the form of intensifying funding pressures. Recent research by Allen and Gale (2007) confirms that, in principle at least, "fire sales" forced by sharp increases in investors' liquidity preference can drive asset prices below their fundamental value, at significant cost to the financial system and the economy. Their work underscores the basic logic in Bagehot's prescription for crisis management: A central bank may be able to eliminate, or at least attenuate, adverse outcomes by making cash loans secured by borrowers' illiquid but sound assets. Thus, borrowers can avoid selling securities into an illiquid market, and the potential for economic damage--arising, for example, from the unavailability of credit for productive purposes or the inefficient liquidation of long-term investments--is substantially reduced. Liquidity Powers of Other Central BanksThis prescription for providing liquidity in a crisis is simple in theory, but, in practice, it can be far more complicated. For instance, how should the central bank distinguish between institutions whose liquidity pressures stem primarily from a breakdown in financial market functioning and those whose problems fundamentally derive from underlying concerns about their solvency? The answer, at times, is by no means straightforward. There are other complexities, too. Central banks provide liquidity through a variety of mechanisms, including open market operations and direct credit extension through standing lending facilities. The choice of tools in a crisis depends on the circumstances as well as on specific institutional factors. The European Central Bank (ECB), for example, routinely conducts open market operations with a wide range of counterparties against a broad range of collateral. In recent months, in light of intense pressures in term funding markets, the ECB has provided relatively large quantities of reserves through longer-term open market operations. Extending this strategy, the ECB also introduced a new refinancing operation with a six-month maturity. The first of these was executed on April 2 and was well received. The Bank of England has followed a similar strategy, expanding their term open market operations and accepting a wider range of collateral. Very recently, the Bank of England also initiated a special liquidity facility that allows banks to swap high-quality mortgage-backed and other securities for U.K. Treasury bills. Differences in legal and institutional structure have affected the methods used by various central banks to inject liquidity in their markets. In the United States, in ordinary circumstances only depository institutions have direct access to the discount window, and open market operations are conducted with just a small set of primary dealers against a narrow range of highly liquid collateral. In contrast, in jurisdictions with universal banking, the distinction between depository institutions and other types of financial institutions is much less relevant in defining access to central bank liquidity than is the case in the United States. Moreover, some central banks (such as the ECB) have greater flexibility than the Federal Reserve in the types of collateral they can accept in open market operations. As a result, some foreign central banks have been able to address the recent liquidity pressures within their existing frameworks without resorting to extraordinary measures. In contrast, the Federal Reserve has had to use methods it does not usually employ to address liquidity pressures across a number of markets and institutions. In effect, the Federal Reserve has had to innovate in large part to achieve what other central banks have been able to effect through existing tools. The financial distress since August has also underscored the importance of international cooperation among central banks. For some time, central banks have recognized that managing crises involving large financial institutions operating across national borders and in multiple currencies can present difficult challenges. Funding pressures can easily arise in more than one currency and in more than one jurisdiction. In such cases, central banks may find it essential to work closely together. For just this reason, the Federal Reserve, the ECB, and the Swiss National Bank have established currency swap arrangements and have coordinated their provision of dollar liquidity to international financial institutions over recent months. Federal Reserve Liquidity OperationsIn the United States, open market operations have long been the principal tool used by the Federal Reserve to manage the aggregate level of reserves in the banking system and thereby control the federal funds rate. The discount window has typically functioned as a backstop, serving as a source of reserves when conditions in the federal funds market tighten significantly or when individual depository institutions experience short-term funding pressures. Throughout much of the Federal Reserve's history, this basic structure has proven adequate to address liquidity pressures, even during some periods of market turmoil. However, it became abundantly clear that this traditional framework for liquidity provision was not up to addressing the recent strains in short-term funding markets. In particular, the efficacy of the discount window has been limited by the reluctance of depository institutions to use the window as a source of funding. The "stigma" associated with the discount window, which if anything intensifies during periods of crisis, arises primarily from banks' concerns that market participants will draw adverse inferences about their financial condition if their borrowing from the Federal Reserve were to become known. The Federal Reserve has taken steps to make discount window borrowing through the regular primary credit program more attractive. Most notably, we narrowed the spread of the primary credit rate over the target federal funds rate from 100 basis points in August to only 25 basis points today. In addition, to address the pressures in term funding markets, we now permit depositories to borrow for as long as 90 days, renewable at their discretion so long as they remain in sound financial condition. These actions have had some success in increasing depository institutions' willingness to borrow. Moreover, the existence of the option to borrow through the discount window, even if not exercised, likely has improved confidence by assuring depository institutions that backstop liquidity will be available should they need it. Still, the continuing disruptions in short-term funding markets over recent months suggested that new ways of providing liquidity were necessary. Last December, the Federal Reserve introduced the Term Auction Facility, or TAF, through which predetermined amounts of discount window credit are auctioned every two weeks to eligible borrowers for terms of 28 days. In effect, TAF auctions are very similar to open market operations, but conducted with depository institutions rather than primary dealers and against a much broader range of collateral than is accepted in standard open market operations. The TAF, apparently because of its competitive auction format and the certainty that a large amount of credit would be made available, appears to have overcome the stigma problem to a significant degree. Indeed, a large number of banks--ranging from 52 to more than 90--have participated in each of the 11 auctions held thus far. The TAF has also simplified the implementation of monetary policy by providing greater predictability of the level of borrowings by depository institutions and consequently of bank reserves. The size of individual TAF auctions has been raised over time from $20 billion at the inception of the program to $75 billion in the auctions this month. We stand ready to increase the size of the auctions further if warranted by financial developments. The recent market turmoil has also affected the liquidity positions of financial institutions that do not ordinarily have access to the discount window. In particular, prior to the recent experience, it was believed that primary dealers were not especially susceptible to runs by their creditors. Primary dealers typically rely on short-term secured financing arrangements, and the collateralization of those borrowings was thought sufficient to maintain the confidence of investors. Consequently, dealers' liquidity management policies and contingency plans were typically based on the assumption that they would not be faced with a sudden loss of financing. But these beliefs were predicated on the assumption that financial markets would always be reasonably liquid. As I have already noted, recent events have proven that assumption unwarranted, and the risk developed that liquidity pressures might force dealers to sell assets into already illiquid markets. This might have resulted in Allen and Gale's fire sale scenario that I mentioned earlier, in which a cascade of failures and liquidations sharply depresses asset prices, with adverse financial and economic implications. This heightened risk led the Federal Reserve to expand its ability to supply liquidity to primary dealers. In March, to ease strains that had developed in the agency mortgage-backed securities market, the Federal Reserve initiated as part of its open-market operations a series of single-tranche repurchase transactions with terms of roughly 28 days and cumulating to up to $100 billion. For the purposes of these transactions, primary dealers can deliver as collateral any securities eligible in conventional open market operations. Additionally, the Federal Reserve introduced the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF), which allows primary dealers to exchange less-liquid securities for Treasury securities for terms of 28 days at an auction-determined fee. Recently, the Federal Reserve expanded the list of securities eligible for such transactions to include all AAA/Aaa-rated asset-backed securities. By mid-March, however, the pressures in short-term financing markets intensified, and market participants were speculating about the financial condition of Bear Stearns, a prominent investment bank. On March 13, Bear advised the Federal Reserve and other government agencies that its liquidity position had significantly deteriorated, and that it would be forced to file for bankruptcy the next day unless alternative sources of funds became available. A bankruptcy filing would have forced Bear's secured creditors and counterparties to liquidate the underlying collateral and, given the illiquidity of markets, those creditors and counterparties might well have sustained losses. If they responded to losses or the unexpected illiquidity of their holdings by pulling back from providing secured financing to other firms, a much broader liquidity crisis would have ensued. In such circumstances, the Federal Reserve Board judged that it was appropriate to use its emergency lending authorities under the Federal Reserve Act to avoid a disorderly closure of Bear. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve, in close consultation with the Treasury Department, agreed to provide short-term funding to Bear Stearns through JPMorgan Chase. Over the following weekend, JPMorgan Chase agreed to purchase Bear Stearns and assumed the company's financial obligations. The Federal Reserve, again in close consultation with the Treasury Department, agreed to supply term funding, secured by $30 billion in Bear Stearns assets, to facilitate the purchase. In a further effort to short-circuit a possible downward spiral in financing markets, the Federal Reserve used its emergency authorities to create the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF). The PDCF allows primary dealers to borrow at the same rate at which depository institutions can access the discount window, with the borrowings able to be secured by a broad range of investment-grade securities. In effect, the PDCF provides primary dealers with a liquidity backstop similar to the discount window for depository institutions in generally sound financial condition. To date, our liquidity measures appear to have contributed to some improvement in financing markets. The existence of the PDCF seems to have bolstered confidence among primary dealers' counterparties (including the clearing banks, which provide the dealers with critical intra-day secured credit). In addition, conditions in the Treasury repo market, which became very strained around mid-March, have improved substantially. Liquidity is better in several other markets as well. For example, spreads on agency mortgage-backed securities have dropped in recent weeks after reaching very high levels in mid-March, as have spreads between conforming fixed-rate mortgage rates and Treasury rates. Spreads on jumbo mortgage loans have retraced a portion of their earlier large increases, but recent regulatory and legislative changes make it difficult to assess the impact of liquidity measures in that segment of the market. Corporate debt spreads have also declined somewhat from recent highs. These are welcome signs, of course, but at this stage conditions in financial markets are still far from normal. A number of securitization markets remain moribund, risk spreads--although off their recent peaks--generally remain quite elevated, and pressures in short-term funding markets persist. Spreads of term dollar Libor over comparable-maturity overnight index swap rates have receded some from their recent peaks but remain abnormally high.4Funding pressures have also been evident in the strong participation at recent TAF auctions even after the recent expansions in auction sizes, and, of late, depository institutions have borrowed significant amounts under the primary credit program for terms of up to 90 days. Ultimately, market participants themselves must address the fundamental sources of financial strains--through deleveraging, raising new capital, and improving risk management--and this process is likely to take some time. The Federal Reserve's various liquidity measures should help facilitate that process indirectly by boosting investor confidence and by reducing the risks of severe disruption during the period of adjustment. Once financial conditions become more normal, the extraordinary provision of liquidity by the Federal Reserve will no longer be needed. As Bagehot would surely advise, under normal conditions financial institutions should look to private counterparties and not central banks as a source of ongoing funding. Liquidity Regulation and Moral HazardThe provision of liquidity by a central bank can help mitigate a financial crisis. However, central banks face a tradeoff when deciding to provide extraordinary liquidity support. A central bank that is too quick to act as liquidity provider of last resort risks inducing moral hazard; specifically, if market participants come to believe that the Federal Reserve or other central banks will take such measures whenever financial stress develops, financial institutions and their creditors would have less incentive to pursue suitable strategies for managing liquidity risk and more incentive to take such risks. Although central banks should give careful consideration to their criteria for invoking extraordinary liquidity measures, the problem of moral hazard can perhaps be most effectively addressed by prudential supervision and regulation that ensures that financial institutions manage their liquidity risks effectively in advance of the crisis. Recall Bagehot's advice: "The time for economy and for accumulation is before. A good banker will have accumulated in ordinary times the reserve he is to make use of in extraordinary times" (p. 24). Indeed, under the international Basel II capital accord, supervisors are expected to require that institutions have adequate processes in place to measure and manage risk, importantly including liquidity risk. In light of the recent experience, and following the recommendations of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), the Federal Reserve and other supervisors are reviewing their policies and guidance regarding liquidity risk management to determine what improvements can be made. In particular, future liquidity planning will have to take into account the possibility of a sudden loss of substantial amounts of secured financing. Of course, even the most carefully crafted regulations cannot ensure that liquidity crises will not happen again. But, if moral hazard is effectively mitigated, and if financial institutions and investors draw appropriate lessons from the recent experience about the need for strong liquidity risk management practices, the frequency and severity of future crises should be significantly reduced. References Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale (2007).Understanding Financial Crises, Clarendon Lectures in Finance. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Bagehot, Walter (1873).Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market.London: King. Reprint, Gloucester, U.K.: Dodo Press, 2006. Clapham, John (1945).The Bank of England: A History. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press. President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008). "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)," March. Footnotes 1.Primary securities dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The New York Fed's Open Market Desk engages in the trades on behalf of the Federal Reserve System to implement monetary policy.Return to text 2.Such a circumstance could arise in two ways: The banking reserve--that is, the liquid assets backing deposits at the Bank of England--could fall to a low level as a result of heavy discounting or the issue reserve--that is gold bullion backing Bank of England notes--could run short because of substantial redemptions by note holders. Indeed, the Bank of England's gold reserves, its ultimate store of liquidity, along with the gold in circulation, were quite small relative to total sterling deposits in the U.K. banking system. This implied, as English historian Sir John Clapham (1945) noted, that there was just a "thin film of gold" (p. 299) tying the pound to the gold standard.Return to text 3.A high rate, Bagehot (1873) wrote, "will prevent the greatest number of applications by persons who do not require it" (p. 99) and ensure that "no one may borrow out of idle precaution without paying well for it; that the [Bank of England's] reserve may be protected as far as possible" (p. 99). Moreover, as Clapham (1945) observed, higher interest rates during a period of crisis would draw in gold from abroad, easing strains on the Bank.Return to text 4.Libor is the London interbank offered rate, a standard measure of the cost of funds in the interbank market.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount ratemeetings from March 31 through April 30, 2008.The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on April 29-30, 2008. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the April 29-30, 2008 meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. Summaries of economic projections are released on an approximately quarterly schedule. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in the minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes and the Summary of Economic Projections can be viewed on the Board’s website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc.htm#calendars. Minutes of Federal Open Market CommitteeApril 29-30, 2008:337 KB PDF|HTML
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the NeighborWorks America Symposium on Stabilizing Communities in the Wake of Foreclosure, Cincinnati, Ohio Good morning. I would like to thank NeighborWorks America for inviting me to be with you today to continue the very important discussion of community stabilization in the wake of rising foreclosures in neighborhoods across the country. As a member of the board of directors of NeighborWorks America for the last two years, I am impressed that attendance at these training institutes continues to grow--a strong testament to the importance of the subject matter being discussed as well as the quality of the curriculum and instruction. Today's discussion of the impact of foreclosures on neighborhoods and what can be done to mitigate those impacts is not only timely, it is essential to promoting local and regional economic recovery and growth. This morning, I will provide an overview of current conditions in the mortgage market and discuss how the disruption in this market is affecting neighborhoods. I will also outline the steps that the Federal Reserve System is taking to address these challenges and assist communities struggling with the impact of foreclosures. Foreclosures Continue to Affect the Housing MarketThe mortgage market continues to face challenges, especially in the subprime segment, which serves consumers who have imperfect or limited credit histories. The delinquency rate on subprime mortgages has continued to climb and has about doubled in the past year and, as of February, one in four subprime adjustable-rate mortgages was seriously delinquent, meaning the borrower was either in foreclosure or ninety days or more past due on a payment. Delinquency rates have risen on most other types of mortgages as well, but these increases have been more recent and less dramatic than those in the subprime segment. Foreclosures have also risen appreciably. Lenders initiated roughly one-and-a-half million foreclosures last year, up 53 percent from the previous year. On the basis of preliminary estimates published by the Hope Now Alliance, foreclosures are likely to have risen further in the first quarter of 2008. Homeowners may become delinquent on their mortgage for a variety of reasons. Historically, an adverse life event, such as a job loss, was often the reason a homeowner fell behind on his or her mortgage payments. And in the current economic environment, job losses have continued to contribute to the rise in mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures, particularly in areas of the Midwest, such as here in Ohio. Yet, other factors also explain the recent rise in mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures. Mortgage underwriting standards slipped in the middle of this decade, resulting in greater numbers of mortgages that had high combined loan-to-value ratios or for which incomplete documentation was provided. More than 40 percent of the subprime loans originated in 2006 had combined loan-to-value ratios in excess of 90 percent, a considerably higher share than earlier in the decade. In some cases, lenders originated mortgages that had multiple risk factors--a practice often referred to as risk-layering. Taken individually, these risk factors may not have significantly raised the likelihood that a homeowner would fall behind on payments; taken together, however, these risks materially increased this likelihood. High loan-to-value ratios at origination, combined with stagnant and eventually declining home prices, are a key aspect of the recent rise in delinquencies and foreclosures. After rising rapidly during the early part of this decade, home prices began to decelerate in 2006 and are now declining appreciably in some areas. As home prices declined, homeowners who had little or no equity at the time of their mortgage origination saw their home equity disappear--and with it their ability to refinance into a more-sustainable mortgage. Declining home equity may also reduce a stressed borrower's incentive to stay current on his or her mortgage or remain in a home. Recent research conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston suggests that homeowners who have experienced a 20 percent or greater fall in house prices are about 14 times more likely to default on a mortgage compared with homeowners who have experienced a 20 percent increase in the price of their home.1Some types of mortgage borrowers appear to be particularly sensitive to home-price declines; at least 18 percent of foreclosures started in the third quarter of 2007 involved non-owner-occupied properties. The Federal Reserve's Response to the Challenges Resulting from ForeclosuresThe Federal Reserve views the current high rate of mortgage foreclosures as an urgent problem, and we are addressing the issue on many fronts: we are contributing to initiatives already underway at the local and national level, as well as collaborating with other regulators, community groups, policy organizations, financial institutions, and public officials in an effort to identify ways to prevent unnecessary foreclosures and the associated negative effects on local communities. We are also leveraging the decentralized structure of the Federal Reserve System, which consists of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., and the twelve Federal Reserve Banks that each represent a distinct region of the country. This structure enables us to gather information and tailor responses to foreclosure issues at the local level, while using our collective experience to address regional and national policy issues. In addition, the Federal Reserve uses its considerable analytic resources to conduct research at the national level, which the Reserve Banks can disseminate to local community groups, counseling agencies, financial institutions, and others who are working to help troubled borrowers and communities. Timely analysis of data and other available information is critical to crafting appropriate remedies to any problem. To that end, the Federal Reserve recently helped NeighborWorks America identify those regions and neighborhoods throughout the country that are most at risk for higher rates of foreclosure and would therefore benefit from an increased capacity to provide mortgage counseling. Using this analysis, NeighborWorks America in February awarded $130 million in newly granted funds from Congress to thirty-two state housing finance agencies, eighty-two community-based NeighborWorks organizations, and sixteen counseling intermediaries approved by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). The Federal Reserve has recently made available on its public website detailed reports identifying neighborhoods that have especially high concentrations of foreclosures. These data--in the form of dynamic maps and other data--illustrate the regional variation in the condition of securitized, owner-occupied subprime and alt-A mortgage loans across the United States.2Local leaders can access these reports and work with community affairs staff at the local Reserve Banks to more effectively address foreclosure problems. For example, a user can choose to view key foreclosure measures such as "Foreclosures per 1000 housing units," "Share ARMs," and other factors. The maps drill down from national-level data to zip code level. They also depict factors such as "Share of low FICO and high LTV" and "Share late payment in last 12 months" that may help to predict which areas are most likely to experience higher rates of foreclosures. Finally, the Federal Reserve is providing, via downloadable files, the data supporting the maps, as well as data for scores of other loan-performance variables at the state, metropolitan area, and county levels. By making more data and information on emerging trends available to key local leaders, financial institutions, and community organizations, our aim is to improve the efficiency of their efforts to rebuild neighborhoods. The Federal Reserve System has also established a working group of economists and community development experts in order to coordinate System research efforts. This working group will monitor developments in the mortgage markets and study how these developments may affect individual borrowers and neighborhoods. Currently, the group is assessing existing research on house prices, mortgages, and foreclosures, with the goal of identifying important analytical gaps. The Federal Reserve System conducts outreach and education efforts through its regular contact with financial institutions and market intermediaries, as well as through its network of Community Affairs staff members who work with communities to identify trends and issues affecting low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. This communication with both financial markets and communities allows the Federal Reserve to act as a bridge between the two groups and between local communities and the organizations that provide community resources, such as credit counselors. For many borrowers who are behind on their mortgage payments, refinancing their loan is not an option. Therefore, the Federal Reserve is engaged in a number of efforts to encourage the use of loss-mitigation tools by lenders, servicers, and not-for-profit organizations that help individual borrowers resolve delinquency issues. The cost of foreclosure is high for everyone involved; estimates of the direct losses resulting from a foreclosure range from one-fifth to one-half the principal balance of a mortgage loan.3With these costs in mind, the Federal Reserve, together with the other federal banking agencies, has issued guidance urging lenders and servicers to pursue workout arrangements, when feasible and prudent, as an alternative to foreclosure. In some cases, temporary adjustments to payments may not be sufficient, and more-permanent reductions in interest rates or an extension of the loan term may be required to help a borrower. In some situations, lenders and servicers may want to consider using principal writedowns as a way to reduce re-default risk or to facilitate a refinancing. The Federal Reserve's outreach efforts inform its policymaking. We recently hosted focus groups to evaluate regulatory proposals on credit disclosures and held a series of informative hearings on the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) regulations. The Board then issued a regulatory proposal under HOEPA that called for stricter regulations to prohibit unfair and deceptive practices in the mortgage market. By targeting protections to borrowers who face the most risk of experiencing unfair or deceptive practices, the proposal seeks to protect consumers and preserve consumer choice in mortgage products. We have also sought to provide lenders with clear standards that, without being overly prescriptive, preserve access to responsible credit for qualified borrowers. The proposal covers the entire subprime market, not just lenders supervised by the federal banking agencies, and focuses attention on the areas of greatest risk--while preserving consumers' access to responsible credit. The proposal addresses the extension of credit without consideration of a borrower's ability to repay, verification of income and assets relied upon to make a loan, prepayment penalties, and escrow accounts for taxes and insurance. The comment period ended on April 8, and we are currently reviewing the more than 4,000 comment letters received. Legislative initiatives that would allow the Federal Housing Administration to increase its scale to reach a wider range of borrowers and develop appropriate underwriting and pricing methodologies to deal with any increased risk and another that would strengthen the oversight of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are important compliments to our regulatory efforts to strengthen the housing markets. Another major outreach effort involves gathering information on the best practices for addressing community development issues and then disseminating that information through publications, meetings, and forums. Since January 2007, Community Affairs offices across the Federal Reserve System have sponsored or cosponsored more than 75 events related to foreclosures, reaching more than 5,800 lenders, counselors, community development specialists, policymakers, and others. Beginning next month, the Community Affairs function will host a series of System-wide forums in order to further examine the impact foreclosures have on neighborhoods in both weak and strong housing markets, as well as the tools available to address the impacts of foreclosures. The Federal Reserve continues to provide educational resources to help consumers make informed personal financial decisions, such as choosing the right mortgage. We provide a variety of materials and other resources, including websites, to help consumers understand mortgage- and foreclosure-related issues, and to help lenders educate borrowers. The Federal Reserve Banks, through their Community Affairs offices, are working to establish foreclosure-mitigation resources on their websites for use by municipalities, housing counselors, and community groups. The Federal Reserve System's Partnership with NeighborWorks AmericaThe Federal Reserve's most recent undertaking to address foreclosure issues is the partnership we are announcing today with NeighborWorks America. Specifically, this partnership will focus on efforts to stabilize neighborhoods that have experienced high rates of foreclosures. This new partnership not only leverages our ability to conduct data analysis, research, and outreach, it builds on our existing working relationship as one of the federal agencies represented on the NeighborWorks America board of directors. Together, the Federal Reserve and NeighborWorks America will develop and deploy resources, tools, strategies, and best practices for mitigating the impact of foreclosures across the country. The cost of foreclosures is not limited to individual homeowners. Communities in which a high number of foreclosures have occurred are increasingly faced with large numbers of properties held by lenders or servicers as "real estate owned," or "REO." REO is costly to hold, and many lenders are not well equipped to handle large REO inventories. As a result, the number of vacant homes in some neighborhoods has increased markedly. After averaging about 1.7 percent starting in 1990 through 2006, the home-vacancy rate rose sharply in 2006 and hit 2.9 percent in the first quarter of 2008, according to the U.S. Census Bureau. Properties left vacant for long periods have many negative effects on a community. Research indicates that foreclosures tend to reduce the value of nearby properties; the magnitude of these price declines appears to differ, depending on the presence of variables such as the strength of the local housing market or the distance between a foreclosed home and other surrounding homes.4Moreover, neighborhoods that have significant concentrations of vacant properties are not attractive to potential buyers, further challenging community-stabilization efforts. Vacant homes also drain the coffers of municipalities, who must secure the homes from crime, keep them clear of trash, or in extreme cases, demolish them in order to maintain stability in the broader community.5For example, the chief of regional development for the City of Cleveland estimates that the city will spend $65 million each year for five years to address costs related to abandoned properties.6Not only are these costs high, they come at a time when tax revenues are generally decreasing because of declining home values. As state and local governments face diminished resources for dealing with vacant properties, many nonprofit organizations are likewise struggling with capacity issues. We have heard from many nonprofit community development organizations that foreclosures, and the impact on the neighborhoods affected by them, limit the organizations' ability to proactively engage in their previous development activities. As a member of the board of NeighborWorks America, I am keenly aware of the resources needed to deal with community stabilization in the wake of foreclosures. I am also aware of some promising examples of programs that NeighborWorks affiliates have developed to address problems associated with vacant and abandoned homes. In Chicago, the Neighborhood Housing Services Redevelopment Corporation, in cooperation with the city, has acquired hundreds of abandoned properties from several sources, such as HUD, REO from financial institutions, and private owners. The properties are then rehabilitated and sold to owner-occupants, frequently with appraisal-gap subsidies provided by the city and federal resources. In other highly depressed housing markets across the country, municipalities often demolish the worst-quality units in order to mitigate safety hazards, reduce the total number of vacant homes, and restore the quality of life in the community. The purpose of our partnership with NeighborWorks America is to support local communities as they assess local housing conditions and evaluate responses to the challenges before them. The partnership will develop and deliver training designed to help local communities acquire, rehabilitate, and manage foreclosed REO. Working with NeighborWorks America, the Federal Reserve will develop training resources for nonprofits and local governments to foster their understanding of the foreclosure and REO process and to help them develop specific strategies for the sale and effective use of REO in individual markets. The ultimate goal is to return REO to productive use, for example, to provide affordable rental housing or to supply new, sustainable homeownership opportunities in low- and moderate-income communities. Research and analysis will play a key role in the success of local efforts. The Federal Reserve System is committed to providing NeighborWorks and others with timely reports and information so that foreclosure-mitigation resources can be effectively targeted to local areas. For example, the Federal Reserve may map mortgage-delinquency rates in specific metropolitan areas, to help local governments and nonprofits develop and prioritize their strategies for stabilizing communities. As demonstrated by our partnership with NeighborWorks America, the Federal Reserve System is committed to supporting sustainable, healthy communities. Bringing nonprofits, local government representatives, and financial market participants together to share information and develop best practices for addressing the negative impacts of foreclosures on neighborhoods is the next phase of this commitment. Leveraging the System's unique structure of Banks and Branches and NeighborWorks America's broad local presence will allow us to make our research and outreach broadly available to nonprofits and community leaders. ConclusionAs the Federal Reserve builds on its consumer protection efforts in order to mitigate foreclosures for current homeowners, we are also concerned about the impact current mortgage market problems are having on individual communities. The challenges of rising foreclosures are significant at the state and local level and the nature of the problem varies by location. Through its structure, the Federal Reserve System is attuned to local issues, which both informs its national policymaking and allows for responses tailored to local conditions. We are committed to continuing to strengthen our relationships with local stakeholders. Our partnership with NeighborWorks America is an important part of that commitment. A unified effort is essential to mitigating and offsetting the negative impact of foreclosures. Footnotes 1.Kristopher Gerardi, Adam Hale Shapiro, and Paul Willen (2008), "Subprime Outcomes: Risky Mortgages, Homeownership Experiences, and Foreclosures," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.Return to text 2."Dynamic Maps of Nonprime Mortgage Conditions in the United States."Return to text 3.Liz Laderman (March 2008), "The Efficacy of Mortgage Loan Workouts," Unpublished, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.Return to text 4.Dan Immergluck and Geoff Smith (June 2005), "There Goes the Neighborhood: The Effect of Single-Family Mortgage Foreclosures on Property Values," Woodstock Institute; William C. Apgar and Mark Duda,"Collateral Damage: The Municipal Impact of Today's Mortgage Foreclosure Boom," Minneapolis, Homeownership Preservation Foundation.Return to text 5.William C. Apgar and Duda, Mark, "Collateral Damage: The Municipal Impact of Today's Mortgage Foreclosure Boom," Minneapolis, Homeownership Preservation Foundation.Return to text 6.Chris Warren (March 5, 2008), "Presentation to Consumer Advisory Council of the Federal Reserve Board," City of Cleveland.Return to text
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Columbia Business School Conference on the Role of Money Markets, New York, New York Market participants, scholars, and central bankers and other policymakers have long recognized that liquid money markets are critical to financial stability. Many banks and other financial market participants obtain a significant portion of their funding in the money markets and rely on rolling over such short-term debt. Developments in global financial markets since last summer have underscored that if market participants become concerned about their access to money market funding, they can pull back from providing credit to other financial market participants and to businesses and households. Furthermore, certain liquidity tools traditionally used by central banks may not be fully effective in restoring liquidity to the money markets and containing the threats such money market disturbances pose to financial stability. We all need to reflect carefully on these developments and draw appropriate lessons regarding the management of liquidity risk and the design of central bank liquidity facilities.1 The Role of Money Markets in the Recent and Ongoing Financial Market TurmoilThe financial turmoil that we have been experiencing since last summer clearly did not originate in the money markets. As everyone knows, the trigger was losses associated with soaring delinquencies on U.S. subprime mortgages that were originated from 2005 through early 2007, a period during which underwriting standards for such mortgages weakened dramatically. But the loosening of standards and terms on subprime mortgages was also symptomatic of a broader erosion of the underwriting of loans to households and businesses. Many of those loans had been packaged as asset-backed securities and sold to investors who relied on the credit ratings of the securities rather than thoroughly conducting their own due diligence on the securities' risk characteristics. When those investors experienced significant losses on even the most highly rated securities backed by subprime collateral, they lost confidence in the ratings and pulled back from markets for a range of asset-backed securities, especially those with more complex structures. During the spring and early summer of 2007, the pullback by investors began to put pressure on the liquidity of banks and other financial institutions that had originated large volumes of loans with the expectation of distributing them. That pressure became severe and widespread when the liquidity of the asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) markets became impaired in early August 2007. Money markets, like that for ABCP, are especially vulnerable to a decline in confidence because so many investors in that sector, such as money market funds, are seeking assured safety and liquidity. And well-functioning money markets are critical to the originate-to-distribute model of financial intermediation that has become an increasingly important means of funneling savings into investment. Originators and packagers need the money markets to fund loans accumulated for later resale; and liquidity in securitization markets depends on dealers being able to borrow in money markets to hold inventories acquired in the process of making markets. An illustration of such dependency is that problems in money markets fed back on mortgage markets last year because many securitized loans were being financed on a more permanent basis with short-term money market paper, such as ABCP. I believe that the depth, scope, and persistence of the financial turmoil we have been experiencing is in significant part attributable to broader concerns about the liquidity of money markets. A loss of liquidity in a money market generally has more serious effects than a loss of liquidity in markets for longer-term instruments because such large amounts of money market instruments become due each day. If investors pull back from a money market, the issuers come under substantial liquidity pressures very suddenly. In the case of ABCP, with the exception of paper issued by structured investment vehicles (SIVs) and so-called extendible paper, issuers were able to meet those liquidity demands by drawing on committed lines of credit from banks. But that simply transferred the liquidity pressure to the banking system. Banks generally were able to cope with that pressure, but the need to fund the draws on their backup lines ate substantially into their liquidity and capital buffers. Thus, credit problems in mortgage markets helped reduce the availability of credit across a wide variety of instruments and borrowers. The pressure on their liquidity and on their balance sheets, combined with heightened credit concerns, made banks reluctant to provide others with term funding--that is, money market loans with terms longer than overnight. Term premiums embodied in interbank money markets increased markedly; at times the spreads between term dollar Libor and comparable-maturity overnight index swap rates exceeded 100 basis points, and term premiums of comparable magnitude also emerged in interbank markets for sterling and euros. Securities firms and hedge funds also found term funding considerably more costly and difficult to obtain after the strains emerged in the ABCP markets. Convinced that the illiquidity of money markets and persistently enlarged term premiums were a significant impediment to restoring the effectiveness of financial market functioning, the Federal Reserve in late 2007 and early 2008 took steps to make borrowing at the discount window more attractive to banks and provided greater liquidity to primary dealers in U.S. government securities by extending the maturity of its open market operations. For a time those actions seemed to be reducing the pressures in term funding markets. However, in mid-March events once again demonstrated how disruptions to money markets can threaten financial stability. Growing concerns about the financial condition of Bear Stearns undermined the confidence of its creditors and counterparties and in a few days eroded what it and its regulator had judged to be an ample liquidity cushion. Although the demands on its liquidity took many forms, the principal drain resulted from the reluctance of creditors and counterparties to roll over the overnight secured transactions that Bear Stearns used to finance a substantial portion of its balance sheet. Unable to roll over those transactions, Bear Stearns would have been forced to file for bankruptcy unless other sources of financing became available. A bankruptcy filing would have forced its secured creditors to liquidate the underlying collateral, which would have added to already severe downward pressures on prices given the illiquidity of the markets for some of this collateral. Those creditors and counterparties, which included money market funds and other highly risk-averse investors, might well have responded to the sharp and unexpected reduction in the liquidity of their portfolios, as well as to possible losses and a heightened risk of future losses, by pulling back from providing secured financing to other primary dealers. In those circumstances, in which a much broader and less containable liquidity crisis threatened to emerge, the Federal Reserve Board judged that it needed to use its emergency liquidity powers to avoid a bankruptcy filing by Bear Stearns. Furthermore, to reduce the potential for counterparties and creditors to make a run on other primary dealers, the Federal Reserve used its emergency lending authority to create a new facility that provided the primary dealers with a liquidity backstop similar to the discount window available to banks in generally sound financial condition. These actions by the Federal Reserve and other central banks have contributed to some improvements in the liquidity of term money markets. But market functioning remains far from normal. In particular, although spreads between Libor and comparable swap rates have receded from their recent peaks, they remain abnormally high. Until the market turmoil fully abates, we run some risk in trying to draw lessons from recent experience. Nonetheless, I believe experience to date has taught some lessons regarding the management of liquidity risk by market participants and the design of central bank liquidity facilities that will prove durable. Liquidity Risk ManagementRecent developments suggest that market participants must thoroughly reassess the market-liquidity assumptions that underlie their existing risk-management practices. The scope and duration of disruptions to market liquidity that we have experienced since last summer have greatly exceeded what market participants, prudential supervisors, and central banks thought likely or even possible. The implications are quite broad and significant. In general, in determining the appropriate size of their liquidity buffers (their holdings of unencumbered liquid assets or their access to very stable sources of funding), market participants must plan for the possibility of more-severe liquidity shocks. For example, originators and distributors of securitized assets need to be prepared for the possibility that the securitization markets seize up and force them to fund loans in the securitization pipeline. Banks that provide liquidity backstops to the ABCP markets or to other issuers of short-term liabilities need to prepare for the possibility that broad disturbances to money market liquidity force many issuers to draw upon the backstop facilities at the same time. And sponsors of ABCP programs and other facilities in which short-term liabilities fund longer-term assets need to recognize that reputational concerns may induce them to purchase paper that cannot otherwise be sold or to purchase the collateral that cannot be financed. Perhaps most important, market participants must reassess their assumptions about the stability of secured funding in circumstances in which the liquidity of the markets for the underlying collateral becomes impaired. That reassessment is especially important because in recent years market participants have been funding growing volumes of relatively less liquid assets though secured financings in the money markets. In the ABCP markets, collateral expanded beyond short-term corporate and consumer receivables to include large amounts of paper that SIVs and other "securities arbitrage" programs used to finance mortgage-backed securities, other asset-backed securities, and long-term debt issued by financial institutions. In the even larger tri-party repo markets, broker-dealers finance not only Treasury securities but also very substantial amounts of agency debt, agency mortgage-backed securities, and various other types of privately-issued debt instruments. So long as the markets for the collateral remain liquid, lenders are likely to remain confident that the margin requirements applied to the collateral provide adequate protection against loss. But if liquidity evaporates, borrowers whose creditworthiness is questioned can suddenly encounter difficulties financing now-illiquid collateral. The primary responsibility for reassessing and strengthening the management of liquidity risk appropriately rests with market participants themselves, but prudential supervisors, working with central banks, should carefully review the practices of regulated entities. In particular, the public authorities must address a difficult yet very important question: To what degree should entities with access to central bank credit be permitted to rely on that access to meet potential liquidity demands? Central bank liquidity facilities are intended to permit those with access to hold smaller liquidity buffers, which allows them to fund more longer-term assets and thereby promotes capital formation and economic growth. At the same time, however, the existence of central bank credit facilities can so undermine incentives for maintaining liquidity buffers that institutions hold more longer-term assets than is socially desirable and thereby pose excessive risk to themselves and the financial system. In principle, prudential regulation of institutions with access to central bank credit can limit moral hazard and induce institutions to hold amounts of longer-term assets and liquid assets that are socially desirable. In practice, however, this requires difficult and necessarily somewhat arbitrary judgments about the types of liquidity stress scenarios that institutions should plan to confront without access to central bank credit and, correspondingly, those scenarios in which institutions in sound financial condition can appropriately rely on central bank credit. For example, for what types of collateral can institutions appropriately assume that secured financing will always be available, because markets for that collateral ordinarily are highly liquid and because if they are not central banks can be expected to take actions to address the situation. Conversely, for what types of collateral should institutions prepare for a loss of secured funding and for how long a period? Although recent experience suggests that these are very important questions, it provides only limited insights regarding the answers. Central Bank Liquidity FacilitiesI have already mentioned a number of steps the Federal Reserve has taken to address liquidity problems in money markets, including the creation of new or expanded auction facilities for discount window and securities lending and the opening of our lending facilities to more counterparties. Many other central banks also found that they needed to adapt their methods of providing liquidity to the unusual pressures associated with the market turmoil since last summer. Although specific actions varied according to the severity of the pressure and the characteristics of the preexisting operational framework, many central banks concentrated operations more in longer maturities, broadened the range of collateral accepted in various types of operations, and increased the utility of standing loan facilities; some made loans in other currencies by use of swaps with the Federal Reserve, enhanced securities lending operations, and engaged in auctions or other new methods to distribute some kinds of liquidity. In many cases, these innovations involved a degree of cooperation in timing or action across central banks. Normally, most central banks supply and absorb reserves primarily in the safest and most liquid parts of the money markets.2In these segments of the markets they can operate in size without distorting prices, and without preferential treatment for certain private borrowers or forms of collateral. The private sector then distributes the reserves around the markets--across counterparties, maturities, and degrees of creditworthiness. The resulting transactions enhance market liquidity and allow private market participants to allocate credit and determine the appropriate compensation for taking risk. However, this private-sector intermediation process in money markets became severely impaired in the recent turmoil. As I already mentioned, uncertainty about the value of assets, about the creditworthiness of counterparties, and about future calls on the liquidity and capital of important market participants caused liquidity to dry up in many segments of the money markets. A flight to liquidity and safety is not unusual when uncertainty rises and markets are disturbed, but the breadth and persistence of this turmoil and its spread into money markets made it a substantial threat to financial and economic stability. To ameliorate the threat to financial and economic stability, the Federal Reserve and a number of other central banks in effect found they needed to provide a substitute for the arbitrage and trading no longer being undertaken in sufficient size by the private sector. These central banks changed the composition of their balance sheets, selling or lending the assets that were in especially strong demand and lending against the illiquid assets the private sector was having difficulty financing. The purpose of those moves has been to forestall fire sales of assets that could no longer be financed, to facilitate orderly deleveraging and reintermediation in the financial sector, and to encourage the reopening of private markets for securitization products so that price discovery could proceed and credit flows resume. Those actions raise a number of difficult public policy questions for central banks and other public authorities. An important issue is how durable the changes should be; to what extent are they a desirable adaptation of central bank tools to the current structure of markets, and to what extent should the changes be phased out as market functions are restored? I start from the premise that central banks should not allocate credit or be market makers on a permanent basis. That should be left to the market--or if externalities or other market failures are important, to other governmental programs. The Federal Reserve should return to adjusting reserves mainly through purchases and sales of the safest and most liquid assets as soon as that would be consistent with stable, well-functioning markets. In fact, several of the Federal Reserve's new programs are designed to be self-liquidating as markets improve. Minimum bid rates and collateral requirements have been set to be effective when markets are disrupted but to make participation uneconomic when markets are functioning well. Under current law, our facilities for investment banks that don't involve securities eligible for open market operations (OMO-eligible paper) will necessarily be wound down when circumstances are no longer "unusual and exigent"; I'll come back to questions about these facilities in a minute. However, the Federal Reserve's auction facilities have been an important innovation that we should not lose. They have been successful at reducing the stigma that can impede borrowing at the discount window in a crisis environment and might be very useful in dealing with future episodes of illiquidity in money markets. The new auction facilities required planning and changes in existing systems, and we should consider retaining the new facilities for the purposes of bank discount window borrowing and securities lending against OMO-eligible paper, either on a standby basis or operating at a very low level when markets are functioning well in order to keep the new facilities in good working order. The latter might require that we allow the auction to set the price without a constraining minimum, but a small auction should not distort the allocation decisions of private participants. Our experience in recent months has underlined the global interdependencies of financial markets. Globally active banks manage their positions on an integrated basis around the world, and pressures originating in one market are quickly transmitted elsewhere. Central banks should consider how to adapt their facilities to help these institutions mobilize their global liquidity in stressed market conditions and apply it to where it is most needed. That approach will require the consideration of arrangements with sound institutions in which central banks would accept foreign collateral denominated in foreign currencies. Those arrangements are under active study and a number of issues need to be resolved. It is possible that over time, major central banks could perhaps agree to accept a common pool of very safe collateral, facilitating the liquidity management of global banks. The stipulation that the institutions be sound is important: Decisions about lending to troubled banks should be made by home country authorities with knowledge and responsibility. Another instrument of liquidity provision that central banks are examining is currency swaps to facilitate granting liquidity in other currencies. The central banks found currency swaps useful because the impediments to intermediation in money markets naturally extended to transactions across currencies as well as across maturities and counterparties. Supplying credit in dollars to banks in the euro area and Switzerland helped relieve pressure on those banks and in our markets. In recent months, the Fed was able to make currency swap arrangements on short notice but our reaction time could be even shorter if we keep such arrangements in place or on standby. Thinking carefully about which circumstances in the future would warrant the activation of such arrangements will be a useful form of contingency planning. For the United States, of course, perhaps the most difficult and important question involves access to central bank credit facilities by U.S. broker-dealers, including the primary dealers. Over the past several decades, the growing importance of broker-dealers and the increasing interconnections of these institutions with other parts of the financial marketplace have accompanied the shift to intermediation through securities markets rather than through commercial banks. Financial markets in most other countries are dominated by universal banks; in those circumstances, securities activities are carried out in organizations that have access to the discount window and other aspects of the safety net we associate with commercial banks. As I have emphasized this evening, one of the things we learned over recent months is that broker-dealers, like banks, are subject to destructive runs when markets aren't functioning well, despite the fact that their borrowing in money markets is mostly secured and their assets mostly marketable. And, in the case of Bear Stearns, we saw that a run on a major broker-dealer when markets were already disrupted by a flight to safety and liquidity could, through a chain of actions and reactions, threaten financial stability. We gave the primary dealers access to central bank credit under the unusual and exigent circumstances prevailing in mid-March. Their counterparties and creditors will presume that such access would again be granted if the health of the financial system is again threatened by loss of liquidity at the primary dealers. The public authorities need to consider several difficult issues with respect to access to the discount window. One is the circumstances under which broker-dealers should be permitted to borrow in the future. One possibility would be to confine such borrowing to circumstances in which the Federal Reserve judges that the stability of the financial system is at risk--as we did in March. Another would be to grant broker-dealers the same sort of regular access enjoyed by commercial banks. The question has implications for the appropriate regulatory regime for broker-dealers and their parent companies. As I've already noted, the existence of liquidity facilities at the central bank can undermine normal incentives for maintaining liquidity buffers, and the more extensive the access, the greater the degree to which market discipline will be loosened and prudential regulation will need to be tightened. Unquestionably, regulation needs to respond to what we have learned about the importance of primary dealers and their vulnerabilities to liquidity pressures. We need to confront the difficult questions I raised earlier about the scenarios in which it is appropriate to rely on central bank liquidity and the scenarios in which such reliance is inappropriate. And we need to ensure that supervisory guidance regarding liquidity risk management is consistent with the way we answer those questions. Whether broader regulatory changes for broker-dealers are necessary is a difficult question that deserves further study. In the interim we are working closely with the Securities and Exchange Commission to provide appropriate prudential oversight of primary dealers and their affiliates. We are also looking at ways to strengthen the infrastructure of financial markets, including markets for secured financing and over-the-counter derivatives markets. In terms of reducing the risk of money market disruptions, steps to strengthen market infrastructure complement supervisory efforts to strengthen the management of liquidity risk at individual firms. ConclusionAs I noted at the outset, one important lesson from recent developments is that we need to devote greater attention to money markets. Disruptions to those critical markets have the potential to significantly harm the financial system and the real economy. Thus, this conference, which brings together market participants, scholars, and policymakers, is quite timely. I have no doubt that it will yield important insights into the issues I have been discussing. Footnotes 1.Patrick Parkinson, of the Board's staff, contributed to the preparation of these remarks. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of other members of the Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.The Federal Reserve makes loans at the discount window against a wide range of collateral, but under most circumstances this facility is lightly used.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Columbia Business School's 32nd Annual Dinner, New York, New York President Bollinger, Dean Hubbard, Co-Chairman Kravis, and distinguished guests, I am very pleased to be here and especially honored to receive the Columbia Business School's Distinguished Leadership in Government Award. This evening I would like to offer a few thoughts on mortgage markets and the recent increase in the pace of delinquencies and foreclosures. My particular focus will be on geographic variation in mortgage performance and how that variation can help us better understand and prevent foreclosures. I will also discuss some initiatives taken by the Federal Reserve to address the foreclosure crisis as well as other policies that might be used to strengthen mortgage and housing markets. Geographic Variation in Loan Mortgage PerformanceAs my listeners know, conditions in mortgage markets remain quite difficult, and mortgage delinquencies have climbed steeply. The sharpest increases have been among subprime mortgages, particularly those with adjustable interest rates: About one quarter of subprime adjustable-rate mortgages are currently 90 days or more delinquent or in foreclosure.1Delinquency rates also have increased in the prime and near-prime segments of the mortgage market, although not nearly so much as in the subprime sector.As a consequence of rising delinquencies, foreclosure proceedings were initiated on some 1.5 million U.S. homes during 2007, up 53 percent from 2006, and the rate of foreclosure starts looks likely to be yet higher in 2008. Not all foreclosure starts result in the borrower's loss of the home; sometimes the borrower is able to make up the missed payments or other arrangements are made with the lender. But, given the number of borrowers in distress and the weakness of the general housing market, the share of foreclosure initiations that ultimately result in the loss of the home seems likely to be higher in the current episode than customarily has been the case. Many foreclosures are not preventable. Investors, for example, are unlikely to want to hold onto a property whose value has depreciated significantly, and some borrowers--perhaps because they were put into an inappropriate loan or because personal circumstances have changed--cannot realistically sustain homeownership. However, if a foreclosure is preventable, and the borrower wants to stay in the home, the economic case for trying to avoid foreclosure is strong. Because foreclosures impose high costs, including legal and administrative costs as well as the costs of leaving the property vacant for a possibly extended period, both the borrower and the lender often are better off avoiding foreclosure. Moreover, it is important to recognize that the costs of foreclosure may extend well beyond those borne directly by the borrower and the lender. Clusters of foreclosures can destabilize communities, reduce the property values of nearby homes, and lower municipal tax revenues. At both the local and national levels, foreclosures add to the stock of homes for sale, increasing downward pressure on home prices in general. In the current environment, more-rapid declines in house prices may have an adverse impact on the broader economy and, through their effects on the valuation of mortgage-related assets, on the stability of the financial system. Thus, finding ways to avoid preventable foreclosures is a legitimate and important concern of public policy. To determine the appropriate public- and private-sector responses to the rise in mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures, we need to better understand the sources of this phenomenon. In good times and bad, a mortgage default can be triggered by a life event, such as the loss of a job, serious illness or injury, or divorce. However, another factor is now playing an increasing role in many markets: declines in home values, which reduce homeowners' equity and may consequently affect their ability or incentive to make the financial sacrifices necessary to stay in their homes. On the principle that a picture is worth a thousand words, Federal Reserve staff, using detailed, county-by-county information on mortgage performance, have developed a series of "heat maps," which summarize the incidence of serious mortgage delinquencies across the nation as well as some of the key drivers of loan performance. As the examples will make clear, the figures (with the exception of one map depicting house price changes) use warmer colors--orange and red--to show counties for which the factor being considered has a higher value or change. Lower values or changes (again, with the exception of that one map) are indicated by shades of green. Yellow indicates areas where the factor under consideration has a moderate value or change. Nationally, as of the fourth quarter of 2007, the rate of serious delinquency, as measured by credit records, stood at 2 percent of all mortgage borrowers, up nearly 50 percent from the end of 2004.2The fourth quarter of 2004 is a useful benchmark, because general economic conditions were fairly normal and the lax underwriting that emerged later was not yet evident. Figure 1shows the national patterns of serious mortgage delinquency in 2004, which, again, I am taking as representative of a relatively normal period, with orange and red indicating the highest rates of delinquency and greens indicating the lowest. In 2004, the areas of the country with the highest rates of serious delinquency included significant portions of the Southeast; parts of the Midwest, most notably Ohio and Indiana; portions of the Rocky Mountain region; and Texas, Oklahoma, and areas in the Mississippi valley. In contrast, many parts of the country experienced exceptionally good loan performance at that time, including most of the West Coast, New England, and much of southern Florida. However, conditions in some areas changed greatly in a relatively short period of time.Figure 2shows the pattern of delinquency rates as of the last quarter of 2007. Many of the areas that exhibited elevated delinquency rates in 2004 continued to show relatively high rates of delinquency in 2007. But some areas that had low rates in 2004 experienced high rates three years later.Figure 3makes this point more sharply by showing the pattern ofincreasesin delinquency rates between 2004 and 2007, with the largest increases shown in red. The strong regional pattern is evident in the figure. Although many parts of the country have seen significant increases in mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures, a number of areas--such as California, parts of Nevada, Arizona, Colorado, Florida, portions of the upper Midwest, and New England--have been particularly hard hit. The regional pattern of the recent rise in mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures requires explanation. Again, we can use heat maps to examine the underlying relationships across geographic regions between changes in mortgage delinquency rates and factors identified as driving loan performance. For example, the change in the unemployment rate in a county can be used as a proxy for disruptions in family incomes and subsequent financial stress.Figure 4shows changes in average annual unemployment rates across counties between 2004 and 2007, with counties indicated in red experiencing increases or only slight decreases in joblessness.3The data suggest that increases in unemployment rates account for at least some of the recent increases in mortgage delinquencies. Parts of New England, states in the Great Lakes region--including Minnesota, Michigan, and Wisconsin--and a number of other states, such as Nevada, show both increased mortgage delinquencies and notable increases in unemployment rates. However, the behavior of unemployment does not seem sufficient to explain the increased delinquency rates in other areas, including California, Florida, and portions of Colorado, where mortgage delinquencies increased during a period in which unemployment generally decreased. Another important determinant of loan performance, identified by research at the Federal Reserve and elsewhere, is changes in house prices.4Figure 5shows the regional pattern of changes in house prices between 2006 and 2007, with unchanged prices and price declines indicated in red.5The figure shows that Florida, California, Nevada, Michigan, and parts of Arizona and Colorado experienced decreases in house prices between the fourth quarter of 2006 and the fourth quarter of 2007 (a pattern which has continued and intensified in 2008).6As I noted, sharp declines in house prices, and thus in homeowners' equity, reduce both the ability and incentive of homeowners, particularly those under financial stress for other reasons, to retain their homes. Other factors affect foreclosure rates, and once again the heat maps can give us a visual impression.Figure 6shows the share of home purchases by non-owner occupiers--investors or purchasers of vacation homes, for example--during 2005 and 2006.7Again, there is some correlation with the increase in delinquencies and foreclosures, as purchases by non-owner occupiers were relatively high in the West, Southwest, and in Florida.Figure 7shows the incidence of junior liens (or piggyback loans), often an indicator of little borrower equity at the time of purchase. The greater use of these mortgages in the West and East Coasts presumably reflects higher house prices in those regions; again, the geographical pattern suggests that the use of piggyback loans may also have contributed to the recent rise in delinquencies and foreclosures.8 What are the implications of these relationships, particularly the linkage of mortgage payment problems and falling house prices? Loan servicers are used to dealing with mortgage delinquencies related to life events such as unemployment or illness, with the most common approaches being a temporary repayment plan or the folding of missed payments into the principal balance. A widespread decline in home prices, by contrast, is a relatively novel phenomenon, and lenders and servicers will have to develop new and flexible strategies to deal with this issue. In some cases, when the source of the problem is a decline of the value of the home well below the mortgage's principal balance, the best solution may be a write-down of principal or other permanent modification of the loan by the servicer, perhaps combined with a refinancing by the Federal Housing Administration or another lender. To be effective, such programs must be tightly targeted to borrowers at the highest risk of foreclosure, as measured, for example, by debt-to-income ratio or by the extent to which the mortgage is "underwater." Finding the right balance--particularly the need to avoid programs that give borrowers who can make their payments an incentive to default--is difficult. But realistic public- and private-sector policies must take into account the fact that traditional foreclosure avoidance strategies may not always work well in the current environment. The Federal Reserve's Homeownership and Mortgage InitiativesI would like to say a few words about the Federal Reserve's efforts to strengthen homeownership and reduce preventable foreclosures. The Federal Reserve's decisions regarding monetary policy and our efforts to increase financial stability affect housing and mortgage markets, of course. But, as an organization with a national presence in the form of regional Federal Reserve Banks and their Branches, we are also working to address these issues more directly. We are collaborating with other regulators, community groups, policy organizations, lenders, and public officials to identify ways to prevent unnecessary foreclosures and their negative effects on local economies. Our efforts have taken a variety of forms. First, we have employed economic research and analysis, a particular strength of the Federal Reserve, to increase the sum of knowledge about mortgage and housing issues. For example, we are providing community leaders with detailed analyses identifying neighborhoods at high risk of foreclosures, analogous to the heat maps I showed you this evening.9These analyses have helped community organizations better focus their scarce resources, such as deciding where to target counseling services or other intervention efforts. A Federal Reserve System work group has prepared overviews of the current state of knowledge about housing and mortgage markets, and further research is currently under way to fill in the most important analytical gaps. Second, we are collaborating with interested parties across the country, taking advantage of our national presence and our existing relationships with local lenders, community groups, government officials, and other stakeholders, to take practical steps to address the causes and consequences of foreclosures. For example, I mentioned earlier the destabilizing effects foreclosures have on neighborhoods, resulting from factors such as decreased home values and deterioration of vacant properties from neglect. To help address this problem, the Federal Reserve is joining in a partnership with the nonprofit NeighborWorks America to develop materials, tools, and training programs to help communities and others acquire and manage vacant properties. The goal is to support the provision of affordable rental housing and new homeownership opportunities in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. Federal Reserve Banks and Branches have also hosted numerous meetings and workshops to bring together local officials, lenders, community groups, and others to try to find ways to reduce the incidence of foreclosures and mitigate their economic and social effects. Third, we are engaged with mortgage servicers to understand impediments they may face when modifying loans or offering other alternatives to foreclosure. Servicers still report difficulty connecting with troubled borrowers, and we have supported efforts to encourage borrowers to contact their lenders or housing counselors. Working with the Hope Now alliance and independently, we have encouraged the industry to increase their efforts to work with troubled borrowers, to develop guidelines and templates for reasonable standardized approaches to various loss-mitigation techniques, and to adopt uniform reporting standards, such as those sponsored by Hope Now. Clear disclosures of loan modifications will not only make it easier for regulators, the mortgage industry, and homeowners to assess the effectiveness of foreclosure-prevention efforts, but they will also foster greater transparency, and hence greater confidence, in the securitization market. Prospectively, we are committed to promoting an environment that supports the homeownership goals of creditworthy borrowers. To this end, the Federal Reserve Board has proposed new regulations to better protect consumers from a range of unfair or deceptive mortgage lending and advertising practices. To help ensure that the rules are broadly enforced, we are engaging in a program with other federal and state agencies to conduct consumer compliance reviews of nondepository lenders and mortgage brokers. These reviews are targeting underwriting standards, risk-management strategies, and compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. The Federal Reserve also is continuing its long-standing practice of providing educational and information resources to help consumers make informed personal financial decisions, including choosing the right mortgage. Through their community affairs offices, Federal Reserve Banks are working to establish foreclosure-mitigation resource centers on their websites to be used by small municipalities, housing counselors, and community groups. For consumers who have questions about banking procedures and rules or who believe they may have been treated unfairly by their lender, the Federal Reserve Consumer Help Center directs queries to the various regulatory agencies so that a consumer has only one call to make to ask questions or file complaints.10 Additional Mortgage InitiativesAdditional government policies can help address problems in the mortgage markets. The Congress can take an important step by moving quickly to reconcile and enact legislation permitting the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) to increase its scale and improve its management of risks. Such legislation could help the FHA reach a wider range of borrowers and develop appropriate underwriting and pricing methodologies to deal with any increase in credit risk. Giving the FHA greater latitude to set underwriting standards and risk-based premiums for mortgage refinancing, as well as more flexibility in product development, would allow it to help still more troubled borrowers. Separately, the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs)--Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac‑‑could do more. Recently, the Congress expanded Fannie Mae's and Freddie Mac's role in the mortgage market by temporarily increasing the limits on the sizes of the mortgages they can accept for securitization. In addition, because the GSEs have resolved some of their accounting and operational problems, their federal regulator, the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, has lifted some of the constraints that it had imposed on them. Thus, now is an especially appropriate time for the GSEs to move quickly to raise significant new capital, which they will need to take advantage of these new securitization and investment opportunities, to provide assistance to the housing markets in times of stress, and to do so in a safe and sound manner. As the GSEs expand their role in housing markets, the Congress should move forward on GSE reform legislation, which includes strengthening the regulatory oversight of these companies. As the Federal Reserve has testified on many occasions, it is very important for the health and stability of our housing finance system that the Congress provide the GSE regulator with broad authority to set capital standards, establish a clear and credible receivership process, and define and monitor a transparent public purpose--one that transcends just shareholder interests--for the accumulation of assets held in their portfolios. ConclusionThe realtor's mantra is "location, location, location," and, as I have discussed this evening, local variation in housing and mortgage markets is considerable. This variation is useful for understanding the sources of the increase in mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures, and it should be taken into account as servicers and policymakers consider how best to avoid preventable foreclosures. Most Americans are paying their mortgages on time and are not at risk of foreclosure. But high rates of delinquency and foreclosure can have substantial spillover effects on the housing market, the financial markets, and the broader economy. Therefore, doing what we can to avoid preventable foreclosures is not just in the interest of lenders and borrowers. It's in everybody's interest. ReferencesAvery, Robert B.,Kenneth P. Brevoort, andGlenn B. Canner(2007)."The 2006 HMDA Data (1.26 MB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 93 (December), pp. A73-A109. Gerardi, Kristopher, Adam Hale Shapiro, and Paul S. Willen (2007)."Subprime Outcomes, Risky Mortgages, Homeownership Experiences, and Foreclosures,"Working Paper No. 07-15. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, December 3. Footnotes 1.Based on servicer data from First American LoanPerformance.Return to text 2.This information from TrenData is drawn from the credit records of a geographically stratified random sample of more than 20 million individuals (roughly a 1 in 10 sample of all credit records) for each calendar quarter beginning in 1992. TrenData is a registered trademark of TransUnion LLC. "Serious delinquency" includes accounts that are 90 days or more past due or in foreclosure.Return to text 3.Unemployment rate data are from theBureau of Labor Statistics.Return to text 4.For example, see Gerardi, Shapiro, and Willen (2007).Return to text 5.Displayed is the annual percentage change in the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight price index for each county from the end of 2006 to the end of 2007.Return to text 6.Several different series measure home price changes. The index compiled by theOffice of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversightuses the values of homes whose mortgages were purchased by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac.Return to text 7.Information on non-owner occupiers comes from Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data. HMDA is implemented byRegulation C(12 CFR 203) of the Federal Reserve Board. For more information about HMDA, see Avery, Brevoort, and Canner (2007).Return to text 8.For details about the technique used to identify piggyback loans and for more information about their use, see Avery, Brevoort, and Canner (2007).Return to text 9.Seewww.newyorkfed.org/mortgagemaps/to view more maps related to mortgage lending.Return to text 10.Consumers can call 1-888-851-1920 or visithttp://www.federalreserveconsumerhelp.gov/.Return to text
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the Conference of State Bank Supervisors Annual Conference, Amelia Island Plantation, Florida Governor Kroszner presented identical remarks to the Banco Central do Brasil Annual Seminar on Banking, Financial Stability, and Risk, on May 27, 2008 As all of you well know, it was just about one year ago that the turmoil in the mortgage and financial markets emerged. Today I will offer my perspective on the prospects for recovery and repair of the mortgage markets, which I believe will be a gradual process that requires both market and regulatory discipline.Greater transparency and less complexity in credit instruments will help to promote broader scrutiny of credit risk. Investors with more and better information from the originators and sponsors of credit products will be able to more easily conduct proper due diligence and verify evaluations of credit risk. Financial institutions that develop and hold these instruments and that have similar or correlated exposures through various business lines should also strengthen risk-management practices. As supervisors, we must insist on effective risk management and take the steps necessary to ensure that changes are implemented where needed.Although any assessment at this stage about the recovery and repair of mortgage markets is preliminary, I will outline some steps, many of which are already in train, that can foster the rehabilitation process. As part of this discussion, I will highlight what the Federal Reserve is doing to facilitate improvements in the mortgage markets, some of which involve important collaborations with the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS).BackgroundAs you know, the initial shock to financial markets was essentially a rapid deterioration in the performance of subprime and so-called alt-A mortgages in the United States, particularly among such loans that were originated after the middle of 2005. A large share of those mortgages were funded through structures known as mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and many of those structures were, in turn, funded by other structures called collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), in which subprime and alt-A MBS represented the collateral.These CDOs were ultimately held by a wide range of investors and financial institutions. Much of the issuance of these securities over the past few years occurred in an environment of tightly compressed risk spreads--that is, the difference between the yields on what were perceived as relatively safe and relatively risky assets was much smaller than usual. Indeed, many of the structures seemed to be created to satisfy investors' strong demand for securities that carried investment-grade ratings but that might provide slightly higher yields than other investment-grade securities, such as corporate bonds. In many cases, however, investors seem to have been attracted to these structured securities without a thorough understanding of the underlying risk profiles.Although MBS and CDOs had been around for many years, the more recent structures were significantly different and more complex than their earlier counterparts. Investors' earlier experience with CDOs, for example, was mainly limited to cases in which primary securities, such as corporate bonds, business loans, or other simple securities, formed the underlying collateral. In contrast, the more recent CDOs frequently were themselves backed by structured securities, resulting in so-called two-layer securitizations in which structured products are used to fund other structured products.These two-layer securitizations are inherently more complex and are more exposed to tail risk than their earlier one-layer counterparts. Indeed, in its recent report on credit-risk transfer, the Joint Forum--an international collaboration of financial supervisors--noted a cliff effect that is associated with the distribution of returns that can be realized on the more senior tranches of two-layer securitizations.1Simply put, the cliff effect refers to the fact that investors of higher-rated tranches of complex securities can expect to receive a small positive return in most circumstances, but they are vulnerable to extremely large losses in those rare events of widespread financial stress.Despite the greater complexity, it seems that many investors assumed that the evaluations of credit-rating agencies would work well and be sufficient for the new structured securities. Investors ended up relying too heavily on those assessments rather than requiring ample information about the underlying assets and demanding extra transparency in order to estimate projected risk-return trade-offs.Role of Information and Transparency in Corporate Bond MarketTo illustrate how important information and transparency will be in the recovery and repair process of the securitization markets going forward, it might be helpful to review a case in which, on the whole, market functioning has held up relatively well. I'm thinking specifically about the market for corporate bonds issued by investment-grade nonfinancial firms.To be sure, over the past year, growing concerns about individual firms' earnings and about the overall macroeconomic outlook have contributed to significantly wider risk spreads on corporate bonds. Nonetheless, investment-grade nonfinancial companies in the United States have been able to issue a sizable volume of traditional debt instruments rather consistently, even as demand for some other types of securities has been substantially curtailed. In addition, on the whole, liquidity in the secondary markets for corporate bonds has been perceived to be much better than liquidity for non-agency mortgage-backed securities and for more-complex structured securities. Part of the reason that the markets for high-grade nonfinancial bonds have continued to function relatively well is that those securities have not experienced widespread ratings downgrades or defaults.The extensive amount of data available about nonfinancial corporations and the performance of corporate bonds over time has made it easier and less costly for investors to conduct due diligence--or to put it another way--to trust but verify credit-risk evaluations. The same cannot be said of many residential MBS created over the past couple of years and the many complex structured products that held MBS as collateral, where the complexity of the pay-off structures (including so-called cliff effects) made expected returns and risks more difficult to model.Recovery and Repair Going ForwardAs I have said, recovery in the mortgage market will take time and will require more market and regulatory discipline. I would now like to discuss this process in further detail as it relates to the credit-rating agencies, the originate-to-distribute model for mortgage lending, the important role of the new Basel II framework, and improvements in risk-management practices that financial institutions will need to make in several key areas.Credit-Rating AgenciesAs I mentioned, establishing sound and thorough independent risk evaluations is costly, particularly for complex structured products that have only recently been created. To address problems with risk evaluations, the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG) has recommended, among other things, that the credit-rating agencies themselves should display greater skepticism when they are presented with complex and opaque instruments to rate.2The PWG also suggested that the credit-rating agencies would better serve investors by providing greater transparency about the models, estimation methods, and assumptions used to evaluate credit risk for complex structured securities. In addition, it is important for the rating agencies to clarify that a given rating applied to a complex structured credit product may have a different risk than the same rating applied to a simple security, such as a corporate bond.Originate-to-Distribute Approach to Mortgage LendingThe growth of the originate-to-distribute approach in the mortgage market played an important role in the rapid expansion of mortgage lending in the United States until the onset of the recent market turbulence. That expansion was concentrated in the subprime and alt A segments of the mortgage market, where underwriting deteriorated at the point of origination. To an ever-increasing extent from around the middle of 2005 until about a year ago, originators made loans that layered multiple sources of credit risk, including low documentation of borrower income, very high combined loan-to-value ratios, and loans with nontraditional payment schedules that sometimes allowed principal and interest payments to be deferred. In an environment of compressed risk spreads, investors have more difficulty signaling concerns about credit risk, which may have reduced the incentives for originators to maintain strict underwriting.I would expect the originate-to-distribute model to continue to be an important part of the modern financial market landscape, but, I hope, in a much stronger form. The model works best when the resulting credit instruments are less complex and opaque, as analysts and investors can evaluate the underlying risks with greater certainty. And originate-to-distribute is most effective when the incentives of originators and investors are closely aligned and when market pricing reinforces incentives for originators to perform careful underwriting. Firms surveyed about their risk-management practices by a group of supervisory agencies from France, Germany, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States--known as the Senior Supervisors Group (SSG)--have emphasized the importance of understanding the quality of new credits that their businesses originate or purchase from others.3The process of recovery and repair in non-agency mortgage securitization markets would also be aided by more clarity and consistency in underwriting standards. This would provide more certainty to the mortgage market, thereby helping to revive investor confidence in this market and to promote the flow of credit to borrowers. Both to protect consumers and to foster the revival of these markets, the Federal Reserve has proposed stricter underwriting rules for high-cost mortgages under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA), which could also help to increase the transparency and improve the quality of underlying assets in private mortgage pools.The Federal Reserve's proposed rules would better protect consumers from a range of unfair or deceptive mortgage lending and advertising practices. Our proposal includes four key protections for higher-priced mortgage loans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling: (1) creditors would be prohibited from engaging in a pattern or practice of extending credit without considering borrowers' ability to repay the loan; (2) creditors would be required to verify the income and assets they rely upon in making a loan; (3) prepayment penalties would only be permitted if certain conditions are met, including the condition that no penalty will apply for at least sixty days before any possible payment increase; and (4) creditors would have to establish escrow accounts for taxes and insurance. We are working toward issuing final regulations in July.Role ofBaselIIIndividual institutions are responsible for maintaining sound risk-management practices. But supervisors, of course, also have a role to play in both promoting effective risk management and offering incentives for bankers to make improvements to their practices.The new Basel II framework is a substantial supervisory initiative that seeks to improve risk-management practices at banking organizations. The framework more closely aligns regulatory capital requirements with actual risks, which should lead institutions to make better decisions about extending credit, mitigating risks, and determining overall capital needs. For example, unlike under Basel I, the risk weights applied to first-lien residential mortgages will be subject to a more refined differentiation depending on whether the borrower has low or high credit risk. Similarly, Basel II attempts to more fully capture risks in securitization transactions.Just as lessons learned from recent events can help bankers improve risk- management practices, they can also help supervisors further increase the effectiveness of the Basel II framework. For example, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision plans to strengthen the resiliency of Basel II by revising it to establish higher capital requirements for certain complex structured credit products, such as CDOs of asset-backed securities, among other enhancements.4Improvements in Risk-Management PracticesStudies of last year's events have concluded that part of the reason that the problems with subprime and alt-A mortgages led to much wider financial market turmoil was weaknesses in the risk-management practices at some large global financial firms that created and held complex credit products. Recent events have highlighted the need for risk-management improvements in four fundamental areas: risk identification and measurement, liquidity risk management, governance and risk control, and valuation practices.First, for risk identification and measurement, as all of you here know, good information is the lifeblood of sound risk management. A good risk-management structure is designed to identify the full spectrum of risks across the entire firm, gathering and processing information on an enterprise-wide basis in real time. In short, you cannot manage your risks if you do not know what they are.Recent events have illustrated that many large, complex institutions had exposures to subprime mortgages that ran across independent business lines, through off-balance-sheet conduits such as structured investment vehicles, and with respect to numerous counterparties such as monoline financial guarantors. But too few institutions fully recognized their aggregate exposure to risks that turned out to be highly correlated. Latent risks from certain complex products and certain risky activities are particularly problematic because they can manifest themselves when market turbulence sets in. Stress testing and scenario analysis are essential because they can reveal potential risk concentrations that may not be apparent when using information gleaned from normal times.The second fundamental area is liquidity risk management. Because of its central role in the business of banking, liquidity risk requires rigorous and effective management. Recent events have shown that during times of systemwide stress, liquidity shocks can become correlated, so that the same factors that can lead to liquidity problems for the bank's assets or off-balance-sheet vehicles can simultaneously put pressure on a bank's own funding liquidity. Because risk concentrations have the potential to manifest themselves during times of stress and at that time adversely affect capital positions, it is particularly important that firms assess how liquidity events could place pressure on capital levels.The third fundamental, governance and risk control, has been a key factor that has differentiated performance across financial institutions during the recent turmoil. Firms that operated with the two main ingredients for solid governance and controls--thorough information and strong incentives--have come through this tumultuous period in better condition.Lastly, supervisors' comparative reviews also identified valuation practices as critical. The SSG reported that those firms that paid close attention to the problems associated with the valuation of financial instruments, particularly those for which markets were not deep, fared better. These more-successful firms developed in-house expertise to conduct independent valuations and refrained from relying solely on third-party assessments.Federal Reserve's Mortgage InitiativesI would now like to discuss some of the actions the Federal Reserve is taking to address the ongoing challenges in the mortgage market. The Federal Reserve's decisions regarding monetary policy and our efforts to promote financial stability affect mortgage and housing markets, of course. But, we are also working on these issues more directly on a number of fronts as we are very concerned about the high rate of mortgage foreclosures.We are contributing to initiatives already under way at the local and national level, as well as collaborating with other regulators, community groups, policy organizations, financial institutions, and public officials in an effort to identify ways to prevent unnecessary foreclosures and the associated negative effects on local communities. In doing so, we are taking advantage of the decentralized geographic structure of the Federal Reserve System, which consists of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., and the twelve Federal Reserve Banks that each represent a region of the country.In recent months, for example, I have had the opportunity to get a firsthand look at what is happening in various parts of the country. I have met with local community groups, bankers, housing advocates, counseling agencies, and state and local government officials in Cincinnati, Minneapolis, Philadelphia, Boston, Miami, and Las Vegas. The Reserve Banks representing those areas have helped facilitate these meetings, which have enhanced my understanding of the challenges being faced across the country and of how policymakers should think about these issues at both the local and national levels.We are engaged with mortgage servicers to understand impediments they may face when modifying loans or offering other alternatives to foreclosure. We have encouraged the mortgage industry to increase their efforts to work with troubled borrowers, to develop guidelines and templates for reasonable standardized approaches to various loss-mitigation techniques, and to adopt transparent reporting standards. Clear disclosures of loan modifications will not only make it easier for regulators, the mortgage industry, and community groups to assess the effectiveness of foreclosure-prevention efforts, but they will also foster greater transparency, and hence greater confidence, in the securitization market.We are also using our analytic resources to conduct research that the Reserve Banks can disseminate to local community groups, counseling agencies, financial institutions, and others who are working to help troubled borrowers and communities. Earlier this month, we announced a new partnership with the nonprofit NeighborWorks America to develop materials, tools, and training programs to help communities and others acquire and manage vacant properties. The goal is to support the provision of affordable rental housing and new homeownership opportunities in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods.The Federal Reserve has collaborated with the CSBS on several interagency initiatives to help struggling homeowners and to enhance the functioning of the mortgage markets. The federal banking agencies and the CSBS last fall issued guidance urging lenders and servicers to pursue workout arrangements, when feasible and prudent, as an alternative to foreclosure. Reaching borrowers before they fall too far behind in their payments is important to effecting a sustainable workout and may help more borrowers remain in their homes. In some cases, temporary adjustments to payments may not be sufficient, and more-permanent reductions in interest rates or an extension of the loan term may be called for. In some situations, lenders and servicers may want to consider using principal writedowns as a way to reduce re-default risk or to facilitate a refinancing.We are also coordinating with the CSBS, the American Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators (AARMR), and other federal agencies on consumer compliance reviews of non-depository mortgage lenders with significant subprime mortgage operations. These reviews, which began earlier this year, are aimed at evaluating underwriting standards, risk-management strategies, and compliance with certain consumer protection laws.The Federal Reserve is also working cooperatively with the states to provide data and analysis on subprime mortgage loan performance to inform the states' policies in this area. These efforts will be supported by the new system for registering and tracking mortgage brokers that the CSBS and the AARMR launched earlier this year. The Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System should better protect borrowers by bringing greater consistency across the states to the supervision of mortgage lenders. Nationwide licensing should prevent lenders who run afoul of authorities in one state from simply relocating their business to another state.ConclusionAs market participants take steps to foster greater transparency and to reduce the complexity of structured credit instruments, I believe that recovery and repair in the mortgage markets will take hold over time. Moreover, as financial institutions strengthen risk-management practices and as supervisors ensure that the necessary actions are taken, I expect the financial system as a whole to become more resilient. A number of efforts are under way by the Federal Reserve, jointly and independently with the CSBS and other organizations, to help prevent avoidable foreclosures and to promote responsible mortgage lending.Footnotes1.The Joint Forum (2008),Credit Risk Transfer--Developments from 2005 to 2007(Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements).Return to text2.President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)" (Washington: Department of the Treasury).Return to text3.The report, "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence," is available at:http://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/news/banking/2008/rp080306.htmlReturn to text4.For further discussion of plans to strengthen the resiliency of the framework, refer to Randall S. Kroszner (2008), "Risk Management and Basel II," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston AMA Conference, May 14.Return to text As all of you well know, it was just about one year ago that the turmoil in the mortgage and financial markets emerged. Today I will offer my perspective on the prospects for recovery and repair of the mortgage markets, which I believe will be a gradual process that requires both market and regulatory discipline. Greater transparency and less complexity in credit instruments will help to promote broader scrutiny of credit risk. Investors with more and better information from the originators and sponsors of credit products will be able to more easily conduct proper due diligence and verify evaluations of credit risk. Financial institutions that develop and hold these instruments and that have similar or correlated exposures through various business lines should also strengthen risk-management practices. As supervisors, we must insist on effective risk management and take the steps necessary to ensure that changes are implemented where needed.Although any assessment at this stage about the recovery and repair of mortgage markets is preliminary, I will outline some steps, many of which are already in train, that can foster the rehabilitation process. As part of this discussion, I will highlight what the Federal Reserve is doing to facilitate improvements in the mortgage markets, some of which involve important collaborations with the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS).BackgroundAs you know, the initial shock to financial markets was essentially a rapid deterioration in the performance of subprime and so-called alt-A mortgages in the United States, particularly among such loans that were originated after the middle of 2005. A large share of those mortgages were funded through structures known as mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and many of those structures were, in turn, funded by other structures called collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), in which subprime and alt-A MBS represented the collateral.These CDOs were ultimately held by a wide range of investors and financial institutions. Much of the issuance of these securities over the past few years occurred in an environment of tightly compressed risk spreads--that is, the difference between the yields on what were perceived as relatively safe and relatively risky assets was much smaller than usual. Indeed, many of the structures seemed to be created to satisfy investors' strong demand for securities that carried investment-grade ratings but that might provide slightly higher yields than other investment-grade securities, such as corporate bonds. In many cases, however, investors seem to have been attracted to these structured securities without a thorough understanding of the underlying risk profiles.Although MBS and CDOs had been around for many years, the more recent structures were significantly different and more complex than their earlier counterparts. Investors' earlier experience with CDOs, for example, was mainly limited to cases in which primary securities, such as corporate bonds, business loans, or other simple securities, formed the underlying collateral. In contrast, the more recent CDOs frequently were themselves backed by structured securities, resulting in so-called two-layer securitizations in which structured products are used to fund other structured products.These two-layer securitizations are inherently more complex and are more exposed to tail risk than their earlier one-layer counterparts. Indeed, in its recent report on credit-risk transfer, the Joint Forum--an international collaboration of financial supervisors--noted a cliff effect that is associated with the distribution of returns that can be realized on the more senior tranches of two-layer securitizations.1Simply put, the cliff effect refers to the fact that investors of higher-rated tranches of complex securities can expect to receive a small positive return in most circumstances, but they are vulnerable to extremely large losses in those rare events of widespread financial stress.Despite the greater complexity, it seems that many investors assumed that the evaluations of credit-rating agencies would work well and be sufficient for the new structured securities. Investors ended up relying too heavily on those assessments rather than requiring ample information about the underlying assets and demanding extra transparency in order to estimate projected risk-return trade-offs.Role of Information and Transparency in Corporate Bond MarketTo illustrate how important information and transparency will be in the recovery and repair process of the securitization markets going forward, it might be helpful to review a case in which, on the whole, market functioning has held up relatively well. I'm thinking specifically about the market for corporate bonds issued by investment-grade nonfinancial firms.To be sure, over the past year, growing concerns about individual firms' earnings and about the overall macroeconomic outlook have contributed to significantly wider risk spreads on corporate bonds. Nonetheless, investment-grade nonfinancial companies in the United States have been able to issue a sizable volume of traditional debt instruments rather consistently, even as demand for some other types of securities has been substantially curtailed. In addition, on the whole, liquidity in the secondary markets for corporate bonds has been perceived to be much better than liquidity for non-agency mortgage-backed securities and for more-complex structured securities. Part of the reason that the markets for high-grade nonfinancial bonds have continued to function relatively well is that those securities have not experienced widespread ratings downgrades or defaults.The extensive amount of data available about nonfinancial corporations and the performance of corporate bonds over time has made it easier and less costly for investors to conduct due diligence--or to put it another way--to trust but verify credit-risk evaluations. The same cannot be said of many residential MBS created over the past couple of years and the many complex structured products that held MBS as collateral, where the complexity of the pay-off structures (including so-called cliff effects) made expected returns and risks more difficult to model.Recovery and Repair Going ForwardAs I have said, recovery in the mortgage market will take time and will require more market and regulatory discipline. I would now like to discuss this process in further detail as it relates to the credit-rating agencies, the originate-to-distribute model for mortgage lending, the important role of the new Basel II framework, and improvements in risk-management practices that financial institutions will need to make in several key areas.Credit-Rating AgenciesAs I mentioned, establishing sound and thorough independent risk evaluations is costly, particularly for complex structured products that have only recently been created. To address problems with risk evaluations, the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG) has recommended, among other things, that the credit-rating agencies themselves should display greater skepticism when they are presented with complex and opaque instruments to rate.2The PWG also suggested that the credit-rating agencies would better serve investors by providing greater transparency about the models, estimation methods, and assumptions used to evaluate credit risk for complex structured securities. In addition, it is important for the rating agencies to clarify that a given rating applied to a complex structured credit product may have a different risk than the same rating applied to a simple security, such as a corporate bond.Originate-to-Distribute Approach to Mortgage LendingThe growth of the originate-to-distribute approach in the mortgage market played an important role in the rapid expansion of mortgage lending in the United States until the onset of the recent market turbulence. That expansion was concentrated in the subprime and alt A segments of the mortgage market, where underwriting deteriorated at the point of origination. To an ever-increasing extent from around the middle of 2005 until about a year ago, originators made loans that layered multiple sources of credit risk, including low documentation of borrower income, very high combined loan-to-value ratios, and loans with nontraditional payment schedules that sometimes allowed principal and interest payments to be deferred. In an environment of compressed risk spreads, investors have more difficulty signaling concerns about credit risk, which may have reduced the incentives for originators to maintain strict underwriting.I would expect the originate-to-distribute model to continue to be an important part of the modern financial market landscape, but, I hope, in a much stronger form. The model works best when the resulting credit instruments are less complex and opaque, as analysts and investors can evaluate the underlying risks with greater certainty. And originate-to-distribute is most effective when the incentives of originators and investors are closely aligned and when market pricing reinforces incentives for originators to perform careful underwriting. Firms surveyed about their risk-management practices by a group of supervisory agencies from France, Germany, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States--known as the Senior Supervisors Group (SSG)--have emphasized the importance of understanding the quality of new credits that their businesses originate or purchase from others.3The process of recovery and repair in non-agency mortgage securitization markets would also be aided by more clarity and consistency in underwriting standards. This would provide more certainty to the mortgage market, thereby helping to revive investor confidence in this market and to promote the flow of credit to borrowers. Both to protect consumers and to foster the revival of these markets, the Federal Reserve has proposed stricter underwriting rules for high-cost mortgages under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA), which could also help to increase the transparency and improve the quality of underlying assets in private mortgage pools.The Federal Reserve's proposed rules would better protect consumers from a range of unfair or deceptive mortgage lending and advertising practices. Our proposal includes four key protections for higher-priced mortgage loans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling: (1) creditors would be prohibited from engaging in a pattern or practice of extending credit without considering borrowers' ability to repay the loan; (2) creditors would be required to verify the income and assets they rely upon in making a loan; (3) prepayment penalties would only be permitted if certain conditions are met, including the condition that no penalty will apply for at least sixty days before any possible payment increase; and (4) creditors would have to establish escrow accounts for taxes and insurance. We are working toward issuing final regulations in July.Role ofBaselIIIndividual institutions are responsible for maintaining sound risk-management practices. But supervisors, of course, also have a role to play in both promoting effective risk management and offering incentives for bankers to make improvements to their practices.The new Basel II framework is a substantial supervisory initiative that seeks to improve risk-management practices at banking organizations. The framework more closely aligns regulatory capital requirements with actual risks, which should lead institutions to make better decisions about extending credit, mitigating risks, and determining overall capital needs. For example, unlike under Basel I, the risk weights applied to first-lien residential mortgages will be subject to a more refined differentiation depending on whether the borrower has low or high credit risk. Similarly, Basel II attempts to more fully capture risks in securitization transactions.Just as lessons learned from recent events can help bankers improve risk- management practices, they can also help supervisors further increase the effectiveness of the Basel II framework. For example, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision plans to strengthen the resiliency of Basel II by revising it to establish higher capital requirements for certain complex structured credit products, such as CDOs of asset-backed securities, among other enhancements.4Improvements in Risk-Management PracticesStudies of last year's events have concluded that part of the reason that the problems with subprime and alt-A mortgages led to much wider financial market turmoil was weaknesses in the risk-management practices at some large global financial firms that created and held complex credit products. Recent events have highlighted the need for risk-management improvements in four fundamental areas: risk identification and measurement, liquidity risk management, governance and risk control, and valuation practices.First, for risk identification and measurement, as all of you here know, good information is the lifeblood of sound risk management. A good risk-management structure is designed to identify the full spectrum of risks across the entire firm, gathering and processing information on an enterprise-wide basis in real time. In short, you cannot manage your risks if you do not know what they are.Recent events have illustrated that many large, complex institutions had exposures to subprime mortgages that ran across independent business lines, through off-balance-sheet conduits such as structured investment vehicles, and with respect to numerous counterparties such as monoline financial guarantors. But too few institutions fully recognized their aggregate exposure to risks that turned out to be highly correlated. Latent risks from certain complex products and certain risky activities are particularly problematic because they can manifest themselves when market turbulence sets in. Stress testing and scenario analysis are essential because they can reveal potential risk concentrations that may not be apparent when using information gleaned from normal times.The second fundamental area is liquidity risk management. Because of its central role in the business of banking, liquidity risk requires rigorous and effective management. Recent events have shown that during times of systemwide stress, liquidity shocks can become correlated, so that the same factors that can lead to liquidity problems for the bank's assets or off-balance-sheet vehicles can simultaneously put pressure on a bank's own funding liquidity. Because risk concentrations have the potential to manifest themselves during times of stress and at that time adversely affect capital positions, it is particularly important that firms assess how liquidity events could place pressure on capital levels.The third fundamental, governance and risk control, has been a key factor that has differentiated performance across financial institutions during the recent turmoil. Firms that operated with the two main ingredients for solid governance and controls--thorough information and strong incentives--have come through this tumultuous period in better condition.Lastly, supervisors' comparative reviews also identified valuation practices as critical. The SSG reported that those firms that paid close attention to the problems associated with the valuation of financial instruments, particularly those for which markets were not deep, fared better. These more-successful firms developed in-house expertise to conduct independent valuations and refrained from relying solely on third-party assessments.Federal Reserve's Mortgage InitiativesI would now like to discuss some of the actions the Federal Reserve is taking to address the ongoing challenges in the mortgage market. The Federal Reserve's decisions regarding monetary policy and our efforts to promote financial stability affect mortgage and housing markets, of course. But, we are also working on these issues more directly on a number of fronts as we are very concerned about the high rate of mortgage foreclosures.We are contributing to initiatives already under way at the local and national level, as well as collaborating with other regulators, community groups, policy organizations, financial institutions, and public officials in an effort to identify ways to prevent unnecessary foreclosures and the associated negative effects on local communities. In doing so, we are taking advantage of the decentralized geographic structure of the Federal Reserve System, which consists of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., and the twelve Federal Reserve Banks that each represent a region of the country.In recent months, for example, I have had the opportunity to get a firsthand look at what is happening in various parts of the country. I have met with local community groups, bankers, housing advocates, counseling agencies, and state and local government officials in Cincinnati, Minneapolis, Philadelphia, Boston, Miami, and Las Vegas. The Reserve Banks representing those areas have helped facilitate these meetings, which have enhanced my understanding of the challenges being faced across the country and of how policymakers should think about these issues at both the local and national levels.We are engaged with mortgage servicers to understand impediments they may face when modifying loans or offering other alternatives to foreclosure. We have encouraged the mortgage industry to increase their efforts to work with troubled borrowers, to develop guidelines and templates for reasonable standardized approaches to various loss-mitigation techniques, and to adopt transparent reporting standards. Clear disclosures of loan modifications will not only make it easier for regulators, the mortgage industry, and community groups to assess the effectiveness of foreclosure-prevention efforts, but they will also foster greater transparency, and hence greater confidence, in the securitization market.We are also using our analytic resources to conduct research that the Reserve Banks can disseminate to local community groups, counseling agencies, financial institutions, and others who are working to help troubled borrowers and communities. Earlier this month, we announced a new partnership with the nonprofit NeighborWorks America to develop materials, tools, and training programs to help communities and others acquire and manage vacant properties. The goal is to support the provision of affordable rental housing and new homeownership opportunities in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods.The Federal Reserve has collaborated with the CSBS on several interagency initiatives to help struggling homeowners and to enhance the functioning of the mortgage markets. The federal banking agencies and the CSBS last fall issued guidance urging lenders and servicers to pursue workout arrangements, when feasible and prudent, as an alternative to foreclosure. Reaching borrowers before they fall too far behind in their payments is important to effecting a sustainable workout and may help more borrowers remain in their homes. In some cases, temporary adjustments to payments may not be sufficient, and more-permanent reductions in interest rates or an extension of the loan term may be called for. In some situations, lenders and servicers may want to consider using principal writedowns as a way to reduce re-default risk or to facilitate a refinancing.We are also coordinating with the CSBS, the American Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators (AARMR), and other federal agencies on consumer compliance reviews of non-depository mortgage lenders with significant subprime mortgage operations. These reviews, which began earlier this year, are aimed at evaluating underwriting standards, risk-management strategies, and compliance with certain consumer protection laws.The Federal Reserve is also working cooperatively with the states to provide data and analysis on subprime mortgage loan performance to inform the states' policies in this area. These efforts will be supported by the new system for registering and tracking mortgage brokers that the CSBS and the AARMR launched earlier this year. The Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System should better protect borrowers by bringing greater consistency across the states to the supervision of mortgage lenders. Nationwide licensing should prevent lenders who run afoul of authorities in one state from simply relocating their business to another state.ConclusionAs market participants take steps to foster greater transparency and to reduce the complexity of structured credit instruments, I believe that recovery and repair in the mortgage markets will take hold over time. Moreover, as financial institutions strengthen risk-management practices and as supervisors ensure that the necessary actions are taken, I expect the financial system as a whole to become more resilient. A number of efforts are under way by the Federal Reserve, jointly and independently with the CSBS and other organizations, to help prevent avoidable foreclosures and to promote responsible mortgage lending.Footnotes1.The Joint Forum (2008),Credit Risk Transfer--Developments from 2005 to 2007(Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements).Return to text2.President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)" (Washington: Department of the Treasury).Return to text3.The report, "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence," is available at:http://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/news/banking/2008/rp080306.htmlReturn to text4.For further discussion of plans to strengthen the resiliency of the framework, refer to Randall S. Kroszner (2008), "Risk Management and Basel II," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston AMA Conference, May 14.Return to text Greater transparency and less complexity in credit instruments will help to promote broader scrutiny of credit risk. Investors with more and better information from the originators and sponsors of credit products will be able to more easily conduct proper due diligence and verify evaluations of credit risk. Financial institutions that develop and hold these instruments and that have similar or correlated exposures through various business lines should also strengthen risk-management practices. As supervisors, we must insist on effective risk management and take the steps necessary to ensure that changes are implemented where needed. Although any assessment at this stage about the recovery and repair of mortgage markets is preliminary, I will outline some steps, many of which are already in train, that can foster the rehabilitation process. As part of this discussion, I will highlight what the Federal Reserve is doing to facilitate improvements in the mortgage markets, some of which involve important collaborations with the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS). BackgroundAs you know, the initial shock to financial markets was essentially a rapid deterioration in the performance of subprime and so-called alt-A mortgages in the United States, particularly among such loans that were originated after the middle of 2005. A large share of those mortgages were funded through structures known as mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and many of those structures were, in turn, funded by other structures called collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), in which subprime and alt-A MBS represented the collateral. These CDOs were ultimately held by a wide range of investors and financial institutions. Much of the issuance of these securities over the past few years occurred in an environment of tightly compressed risk spreads--that is, the difference between the yields on what were perceived as relatively safe and relatively risky assets was much smaller than usual. Indeed, many of the structures seemed to be created to satisfy investors' strong demand for securities that carried investment-grade ratings but that might provide slightly higher yields than other investment-grade securities, such as corporate bonds. In many cases, however, investors seem to have been attracted to these structured securities without a thorough understanding of the underlying risk profiles. Although MBS and CDOs had been around for many years, the more recent structures were significantly different and more complex than their earlier counterparts. Investors' earlier experience with CDOs, for example, was mainly limited to cases in which primary securities, such as corporate bonds, business loans, or other simple securities, formed the underlying collateral. In contrast, the more recent CDOs frequently were themselves backed by structured securities, resulting in so-called two-layer securitizations in which structured products are used to fund other structured products. These two-layer securitizations are inherently more complex and are more exposed to tail risk than their earlier one-layer counterparts. Indeed, in its recent report on credit-risk transfer, the Joint Forum--an international collaboration of financial supervisors--noted a cliff effect that is associated with the distribution of returns that can be realized on the more senior tranches of two-layer securitizations.1Simply put, the cliff effect refers to the fact that investors of higher-rated tranches of complex securities can expect to receive a small positive return in most circumstances, but they are vulnerable to extremely large losses in those rare events of widespread financial stress. Despite the greater complexity, it seems that many investors assumed that the evaluations of credit-rating agencies would work well and be sufficient for the new structured securities. Investors ended up relying too heavily on those assessments rather than requiring ample information about the underlying assets and demanding extra transparency in order to estimate projected risk-return trade-offs. Role of Information and Transparency in Corporate Bond MarketTo illustrate how important information and transparency will be in the recovery and repair process of the securitization markets going forward, it might be helpful to review a case in which, on the whole, market functioning has held up relatively well. I'm thinking specifically about the market for corporate bonds issued by investment-grade nonfinancial firms. To be sure, over the past year, growing concerns about individual firms' earnings and about the overall macroeconomic outlook have contributed to significantly wider risk spreads on corporate bonds. Nonetheless, investment-grade nonfinancial companies in the United States have been able to issue a sizable volume of traditional debt instruments rather consistently, even as demand for some other types of securities has been substantially curtailed. In addition, on the whole, liquidity in the secondary markets for corporate bonds has been perceived to be much better than liquidity for non-agency mortgage-backed securities and for more-complex structured securities. Part of the reason that the markets for high-grade nonfinancial bonds have continued to function relatively well is that those securities have not experienced widespread ratings downgrades or defaults. The extensive amount of data available about nonfinancial corporations and the performance of corporate bonds over time has made it easier and less costly for investors to conduct due diligence--or to put it another way--to trust but verify credit-risk evaluations. The same cannot be said of many residential MBS created over the past couple of years and the many complex structured products that held MBS as collateral, where the complexity of the pay-off structures (including so-called cliff effects) made expected returns and risks more difficult to model. Recovery and Repair Going ForwardAs I have said, recovery in the mortgage market will take time and will require more market and regulatory discipline. I would now like to discuss this process in further detail as it relates to the credit-rating agencies, the originate-to-distribute model for mortgage lending, the important role of the new Basel II framework, and improvements in risk-management practices that financial institutions will need to make in several key areas. Credit-Rating AgenciesAs I mentioned, establishing sound and thorough independent risk evaluations is costly, particularly for complex structured products that have only recently been created. To address problems with risk evaluations, the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG) has recommended, among other things, that the credit-rating agencies themselves should display greater skepticism when they are presented with complex and opaque instruments to rate.2The PWG also suggested that the credit-rating agencies would better serve investors by providing greater transparency about the models, estimation methods, and assumptions used to evaluate credit risk for complex structured securities. In addition, it is important for the rating agencies to clarify that a given rating applied to a complex structured credit product may have a different risk than the same rating applied to a simple security, such as a corporate bond. Originate-to-Distribute Approach to Mortgage LendingThe growth of the originate-to-distribute approach in the mortgage market played an important role in the rapid expansion of mortgage lending in the United States until the onset of the recent market turbulence. That expansion was concentrated in the subprime and alt A segments of the mortgage market, where underwriting deteriorated at the point of origination. To an ever-increasing extent from around the middle of 2005 until about a year ago, originators made loans that layered multiple sources of credit risk, including low documentation of borrower income, very high combined loan-to-value ratios, and loans with nontraditional payment schedules that sometimes allowed principal and interest payments to be deferred. In an environment of compressed risk spreads, investors have more difficulty signaling concerns about credit risk, which may have reduced the incentives for originators to maintain strict underwriting. I would expect the originate-to-distribute model to continue to be an important part of the modern financial market landscape, but, I hope, in a much stronger form. The model works best when the resulting credit instruments are less complex and opaque, as analysts and investors can evaluate the underlying risks with greater certainty. And originate-to-distribute is most effective when the incentives of originators and investors are closely aligned and when market pricing reinforces incentives for originators to perform careful underwriting. Firms surveyed about their risk-management practices by a group of supervisory agencies from France, Germany, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States--known as the Senior Supervisors Group (SSG)--have emphasized the importance of understanding the quality of new credits that their businesses originate or purchase from others.3 The process of recovery and repair in non-agency mortgage securitization markets would also be aided by more clarity and consistency in underwriting standards. This would provide more certainty to the mortgage market, thereby helping to revive investor confidence in this market and to promote the flow of credit to borrowers. Both to protect consumers and to foster the revival of these markets, the Federal Reserve has proposed stricter underwriting rules for high-cost mortgages under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA), which could also help to increase the transparency and improve the quality of underlying assets in private mortgage pools. The Federal Reserve's proposed rules would better protect consumers from a range of unfair or deceptive mortgage lending and advertising practices. Our proposal includes four key protections for higher-priced mortgage loans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling: (1) creditors would be prohibited from engaging in a pattern or practice of extending credit without considering borrowers' ability to repay the loan; (2) creditors would be required to verify the income and assets they rely upon in making a loan; (3) prepayment penalties would only be permitted if certain conditions are met, including the condition that no penalty will apply for at least sixty days before any possible payment increase; and (4) creditors would have to establish escrow accounts for taxes and insurance. We are working toward issuing final regulations in July. Role ofBaselIIIndividual institutions are responsible for maintaining sound risk-management practices. But supervisors, of course, also have a role to play in both promoting effective risk management and offering incentives for bankers to make improvements to their practices. The new Basel II framework is a substantial supervisory initiative that seeks to improve risk-management practices at banking organizations. The framework more closely aligns regulatory capital requirements with actual risks, which should lead institutions to make better decisions about extending credit, mitigating risks, and determining overall capital needs. For example, unlike under Basel I, the risk weights applied to first-lien residential mortgages will be subject to a more refined differentiation depending on whether the borrower has low or high credit risk. Similarly, Basel II attempts to more fully capture risks in securitization transactions. Just as lessons learned from recent events can help bankers improve risk- management practices, they can also help supervisors further increase the effectiveness of the Basel II framework. For example, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision plans to strengthen the resiliency of Basel II by revising it to establish higher capital requirements for certain complex structured credit products, such as CDOs of asset-backed securities, among other enhancements.4 Improvements in Risk-Management PracticesStudies of last year's events have concluded that part of the reason that the problems with subprime and alt-A mortgages led to much wider financial market turmoil was weaknesses in the risk-management practices at some large global financial firms that created and held complex credit products. Recent events have highlighted the need for risk-management improvements in four fundamental areas: risk identification and measurement, liquidity risk management, governance and risk control, and valuation practices. First, for risk identification and measurement, as all of you here know, good information is the lifeblood of sound risk management. A good risk-management structure is designed to identify the full spectrum of risks across the entire firm, gathering and processing information on an enterprise-wide basis in real time. In short, you cannot manage your risks if you do not know what they are. Recent events have illustrated that many large, complex institutions had exposures to subprime mortgages that ran across independent business lines, through off-balance-sheet conduits such as structured investment vehicles, and with respect to numerous counterparties such as monoline financial guarantors. But too few institutions fully recognized their aggregate exposure to risks that turned out to be highly correlated. Latent risks from certain complex products and certain risky activities are particularly problematic because they can manifest themselves when market turbulence sets in. Stress testing and scenario analysis are essential because they can reveal potential risk concentrations that may not be apparent when using information gleaned from normal times. The second fundamental area is liquidity risk management. Because of its central role in the business of banking, liquidity risk requires rigorous and effective management. Recent events have shown that during times of systemwide stress, liquidity shocks can become correlated, so that the same factors that can lead to liquidity problems for the bank's assets or off-balance-sheet vehicles can simultaneously put pressure on a bank's own funding liquidity. Because risk concentrations have the potential to manifest themselves during times of stress and at that time adversely affect capital positions, it is particularly important that firms assess how liquidity events could place pressure on capital levels. The third fundamental, governance and risk control, has been a key factor that has differentiated performance across financial institutions during the recent turmoil. Firms that operated with the two main ingredients for solid governance and controls--thorough information and strong incentives--have come through this tumultuous period in better condition. Lastly, supervisors' comparative reviews also identified valuation practices as critical. The SSG reported that those firms that paid close attention to the problems associated with the valuation of financial instruments, particularly those for which markets were not deep, fared better. These more-successful firms developed in-house expertise to conduct independent valuations and refrained from relying solely on third-party assessments. Federal Reserve's Mortgage InitiativesI would now like to discuss some of the actions the Federal Reserve is taking to address the ongoing challenges in the mortgage market. The Federal Reserve's decisions regarding monetary policy and our efforts to promote financial stability affect mortgage and housing markets, of course. But, we are also working on these issues more directly on a number of fronts as we are very concerned about the high rate of mortgage foreclosures. We are contributing to initiatives already under way at the local and national level, as well as collaborating with other regulators, community groups, policy organizations, financial institutions, and public officials in an effort to identify ways to prevent unnecessary foreclosures and the associated negative effects on local communities. In doing so, we are taking advantage of the decentralized geographic structure of the Federal Reserve System, which consists of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., and the twelve Federal Reserve Banks that each represent a region of the country. In recent months, for example, I have had the opportunity to get a firsthand look at what is happening in various parts of the country. I have met with local community groups, bankers, housing advocates, counseling agencies, and state and local government officials in Cincinnati, Minneapolis, Philadelphia, Boston, Miami, and Las Vegas. The Reserve Banks representing those areas have helped facilitate these meetings, which have enhanced my understanding of the challenges being faced across the country and of how policymakers should think about these issues at both the local and national levels. We are engaged with mortgage servicers to understand impediments they may face when modifying loans or offering other alternatives to foreclosure. We have encouraged the mortgage industry to increase their efforts to work with troubled borrowers, to develop guidelines and templates for reasonable standardized approaches to various loss-mitigation techniques, and to adopt transparent reporting standards. Clear disclosures of loan modifications will not only make it easier for regulators, the mortgage industry, and community groups to assess the effectiveness of foreclosure-prevention efforts, but they will also foster greater transparency, and hence greater confidence, in the securitization market. We are also using our analytic resources to conduct research that the Reserve Banks can disseminate to local community groups, counseling agencies, financial institutions, and others who are working to help troubled borrowers and communities. Earlier this month, we announced a new partnership with the nonprofit NeighborWorks America to develop materials, tools, and training programs to help communities and others acquire and manage vacant properties. The goal is to support the provision of affordable rental housing and new homeownership opportunities in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. The Federal Reserve has collaborated with the CSBS on several interagency initiatives to help struggling homeowners and to enhance the functioning of the mortgage markets. The federal banking agencies and the CSBS last fall issued guidance urging lenders and servicers to pursue workout arrangements, when feasible and prudent, as an alternative to foreclosure. Reaching borrowers before they fall too far behind in their payments is important to effecting a sustainable workout and may help more borrowers remain in their homes. In some cases, temporary adjustments to payments may not be sufficient, and more-permanent reductions in interest rates or an extension of the loan term may be called for. In some situations, lenders and servicers may want to consider using principal writedowns as a way to reduce re-default risk or to facilitate a refinancing. We are also coordinating with the CSBS, the American Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators (AARMR), and other federal agencies on consumer compliance reviews of non-depository mortgage lenders with significant subprime mortgage operations. These reviews, which began earlier this year, are aimed at evaluating underwriting standards, risk-management strategies, and compliance with certain consumer protection laws. The Federal Reserve is also working cooperatively with the states to provide data and analysis on subprime mortgage loan performance to inform the states' policies in this area. These efforts will be supported by the new system for registering and tracking mortgage brokers that the CSBS and the AARMR launched earlier this year. The Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System should better protect borrowers by bringing greater consistency across the states to the supervision of mortgage lenders. Nationwide licensing should prevent lenders who run afoul of authorities in one state from simply relocating their business to another state. ConclusionAs market participants take steps to foster greater transparency and to reduce the complexity of structured credit instruments, I believe that recovery and repair in the mortgage markets will take hold over time. Moreover, as financial institutions strengthen risk-management practices and as supervisors ensure that the necessary actions are taken, I expect the financial system as a whole to become more resilient. A number of efforts are under way by the Federal Reserve, jointly and independently with the CSBS and other organizations, to help prevent avoidable foreclosures and to promote responsible mortgage lending. Footnotes 1.The Joint Forum (2008),Credit Risk Transfer--Developments from 2005 to 2007(Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements).Return to text 2.President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)" (Washington: Department of the Treasury).Return to text 3.The report, "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence," is available at:http://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/news/banking/2008/rp080306.htmlReturn to text 4.For further discussion of plans to strengthen the resiliency of the framework, refer to Randall S. Kroszner (2008), "Risk Management and Basel II," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston AMA Conference, May 14.Return to text 4.For further discussion of plans to strengthen the resiliency of the framework, refer to Randall S. Kroszner (2008), "Risk Management and Basel II," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston AMA Conference, May 14.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board has approved amendments to Appendix A of Regulation CC that reflect the restructuring of the Federal Reserve's check processing operations in the Sixth and Eighth Districts, and provided notice relating to future changes to Appendix A.Appendix A provides a routing symbol guide that helps depository institutions determine the maximum permissible hold periods for most deposited checks. As of July 19, 2008, the Memphis branch office of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis no longer will process checks, and banks currently served by that office will be reassigned to the head office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. To ensure that the information in Appendix A accurately describes the structure of check processing operations within the Federal Reserve System, the final rule deletes the reference in Appendix A to the Memphis branch office of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and reassigns the routing numbers listed thereunder to the head office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. To coincide with the effective date of the underlying check processing changes, the amendments are effective July 19, 2008. As a result of these changes, some checks deposited in the affected regions that currently are nonlocal checks will become local checks that are subject to shorter permissible hold periods.The attachment also provides notice that, as they announced on March 31, 2008, the Federal Reserve Banks are accelerating their planned reductions in the number of locations at which they process checks. Whereas they had previously announced that the transitions would take place by early 2011, the Reserve Banks now plan to cease check processing operations at all of their check processing offices except four--Philadelphia, Cleveland, Atlanta, and Dallas--by early 2010. The Board intends to publish each related amendment to Appendix A approximately 60 days prior to the effective date of the amendment to give affected banks ample time to make necessary changes.The Board's notice is attached.
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston AMA Conference, Boston, MA I am delighted to be here today at this impressive conference. I thank my hosts, President Rosengren and his staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, for the invitation. I also thank President Rosengren for providing such interesting and informative introductory remarks. Over the next two days, you will be having a number of discussions on specific aspects of operational risk and the advanced measurements approaches (AMA) for calculating risk-based capital requirements under Basel II. Therefore, I can probably best contribute to this conference by offering a broader perspective about risk management and Basel II, using examples from the field of operational risk management. I will discuss the implementation of Basel II, including enhancements to the framework being undertaken by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision in light of recent market events, as well as a proposal to implement in the United States a less complex version of the Basel II framework, known as the standardized approach. BackgroundI believe focusing on risk management today is certainly topical, given some of the risk management challenges that financial institutions have faced over the past year. Recent market events have shown that a number of institutions have not maintained satisfactory risk management practices; however, we also can point to many examples of sound risk management practices during the recent disruptions.1 Individual institutions are responsible for maintaining sound risk management practices. But supervisors, of course, also have a role to play both in promoting effective risk management and offering incentives for bankers to make improvements to their practices. There are a number of methods supervisors use to that end--some informal, some formal--including speeches, one-on-one discussions, supervisory guidance, onsite examinations, formal supervisory actions, and regulations. One substantial initiative that seeks to improve risk management practices at banking organizations is Basel II. Importance of Basel IIAs you all know, banking activities must be supported by both sound risk management and strong capital levels. For example, even where robust internal controls are in place, the potential for losses from fraud can never be fully eliminated, meaning that institutions need to hold sufficient capital to offset unexpected losses. Determining the right level of capital to hold for fraud and other elements of operational risk is not necessarily easy, as many of you here can attest. But the AMA is designed to make that determination more risk sensitive and more accurate. In this manner, Basel II represents a major step forward in banking regulation. While the existing Basel I capital regime was a significant advance when introduced in 1988, it has become outdated for large, internationally active banking organizations. Retaining Basel I for these institutions would have widened the gap between their regulatory capital requirements and their actual risk profiles. That is one reason why the Federal Reserve supports Basel II so strongly. With regard to credit risk, the advanced approaches of Basel II improve regulatory capital measures by requiring banks to distinguish among the credit quality of individual borrowers. Generally speaking, banks holding riskier credit exposures are required to hold more capital. Similarly, the AMA framework requires a more systematic approach for assessing the operational risk to which a bank is exposed and ties an explicit regulatory risk-based capital requirement to these exposures. Under Basel I, this charge was indirect and embedded in credit and market risk measures. In contrast, under the AMA, banks with higher levels of operational risk--such as those more heavily involved than others in activities that have elevated loss potential from fraud, business disruption, or systems failure--generally should have higher capital requirements. By establishing a much more refined approach that requires banks to hold capital commensurate with the actual risks of their exposures and activities, Basel II should lead institutions to make better decisions about assuming, retaining, and mitigating risks. Not only does Basel II establish more risk-sensitive and meaningful regulatory capital requirements, it also encourages ongoing improvements in banks' risk management practices. The U.S. final rule for Basel II includes extensive system and process requirements and U.S. supervisors have high standards for banks seeking to qualify. One reason for such high standards is that the framework will only function as intended if Basel II banks have solid risk management infrastructures and robust quantification methods on which to base capital requirements. Another reason for such high standards is that the risk management improvements in Basel II offer broader safety and soundness benefits, beyond those associated with capital requirements. Risk Management and the AMAThere are strong linkages between the AMA and supervisory expectations for sound management of operational risk. The AMA builds upon the longtime best practices of banks to develop techniques for identifying, measuring, and attributing capital for operational risk. I commend those of you here today who have made strides in improving operational risk management, and heartily encourage you to maintain your efforts. Supervisors have been working actively with bankers to improve operational risk management and help bankers move toward qualification under AMA. A good example is the research and analysis conducted by my colleagues here at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston: their useful papers have covered such topics as estimating operational risk loss distributions, evaluating various measurement techniques, and analyzing the reputational impact of operational risk losses. Supervisors have also conducted a series of loss-data collection exercises in which many of you have participated. More generally, I think supervisory attention on operational risk management has provided support to risk managers striving to improve practices within their organizations. The AMA has specific qualification requirements that are intended to bring about risk management improvements. For example, institutions are required to categorize operational risk losses by event type, which promotes identification of the underlying risk drivers of each category. The AMA also requires consistent comprehensive operational risk capture, which promotes an enterprise-wide assessment across all business units within an entire organization. Moreover, qualifying for the AMA requires strong senior management and board oversight of the entire process. In designing AMA requirements, supervisors decided against creating a mandated, standard treatment and instead allowed for considerable flexibility. Allowing more flexibility lets banks create an AMA reflective of their organization, and it promotes innovation in AMA approaches. But that flexibility makes banks more responsible for creating a solid and robust process rather than simply providing inputs to a supervisory-determined formula. Operational risk management is a relatively new field, and a number of challenges remain, such as collecting sufficient and relevant data and developing appropriate modeling techniques to capture low probability events of high severity. Naturally, validating the techniques used in the AMA is also very important, as with any quantitative models. Pillar 2 and Pillar 3While Pillar 1 minimum capital requirements are very important, people sometimes forget that Basel II has three pillars of equal significance. Under Pillar 2, banks are required to have an internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP), subject to rigorous supervisory review. The bank's ICAAP should ensure that the bank is holding enough overall capital to support its entire risk profile, and it should provide a cushion against the potential impact of periods of financial or economic stress. In its ICAAP, for example, an institution may choose a solvency standard for overall capital adequacy that is higher than the 99.9 percent implied by the AMA--for example, a solvency standard of 99.95 or 99.97 associated with a certain credit rating. As most of you know, estimating capital needs in the tail of a loss distribution becomes more and more difficult the farther out one goes, so simply "scaling" the AMA measure will likely not suffice for truly assessing capital adequacy against a higher solvency standard. More broadly, one of the supervisory expectations surrounding the ICAAP is that institutions should understand the limitations of models and conduct stress testing and scenario analysis to provide greater information about potential losses and capital needs. Even good models have their limits--such as incomplete data or assumptions that have not been tested across business cycles--and need to be supported by more qualitative measures and sound judgment. Put another way, Pillar 2 is not just about using "one number," but requires institutions to develop a robust process to evaluate the full range of potentially adverse outcomes that could affect capital adequacy. This process certainly includes considering the potential for operational risk losses becoming correlated with losses in other risk areas. Recent events provide ample evidence that underestimating the potential for concurrent losses in multiple risk areas can put pressure on capital levels. Pillar 3 plays an important role in providing greater information on banks' risk profiles and their ability to manage them. In addition to disclosing their capital requirements for operational risk under the AMA, banks will have to provide a description of their AMA process, including their measurement approaches and relevant internal and external factors considered. They will also have to provide information about the use of insurance to mitigate operational risk. As a strong believer in market discipline and the importance of information in market transactions, I believe Pillar 3 will improve bank disclosures about risk profiles and enhance discussions between bankers and market participants about risk-management practices. Next Steps with Basel II ImplementationIn the United States, Basel II has been an official regulation for just over a month. But the full implementation process will take time. While I believe that expeditious application of Basel II will have significant benefits, it is of the utmost importance that the implementation be undertaken thoughtfully and deliberately. As you know, following a successful four-quarter parallel run, a banking organization would have to progress through three transitional periods--each lasting at least one year--before being able to fully implement Basel II. A banking organization would need approval from its primary federal supervisor to move into each of the three transition periods. Of course, we recognize the substantial work that bankers have undertaken over the past several years to prepare themselves for Basel II, and we think that preparation will pay off. Thus, before setting a parallel run target start date, we strongly recommend that banks conduct a sober and frank self-appraisal of their current state as well as their ability to meet requirements of the final rule. Systems development can take time, for example, and it is important to make sure that these systems function appropriately. As stated in the final rule, and as the U.S. agencies articulated several years ago, a key instrument in the qualification process is a bank's implementation plan. This written implementation plan, approved by a bank's full board of directors, is a detailed and tangible representation of how the bank complies, or intends to comply, with the rule's qualification requirements. Our hope is to provide a bit more information in the next month or so about our expectations for these plans, so I will only provide high-level comments here. One important part of a credible implementation plan is a thorough assessment of how the bank intends to address the gaps it has identified between its existing practices and the qualification requirements set forth in the rule for the advanced approaches that cover all consolidated subsidiaries. The implementation plan also must include objective, measurable milestones--including delivery dates--and a target date when the bank expects its advanced approaches to be fully operational. The bank must establish and maintain a sound, comprehensive planning and governance process to oversee implementation efforts, and it must demonstrate to the full satisfaction of its supervisor that it meets the qualification requirements. Because the implementation plan (including the gap analysis) is the only requirement to enter parallel run, the agencies have high expectations for its overall quality and the reasonableness of the approach taken by the banks in assessing their current state. The large, internationally active banks subject to the final rule on a mandatory basis--the core banks--have until October 1stof this year to adopt an implementation plan and have it approved by their board of directors. This deadline for submission of plans by core banks is intended to ensure that the board of directors will provide the necessary resources and oversight and prevent delays in implementation efforts. Of course, banks may always submit their plans earlier. Once they have adopted an implementation plan, banks have ample time to fully meet the qualification requirements, since the final rule allows a bank up to 36 months before it would have to exit parallel run and enter the first transition period. As with all things, however, waiting until the last possible moment leaves little margin for error. Again, as supervisors, we understand that banks face challenges in implementing Basel II, and we stand ready to assist bankers as they work to meet the high standards we expect. For one, we have already engaged in a number of discussions with bankers to address their questions on certain aspects of the final rule. In that effort, supervisory staffs of all the U.S. agencies are working together to ensure that we give consistent messages to bankers, and we intend to maintain such cooperation among the agencies throughout the implementation process. We have also been preparing our examiners to assess banks' practices during the qualification process. In this manner, we have been working to ensure that qualification is done thoroughly, fairly, and consistently. Enhancements to the Basel II FrameworkOne of the substantial benefits of the Basel II framework is its overall flexibility and adaptability to new practices, instruments, and circumstances. That is, Basel II provides a robust structure within which to integrate new information and enhanced risk management practices as needed. As such, the Basel II framework is well suited to address some of the current challenges seen with the current Basel I framework. For example, the new framework's credit risk capital charges for mortgages vary with the underlying riskiness of the exposures unlike Basel I. Basel II also takes into account off-balance sheet exposures much better than the Basel I framework. Just as lessons learned from recent events can help bankers improve risk management practices, they can also help supervisors further increase the effectiveness of the Basel II framework. Indeed, members of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision recently announced plans to strengthen the resiliency of the framework based on the lessons we have learned over the past year. The Basel Committee's plans to enhance aspects of Basel II are entirely consistent with what we have done in the past with regulatory capital rules upon receiving new information and represent good supervisory practice. These proposals to enhance the resiliency of the Basel II framework are fully consistent with one of its key objectives--improving risk management--and should in no way interfere with institutions' efforts to meet the process and system requirements in the U.S. final rule. The Basel Committee's enhancements, which it outlined in an April 16 press release,2are intended to improve Basel II's ability to make the banking system more resilient to financial shocks. For one, the Committee will revise the framework to establish higher capital requirements for certain complex structured credit products, such as so-called "resecuritizations" or collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) of asset-backed securities, which have been the source of many losses during the recent market disturbances. There are also plans to strengthen the capital treatment of liquidity facilities extended by banks to support off-balance sheet vehicles such as asset-backed commercial paper conduits. Furthermore, the Committee will strengthen the capital requirements in the trading book, given the large growth in trading-book assets and the wide range of instruments held there, some of them quite complex and less liquid. The current value-at-risk based treatment for assessing capital for trading book risk is limited in its ability to capture extraordinary events that can affect many complex and less liquid exposures. The Committee is working with the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) on an interim treatment for certain instruments held in the trading book, such as complex securitizations, and will conduct further analysis to determine a suitable longer-term approach. The Committee plans to issue Pillar 2 guidance in a number of areas to help strengthen banks' practices and help them better prepare for financial shocks that could affect capital adequacy. Areas under consideration include proper asssessment of the risks from off-balance sheet exposures and securitizations, as well as the need to address reputational risk and apply proper stress testing. These efforts relating to Pillar 2 are certainly in line with my earlier comments that bankers must understand the limitations of their more formal risk models, and think creatively to ensure that they have captured all risks and addressed them appropriately. Going forward, the Committee will monitor Basel II minimum requirements and capital buffers to evaluate their appropriateness. It will also assess banks' internal capital management processes and associated risk management practices. This oversight will be particularly important given some of the breakdowns in risk management at institutions over the past year and the associated pressures on capital ratios. The Committee is also working to promote better disclosures by banking organizations under Pillar 3. Standardized Approach in the United StatesAs a final point, I would like to mention that U.S. agencies plan, fairly soon, to publish for public comment a set of proposed rules that would provide an optional capital framework--known as the standardized approach--for those banks not subject to the advanced approaches of Basel II. The proposed standardized approach would help increase risk sensitivity and foster competitive equity. Since we have not yet formally issued the proposed rules for public comment, I will provide just a brief overview on aspects of the proposal that the agencies have already discussed publicly. The proposed U.S. standardized approach will be based on the approach of the same name in the international Basel II framework, modified in some areas to suit the U.S. banking system. The standardized approach would enhance risk sensitivity by increasing the number of risk-weight categories to which a bank would assign credit exposures. It also would increase capital requirements for certain off-balance sheet exposures, such as liquidity commitments, and allow for broader recognition of credit risk mitigants, such as collateral and guarantees. In addition, the approach will include a specific capital requirement for operational risk. Banks not required to adopt the Basel II advanced approaches are facing a choice about whether to opt-in to them. Some of these banks may be sophisticated institutions that exhibit sound risk management, but they might not wish to undertake the extensive effort to meet the advanced approaches of Basel II. The agencies recognize that such institutions should be afforded an alternative to more-risk-sensitive capital requirements, one not as complex as the advanced approaches. Therefore, the proposal is being developed as an optional risk-based capital framework for all banking organizations not required to adopt the Basel II advanced approaches. We plan to retain our existing Basel I-based regulatory capital framework for those banks that would prefer to remain under that regime. I encourage all interested parties to review and comment on this proposal once it has been issued. We are keenly aware of the need for capital requirements to make sense from a standpoint that considers safety, soundness, and competitiveness; we recognize that a one-size-fits-all approach is probably not the best for our banking system, in light of our wide range of institutions. We remain sensitive to the principle that if we have multiple regulatory capital frameworks they must work together to support the safety and soundness of our entire banking system without artificially creating competitive inequalities. ConclusionMy remarks today have focused on the risk management aspects of Basel II, with particular emphasis on operational risk. Events of the past year have shown that institutions should never let their guard down when it comes to risk management. Even though most of the high-profile losses during the past year have--so far--stemmed from market and credit risks, one should not, therefore, assume that less attention should be paid to operational risk management. The Basel II capital framework is a positive step forward through its combination of more risk-sensitive capital requirements with strong incentives for improved risk management. In this manner, we expect Basel II to make the U.S. banking industry more resilient in the face of future financial turbulence and generally more safe and sound. Footnotes 1.Randall S. Kroszner (2008), “The Importance of Fundamentals in Risk Management,” speech delivered at the American Bankers Association Spring Summit Meeting, Washington, DC, March 11. See alsoPresident’s Working Group Issues Policy Statement To Improve Future State of Financial Markets, andReport of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience.Return to text 2.Basel Committee on Banking Supervision announcement on strengthening the banking system, http://www.bis.org/press/p080416.htm.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago's Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Chicago, Illinois The financial and credit market turmoil that began last summer has raised a number of significant issues of public policy, including questions concerning the maintenance of financial stability, the supervision and regulation of financial institutions, and the protection of consumers in their financial dealings. Obviously, I cannot hope to address all the relevant issues today; moreover, events continue to unfold. Still, some of the implications of what has transpired since August are becoming clearer. My remarks today will focus on the lessons of the recent experience for risk-management practices in financial institutions as well as the supervisory oversight of those practices. My comments are based on the experiences and observations of supervisors in both the United States and other countries and thus are intended to be fairly general, applying across regulatory structures and to financial firms of varying scope and size. Origins of the Current TurmoilTo provide some background, I will begin with a brief discussion of the origins of the financial turmoil. Although many factors played a role, to a considerable extent, the financial stress we continue to experience arose from the problematic implementation of the so-called originate-to-distribute approach to credit extension. In principle, and indeed often in practice, the originate-to-distribute model spreads risk and reduces financing costs, offering greater access to capital to a wide range of borrowers while allowing investors greater flexibility in choosing and managing credit exposures. However, weaknesses in the application of the originate-to-distribute model became increasingly apparent last year, resulting ultimately in a broad retreat from this method of credit extension last summer. A report released just this March by the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG), of which I am a member, and an even more recent study issued in April by the international Financial Stability Forum (FSF), in which the Federal Reserve plays an active role, document the nature of these weaknesses.1These reports emphasize that substantial improvements in the originate-to-distribute model as practiced over the past few years are necessary if its potential benefits are to be realized. The reports pointed out that problems occurred at each step of the credit-extension chain. First, at the point of origination, underwriting standards became increasingly compromised in recent years. The most notorious example is, of course, U.S. subprime mortgages. In this case, as in others, the incentives faced by originators were an important source of the breakdown in underwriting. The revenues of the originators of subprime mortgages were often tied to loan volume rather than to the quality of the underlying credits, which induced some originators to focus on the quantity rather than the quality of the loans being passed up the chain. However, the problems with subprime mortgage underwriting were disguised for a time by the continued appreciation in home values. As long as house prices kept rising, subprime borrowers saw their home equity increase and were often able to refinance into more-sustainable mortgages. But when house prices began to stagnate and then fall, many subprime borrowers found themselves trapped in mortgages they could not afford. Because subprime loans were frequently securitized and incorporated into complex structured products, the resulting losses spread throughout the financial system. Although subprime mortgages are the most well-known instance of underwriting failure and were in some sense the trigger of the turmoil, the loosening of credit standards and terms occurred more broadly, even as market risk premiums contracted. For example, investors were willing to purchase so-called leveraged loans--used to finance mergers or buyouts--with few covenants or other protections. The PWG concluded that investors often took insufficient care in evaluating the risks of credit products, in part because they relied too much on evaluations provided by the credit rating agencies. Unfortunately, the methodologies, data, and assumptions the agencies used to rate structured credit products proved deficient in many cases. When rising delinquencies and losses on mortgages forced the agencies to sharply downgrade many of these products, investors lost confidence in those ratings and became unwilling to provide new funds. As financing disappeared, the markets for structured credit products and for related investments seized up. Another significant factor contributing to the financial turmoil was risk-management weaknesses at large global financial institutions that created and held complex credit products. I will return to this topic shortly, but for now, suffice it to say that a result of poor risk management at some financial institutions was that the spreading of risk, one of the purported benefits of the originate-to-distribute model, proved to be much less extensive than many believed. When investors were no longer willing or able to finance new structured credit products, many of the largest financial institutions had to fund instruments they could not readily sell or had to meet contingent funding obligations for which they had not adequately planned. The combination of unanticipated losses, which ate into capital cushions, and severe liquidity pressures has reduced the ability and willingness of some large financial institutions to make markets and to extend new credit, with adverse effects for the financial system and for the economy. Both the PWG and the FSF reports highlighted the important role played by financial regulators in overseeing and helping to strengthen risk-management practices in the firms they supervise, and the reports recommended that the regulators review their own policies, guidance, and supervisory practices to identify areas in which improvements could be made. I will discuss some regulatory and supervisory responses to the recent developments later in my remarks. Lessons for Risk Management at Financial InstitutionsWith that brief diagnosis of our financial market turmoil as background, I turn now to some of the lessons learned thus far regarding the risk-management practices of financial institutions. The financial turmoil presented difficult challenges that were not fully anticipated by either financial institutions or regulators, but firms did vary in how well they were able to deal with those challenges. By comparing how some key firms fared during the recent period, we can better understand what worked well and what did not work so well. Many of the points I will make are drawn from a report published in early March by a group of supervisory agencies from France, Germany, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States--including the Federal Reserve--known as the Senior Supervisors Group, or SSG.2This report employed a methodology similar to that used in the so-called horizontal reviews regularly conducted by U.S. bank supervisors. We begin these reviews by identifying particular activities or practices that merit study. We then gather comparable information from a core set of institutions, with the objectives of identifying the principal differences in practice across firms and determining how those differences are related to subsequent performance. Finally, we provide feedback to the institutions involved and often share the insights gained with other institutions not in the study. Horizontal reviews can involve major commitments of time and resources, but they help both managers of financial institutions and supervisors by revealing the range of practice in the industry and by providing useful information about the strengths and weaknesses of alternative approaches. When focused on large, internationally active organizations, as was the case with the SSG report, these reviews can offer insights that bear not only on the safety and soundness of individual companies but also on the maintenance of overall financial stability. Although the SSG report covered a group of the largest banking and securities firms, based on our own supervisory experience at the Federal Reserve, I believe the lessons of that report have relevance for financial organizations of all sizes and scope. In reviewing these lessons, I will concentrate on four categories of risk-management practices: risk identification and measurement, valuation practices, liquidity risk management, and senior management oversight. Risk Identification and MeasurementFor risks to be successfully managed, they must first be identified and measured. Recent events have revealed significant deficiencies in these areas. Notable examples are the underestimation by many firms of the credit risk of subprime mortgages and certain tranches of structured products. Other firms did not fully consider the linkages between credit risk and market risk, leading to mismeasurement of their overall exposure. Firms differed in their susceptibility to these problems; however, some were more disciplined in their approaches to identifying and measuring risks and thereby gained a better understanding of the risks of some complex securities, particularly in highly stressed environments. This fuller appreciation of the risks involved led these firms to limit their purchases of such securities or to provide additional capital and liquidity backstops. The SSG report notes that some institutions took an excessively narrow perspective on risk with insufficient appreciation of the need for a range of risk measures, including both quantitative and qualitative metrics. For example, some firms placed too much emphasis on the mechanical application of value-at-risk or similar model-based indicators. Sophisticated quantitative tools and models play an important role in good risk management, and they will continue to do so. But no model, regardless of sophistication, can capture all of the risks that an institution might face. Those institutions faring better during the recent turmoil generally placed relatively more emphasis on validation, independent review, and other controls for models and similar quantitative techniques. They also continually refined their models and applied a healthy dose of skepticism to model output. Stress tests and related exercises are a good way to augment models and other standard quantitative techniques for risk management. They can provide a valuable perspective on risks falling outside those typically captured by statistical models, such as risks associated with extreme price movements and those associated with scenarios not reflected in what are sometimes very short data series. Stress testing forces practitioners to step back from daily concerns to think through the implications of scenarios that may seem relatively unlikely but could pose serious risks to the firm if they materialized. For stress tests to be useful, they should be relevant to the business at hand, change with market and risk positions, and, of course, have an impact on management's decisionmaking. In an encouraging finding, the SSG report noted that the surveyed institutions already broadly recognize the need to enhance their stress-testing capabilities. Recent events illustrate the potential usefulness of stress tests. For example, several institutions made what proved to be optimistic assumptions about the correlation of returns between tranches of collateralized debt obligations. Appropriate stress testing might have allowed a better understanding of how these instruments would perform under extreme market conditions. Applying stress tests to several business lines at the same time is operationally challenging, but for several firms, exercises of this type could have revealed previously undetected firmwide risk concentrations that cut across the banking book, the securities portfolio, and counterparty exposures. Some institutions successfully applied stress testing, with corresponding benefits for the bottom line. For example, some risk managers recognized the risk that certain off-balance-sheet exposures might present should they need to be brought back on the balance sheet and tested scenarios to evaluate the potential firmwide impact. This work allowed their firms to be better prepared when the scenarios became reality. ValuationValuation practices are a second area that supervisors' comparative reviews identified as critical. The SSG report indicates that those firms that paid close attention to the problems associated with the valuation of financial instruments, particularly those for which markets were not deep, fared better. These more-successful institutions developed in-house expertise to conduct independent valuations and refrained from relying solely on third-party assessments. They also tested their estimated valuations in various ways, for example, by selling a small portion of the asset in question to test the market or by undertaking an extensive review of the market prices of similar products. Some more-successful firms also consistently embedded market liquidity premiums in their pricing models and valuations. In contrast, less-successful firms did not develop adequate capacity to conduct independent valuations and did not take into account the greater liquidity risks posed by some classes of assets. Liquidity Risk ManagementAnother crucial lesson from recent events is that financial institutions must understand their liquidity needs at an enterprise-wide level and be prepared for the possibility that market liquidity may erode quickly and unexpectedly. Weak liquidity risk controls were a common source of the problems many firms have faced. For example, some firms' treasury functions were not given information from all business lines about either expected liquidity needs or contingency funding plans, in part because managers of individual business lines had little incentive to compile and provide this information. As is now widely recognized, many contingency funding plans did not adequately prepare for the possibility that certain off-balance-sheet exposures might have to be brought onto the firm's balance sheet. Unexpected balance sheet expansions subsequently added to funding pressures as well as to pressures on capital ratios. In contrast, the more-successful institutions worked to develop firmwide strategies for liquidity risk management that incorporated information from all business lines. In the best cases, firmwide strategies included consideration of the liquidity risks associated with structured investment vehicles, which led to more limited involvement in these activities. Senior Management OversightEffective oversight of an organization as a whole is one of the most fundamental requirements of prudent risk management. The SSG report highlighted solid senior management oversight and engagement as a key factor that differentiated firms' performance during the recent events. Senior managers at successful firms are actively involved in risk management, which includes determining the firm's overall risk preferences and creating the incentives and controls to induce employees to abide by those preferences. To manage risk at an enterprise-wide level, successful senior managers also ensure that they have the necessary information, which in turn requires appropriate policies and information systems as well as robust methods for identifying and measuring risks. The failure to appreciate risk exposures at a firmwide level can be costly. For example, during the recent episode, the senior managers of some firms did not fully appreciate the extent of their firms' exposure to U.S. subprime mortgages. They did not realize that, in addition to the subprime mortgages on their books, they had exposures through the mortgage holdings of off-balance-sheet vehicles, through claims on counterparties exposed to subprime, and through certain complex securities. Successful senior managers also worked to ensure that critical information was transmitted horizontally as well as vertically; the SSG report noted that, at some firms, business lines did not share vital information relevant to risk positions and business tactics, with adverse implications for profitability. Culture and governance affect the quality of risk management. The leaders of well-managed institutions of all sizes generally seek to have strong and independent risk functions. Such functions support clear, dispassionate thinking about the entire firm's risk profile. In addition, the institution benefits when senior managers encourage risk managers to dig deep to uncover latent risks and to point out cases in which individual business lines appear to be assuming too much risk. Supervisory ResponsesSupervisors too have learned from the recent experience, including the need for careful self-assessment, and the PWG and the FSF reports offer some helpful recommendations. We are still conducting such an assessment, but I can offer some preliminary conclusions. Given the central role of effective, firmwide risk management in maintaining strong financial institutions, it is clear that supervisors must redouble their efforts to help organizations improve their risk-management practices. Accordingly, we have increased supervisory attention to this issue. We have focused on the institutions in most need of improvement, but we will continue to remind the stronger institutions of the need to remain vigilant, particularly in light of the ongoing fragility of market conditions. We are also considering the need for additional or revised supervisory guidance regarding various aspects of risk management, including further emphasis on the need for an enterprise-wide perspective when assessing risk. Much of our work is being conducted in close consultation with supervisors in other countries. For example, we are working through the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to develop enhanced guidance on the management of liquidity risks. We are also seeking to promote better disclosures by banking institutions with the goal of increasing transparency, thereby strengthening market discipline. As you know, a major ongoing development is the implementation of the international Basel II capital accord in the United States. Basel II is intended to enhance the quality of risk management by tying regulatory capital more closely to institutions' underlying risks and by requiring strong internal systems for evaluating credit and other risks. Although Basel II will by no means eliminate future episodes of financial turbulence, it should help to make financial institutions more resilient to shocks and thus enhance overall financial stability. At the same time, we must ensure that the Basel II framework appropriately reflects the lessons of recent events. The Basel Committee has been evaluating how the framework might be strengthened in areas such as the capital treatment of off-balance-sheet vehicles and the use of credit ratings to determine capital charges. The relatively lengthy transition to Basel II will allow more opportunity to absorb the lessons of the financial turmoil and make necessary adjustments to the framework. ConclusionTo summarize, the turmoil in credit markets underscores some important principles for bank risk management, including the value of proper risk identification and measurement, the need for robust and objective valuation methods, the importance of preparing for liquidity disruptions, and the critical role of strong oversight by senior managers. With renewed attention to these principles and the restoration of strong incentives for sound risk management, institutions should be able to overcome the difficulties we have seen in the recent application of the originate-to-distribute model and begin to use it successfully again. Equally important, improvements in banks' risk management will provide a more-stable financial system by making firms more resilient to shocks. Supervisors must insist on effective risk management and provide as much support as possible for the implementation of needed changes. Recent events have also demonstrated the importance of generous capital cushions for protecting against adverse conditions in financial and credit markets. I have been encouraged by the recently demonstrated ability of many financial institutions, large and small, to raise capital from diverse sources. Importantly, capital raising and balance sheet repair allow for the extension of new credit, which supports economic expansion. I strongly urge financial institutions to remain proactive in their capital-raising efforts. Doing so not only helps the broader economy but positions firms to take advantage of new profit opportunities as conditions in the financial markets and the economy improve. Footnotes 1.President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments," March 13; Financial Stability Forum (2008), “Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience," April 7.Return to text 2.The report, "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence," provides a summary and analysis of a joint survey and review, initiated this past autumn, of risk-management practices during the recent financial stress.Return to text
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the National Conference on Public Employee Retirement Systems Annual Conference, New Orleans, Louisiana These have been challenging times for the U.S. economy. Homebuilding and house prices have gone through prolonged and deep declines; the resulting broad pullback in financial markets from risk-taking and credit extension has transmitted some of the weakness in the housing sector to other types of spending. At the same time, a substantial run-up in the prices of petroleum and other commodities has simultaneously increased inflation and damped spending on other goods and services. I don't need to tell you that challenging times for the economy are also challenging times for those entrusted with managing pension funds. So I thought you might find it useful this morning for me to review where I think the economy is and where it might be going. That, in turn, depends critically on developments in financial markets, and I'll have something to say about those developments as well. Finally, I'll end with a few thoughts about what the recent turbulence in financial markets may imply for the administration of public pension funds.1 Recent Economic DevelopmentsEconomic activity this year has been quite sluggish. The weakness in activity continues to be shaped by the fallout from the contraction in housing markets that began two years ago. The demand for housing continued to decline early this year, and sales could fall even further in coming months, given the tightness in mortgage lending. Nonprime mortgages have all but disappeared from the mortgage market. Moreover, with only limited securitizations of prime jumbo loans, rates on those loans are relatively high, and their share of total originations has shrunk significantly since last July. Rates for fixed-rate conforming loans have dropped to close to 6 percent. But even there, the good news is tempered somewhat because, with delinquencies on prime mortgages rising, the government-sponsored enterprises have tightened their standards for conforming loans and added fees for borrowers with lower credit scores and less collateral. All prominent measures of house prices are now showing declines. Although lower prices would eventually help bolster housing demand, the expectations of further declines in prices may currently be exacerbating the difficulties in housing markets. In this environment, homebuilders have made only limited progress in reducing the very large overhang of unsold new homes despite having cut starts to a level not seen since early 1991. Single-family starts fell to an annual rate of 690,000 in April; the pace of new activity has now dropped by a 1/2 million units in each of the past two years. The supply of existing homes on the market also remains quite high and is likely to be augmented in coming months by rising foreclosures. As a result, further cuts in construction appear to be in train. The sharp contraction in housing was at the center of the slowdown in economic activity that began late last year. By early this year, however, the spillovers from the housing market correction onto other sectors of the economy began to show through more clearly; consumer and business spending, which had slowed at the end of 2007, has remained on a shallow trajectory since then. In particular, spending on consumer goods, including new motor vehicles, has been soft. Since last fall, rising prices for energy and food have made a significant dent in the purchasing power of consumers' incomes. Moreover, despite some improvement in the stock market recently, households' net worth has deteriorated since the beginning of the year as the prices of homes have declined; and credit conditions have tightened. In reaction to these adversities, households seem to have become extremely downbeat about prospects for jobs and income. Business spending for equipment and software edged down in the first quarter, and the environment for capital spending remains difficult; businesses are uncertain about the economic outlook, and lenders have adopted more stringent lending standards. However, while conditions are quite tight for riskier firms, credit does appear to be more readily available to investment-grade businesses. More difficult financing conditions also seem to be leaving an imprint on nonresidential construction, which now appears to be softening after a couple of years of sharp gains. According to our April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, a large majority of banks, which are the largest provider of commercial mortgages, reported tightening standards on commercial real estate over the preceding three months.2The issuance of securitized commercial real estate loans, which funds a little more than one-fourth of all outstanding commercial mortgages, has slowed to a trickle. Sales of commercial properties fell sharply in the first quarter, and late last year prices appeared to have begun to decline. A bright spot has been the external sector. Although the pace of real activity in some foreign economies also appears to be slowing, the overall rate of expansion in our trading partners--especially emerging Asian economies such as China--remains solid. Some of the pullback in U.S. demand has been absorbed by declines in imports, and the decline in the dollar has made U.S. firms more competitive in export markets, though it has also accentuated inflation concerns. The deceleration in economic activity has been reflected in the labor market, where layoffs have risen and hiring has slowed. Payroll employment has now fallen for four consecutive months. The combination of job losses and the greater difficulty in finding jobs has pushed the unemployment rate up to 5 percent in recent months. Financial Market DevelopmentsAs I've just noted, the tightening of financial conditions as a result of stresses in financial markets has been an important factor in the recent slowdown of the U.S. economy. In recent weeks, however, U.S. financial markets have improved somewhat. Equity prices have risen noticeably since mid-March. Spreads on both investment-grade and speculative-grade corporate bonds have generally narrowed over the same period, and investment-grade companies, including financial institutions, have been able to raise funds in credit markets. Financial intermediaries have also tapped equity markets to bolster capital depleted by the recognition of losses on loans and securities. Clearly, some of the extraordinary increase in risk aversion that we saw earlier this year has been reversed. Apparently, a combination of factors has contributed to a perception that financial markets and the economy are less likely than some had feared to experience very adverse outcomes: Among those factors were Federal Reserve actions to bolster liquidity and ease monetary policy, the success of a number of financial institutions in raising capital, and incoming economic data and earnings reports that were not as weak as market participants had expected. Still, the persistence of relatively wide spreads in many markets suggests that investors continue to be worried about credit quality; the issuance of speculative-grade bonds has been scant this year; and securitization markets for many types of mortgages continue to be impaired. In addition, term bank funding markets remain under pressure as banks and other lenders in these markets conserve capital and liquidity and limit risk-taking. Banks have further tightened lending standards across a wide range of business and consumer loans. These findings generally suggest that market participants remain wary, and in that environment, improvements in financial markets are vulnerable to negative news on the economy or the extent of credit losses. I expect further, but gradual, improvement in financial markets. Credit flows need to be re-channeled and re-intermediated with less leverage, less rollover risk, and greater compensation for taking risk than before the turmoil began last year. Securitized assets need to be simpler, more transparent, and less reliant on the imprimatur of a credit rating agency. Lenders and other investors need to gain greater confidence that they understand the extent and incidence of the losses arising from the lax lending practices of recent years and the current economic slowdown. Those processes are likely to be slow and they may be set back from time to time, but they will ultimately succeed in giving us a more robust financial system than we had a year ago. The Economic OutlookAlthough the current financial and economic situation remains quite difficult, I believe that the most likely scenario over the next year or so is one in which economic activity firms during the second half of this year and then gathers some strength in 2009. In the near term, consumer spending is likely to receive a boost from the rebates that are now flowing to taxpayers. Although the timing and the magnitude of the spending response are uncertain, economic studies of the previous experience suggest that a noticeable proportion of households respond reasonably quickly to temporary cash flows. Of course, the stimulus to domestic production will depend on the extent to which the additional demand is met by a temporary drawdown of inventories or an increase in imports rather than by an expansion in domestic output. But to date, businesses appear to be keeping tight control on inventories, and a reasonable assumption is that we will see a temporary lift to the economy in coming months. The pace of activity should continue to improve next year, with an important part of the gains coming from the abatement of the forces currently restraining activity. That said, a number of factors suggest that the recovery could be relatively moderate. I've already mentioned my expectation that financial market functioning and risk appetites will continue to improve, but that recuperation will require some time. As all that happens, the policy easing the Federal Reserve has put in place over recent months will begin to show through more in reductions in the cost of capital and the greater availability of credit. The demand for housing is not likely to rebound substantially for a while after this episode, but the drag on growth from declining activity and prices in the housing market will ebb as excess inventories are worked off and affordability improves. Consumption should pick up along with the improvement in jobs and income, though a gradual increase in the saving rate would be expected now that households will no longer be counting on increases in the value of their homes to finance retirement or other future spending. With a lag, business investment should turn up as prospects for a sustained expansion of economic activity become clearer. And both households and businesses should benefit from a leveling-off in the prices of energy and other commodities along the path implied by futures markets. As with any forecast, mine is subject to a number of uncertainties. One is the extent of the housing correction ahead of us. If the retrenchment in house prices becomes deeper than anticipated, its effect on lenders and financial markets could further damp overall economic activity. We are in uncharted waters when the financial system becomes so disrupted, though we should consider ourselves fortunate that we have very few similar historical episodes on which to base our judgments. In such circumstances, uncertainty about how credit conditions will evolve and how businesses and households will react to changing terms and conditions means that we can have even less confidence than usual in our economic forecasts. InflationAnother area of concern is the implications for inflation as a result of the recent run-up in the prices of energy, food, and other commodities. The recent news on inflation has been mixed. Core inflation has moderated a little so far this year. However, we have seen no relief from the pressures of rising prices for energy and food; thus headline inflation has been quite elevated. These prices have continued to rise despite slowing demand in the United States and, to a lesser extent, in other countries. Over the past few years, emerging market economies have increased demand for many of these commodities, and world supply has not kept pace with this growing demand. For oil, non-OPEC production, particularly in the North Sea and in Mexico, has proved disappointing, and OPEC production has remained restrained. As for food prices, bad weather has combined with higher production costs to restrain supplies. Consequently, agricultural inventories have been drawn down to low levels and have not been available to absorb the rising demand. Furthermore, higher energy prices have affected agricultural prices not only through higher costs of production but also by boosting the demand for biofuels. Some observers have questioned whether the news on fundamentals affecting supply and demand in commodities markets has been sufficient to justify the sharp price increases in recent months. Some of these commentators have cited the actions of the Federal Reserve in reducing interest rates as an important consideration boosting commodity prices. To be sure, commodity prices did rise as interest rates fell. However, for many commodities, inventories have fallen to all-time lows, a development that casts doubt on the premise that speculative demand boosted by low interest rates has pushed prices above levels that would be consistent with the fundamentals of supply and demand. As interest rates in the United States fell relative to those abroad, the dollar declined, which could have boosted the prices of commodities commonly priced in dollars by reducing their cost in terms of other currencies, hence raising the amount demanded by people using those currencies. But the prices of commodities have risen substantially in terms of all currencies, not just the dollar. In sum, lower interest rates and the reduced foreign exchange value of the dollar may have played a role in the rise in the prices of oil and other commodities, but it probably has been a small one. The rise in commodity prices presents particular challenges for monetary policy because such increases both add to near-term inflationary pressures and damp demand. A tendency for increases in commodity prices to become a factor in ongoing pricing and wage-setting more generally would be a worrisome development that would over time tend to undermine economic welfare. In the near term, headline inflation is likely to continue to be boosted by the direct effects of the recent increases in the prices of energy and food. If, as futures markets suggest, those prices level off later this year, prospects seem reasonably good for headline inflation to move back in line over time with core inflation. And I expect core inflation to ease off slowly as commodity prices level out and as economic slack creates competitive conditions that inhibit increases in labor costs and prices. Despite the elevated headline inflation of the past four years, we have seen little evidence of faster wage inflation. And healthy gains in productivity have helped to hold down labor cost pressures on prices. My expectations for moderating inflation and limited spillover effects from commodity price increases depend critically on the continued stability of inflation expectations. In that regard, year-ahead inflation expectations of households have increased this year in response to the jump in headline inflation. Of greater concern, some measures of longer-term inflation expectations appear to have edged up. If longer-term inflation expectations were to become unmoored--whether because of a protracted period of elevated headline inflation or because the public misinterpreted the recent substantial policy easing as suggesting that monetary policy makers had a greater tolerance for inflation than previously thought--then I believe that we would be facing a more serious situation. Monetary PolicyThe Federal Open Market Committee will be monitoring inflation developments closely for any sign that our longer-run objective of promoting price stability is threatened. At the same time, we also need to continue to carefully assess whether, after a period of near-term softness in economic activity, the economy is likely to be on track for sustained economic expansion over time. With the information now in hand, it is my judgment that monetary policy appears to be appropriately calibrated for now to promote both rising employment and moderating inflation over the medium term. But a large measure of uncertainty surrounds that judgment and as the economy evolves, so will the appropriate stance of policy.Lessons for Public Pension SystemsNow let me shift my focus to what pension fund managers might glean as lessons learned from the recent turmoil in financial markets and some of the structural challenges that lie ahead. From what we have seen so far, public pension systems generally appear to have avoided the worst of the damage resulting from the recent tumult. For example, while a number of public funds evidently held structured credit products such as collateralized debt obligations, the overall level of exposure to those products appears to have been relatively small.Nonetheless, the recent experience does point up some serious considerations as pension funds address the challenges in meeting their obligations in coming years. One is that public pension systems--like all investors--need to be diligent about understanding and managing the risks on their balance sheets. Too many investors seem to have placed too much faith in credit rating agencies, and too few seem to have developed their own views of the risks embedded in their holdings. Of course, developing such views is no small undertaking. But if ever a demonstration of the value of doing so were needed, the recent episode certainly provides it.Perhaps the biggest challenge facing public pension systems is inadequate funding. Even by current measures of liability, which themselves may not be fully revealing, last year about three-fourths of public pension systems were underfunded, and about one-third were funded at less than 80 percent. Lengthening life expectancies and tight public budgets are making existing pension promises ever more difficult to keep--and the problem is significantly magnified if promised health benefits are included.The funding situation puts systems under a great deal of pressure to reach for higher returns by investing in riskier assets. But as has been so clearly and forcefully demonstrated over the past year, there is no free lunch with risk-taking: The price is volatility, the extent of which should be well disclosed and the implications of which should be well understood.The generally high weight on equity and real estate investments in the typical public pension fund portfolio has increased in recent years. Part of that exposure has come from increased investment in private equity, real estate investment trusts, and hedge funds. Indeed, some funds have allocated 25 percent or more of their portfolios to these "alternative" categories.With exposures like those, public pension systems should maintain formal risk-management procedures that are independent of the selection and evaluation of managers and that are carefully designed to minimize conflicts of interest that can weaken the risk-management function.I mentioned earlier that current measures of pension liabilities might be less than fully revealing. Why might that be so? The chief reason is that public pension benefits are essentially bullet-proof promises to pay. We all have read about instances in which benefits were lost when a private-sector pension sponsor declared bankruptcy and terminated the plan. In the public sector, that just hasn't happened, even when the plan sponsor has run into serious financial difficulty. For all intents and purposes, accrued benefits have turned out to be riskless obligations. While economists are famous for disagreeing with each other on virtually every other conceivable issue, when it comes to this one there is no professional disagreement: The only appropriate way to calculate the present value of a very-low-risk liability is to use a very-low-risk discount rate.However, most public pension funds calculate the present value of their liabilities using the projected rate of return on the portfolio of assets as the discount rate. This practice makes little sense from an economic perspective. If they shift their portfolio into even riskier assets, does the value of the liabilities backed by their taxpayers go down? Financial economists would say no, but the conventional approach to pension accounting says yes. Unfortunately, the measure of liabilities that results from this process has a real consequence: It pushes the burden of financing today's pension benefits onto future taxpayers, who will be called upon to fund the true cost of existing pension promises.Another challenge that everyone involved in public pensions faces is the issue of transparency. Unlike private pension funds, public pension systems do not account for liabilities in a standardized way. As a result, public employees, taxpayers, municipal bond investors, credit rating agencies, and other market participants have a hard time comparing funding levels across systems and over time.What steps can pension funds take to improve transparency and help clarify their long-run challenges? Ideally, they would disclose a standardized measurement of funding status, using consistent and appropriate measures of liability. They might also disclose how their asset allocation affects the volatility of the returns on their assets and how their funding ratios and cash flow might be affected by various outcomes in the financial markets. Such practices almost surely would be welcomed externally. But they might also pay dividends internally, because the funds might find that the information about the volatility built into their systems changes their views about the amount of risk they want to shoulder.Public pension funds hold more than $3 trillion in assets and cover nearly 20 million workers and retirees. Those funds are clearly vital to the business of state and local governments across the country as well as to the public employees they cover. The potential improvements I have touched on today--adhering to best practices with regard to risk management and grappling with some of the difficult structural issues that currently face public pension systems--would help strengthen public pension systems and should minimize the risks to public employees, the governments that employ them, and the taxpayers that finance them both now and in the future.Footnotes1.Paul Smith,David Wilcox, and Joyce Zickler, of the Board's staff contributed to the preparation of these remarks. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of other members of the Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), "The April 2008 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices" (April).Return to text Lessons for Public Pension SystemsNow let me shift my focus to what pension fund managers might glean as lessons learned from the recent turmoil in financial markets and some of the structural challenges that lie ahead. From what we have seen so far, public pension systems generally appear to have avoided the worst of the damage resulting from the recent tumult. For example, while a number of public funds evidently held structured credit products such as collateralized debt obligations, the overall level of exposure to those products appears to have been relatively small. Nonetheless, the recent experience does point up some serious considerations as pension funds address the challenges in meeting their obligations in coming years. One is that public pension systems--like all investors--need to be diligent about understanding and managing the risks on their balance sheets. Too many investors seem to have placed too much faith in credit rating agencies, and too few seem to have developed their own views of the risks embedded in their holdings. Of course, developing such views is no small undertaking. But if ever a demonstration of the value of doing so were needed, the recent episode certainly provides it. Perhaps the biggest challenge facing public pension systems is inadequate funding. Even by current measures of liability, which themselves may not be fully revealing, last year about three-fourths of public pension systems were underfunded, and about one-third were funded at less than 80 percent. Lengthening life expectancies and tight public budgets are making existing pension promises ever more difficult to keep--and the problem is significantly magnified if promised health benefits are included. The funding situation puts systems under a great deal of pressure to reach for higher returns by investing in riskier assets. But as has been so clearly and forcefully demonstrated over the past year, there is no free lunch with risk-taking: The price is volatility, the extent of which should be well disclosed and the implications of which should be well understood. The generally high weight on equity and real estate investments in the typical public pension fund portfolio has increased in recent years. Part of that exposure has come from increased investment in private equity, real estate investment trusts, and hedge funds. Indeed, some funds have allocated 25 percent or more of their portfolios to these "alternative" categories. With exposures like those, public pension systems should maintain formal risk-management procedures that are independent of the selection and evaluation of managers and that are carefully designed to minimize conflicts of interest that can weaken the risk-management function. I mentioned earlier that current measures of pension liabilities might be less than fully revealing. Why might that be so? The chief reason is that public pension benefits are essentially bullet-proof promises to pay. We all have read about instances in which benefits were lost when a private-sector pension sponsor declared bankruptcy and terminated the plan. In the public sector, that just hasn't happened, even when the plan sponsor has run into serious financial difficulty. For all intents and purposes, accrued benefits have turned out to be riskless obligations. While economists are famous for disagreeing with each other on virtually every other conceivable issue, when it comes to this one there is no professional disagreement: The only appropriate way to calculate the present value of a very-low-risk liability is to use a very-low-risk discount rate. However, most public pension funds calculate the present value of their liabilities using the projected rate of return on the portfolio of assets as the discount rate. This practice makes little sense from an economic perspective. If they shift their portfolio into even riskier assets, does the value of the liabilities backed by their taxpayers go down? Financial economists would say no, but the conventional approach to pension accounting says yes. Unfortunately, the measure of liabilities that results from this process has a real consequence: It pushes the burden of financing today's pension benefits onto future taxpayers, who will be called upon to fund the true cost of existing pension promises. Another challenge that everyone involved in public pensions faces is the issue of transparency. Unlike private pension funds, public pension systems do not account for liabilities in a standardized way. As a result, public employees, taxpayers, municipal bond investors, credit rating agencies, and other market participants have a hard time comparing funding levels across systems and over time. What steps can pension funds take to improve transparency and help clarify their long-run challenges? Ideally, they would disclose a standardized measurement of funding status, using consistent and appropriate measures of liability. They might also disclose how their asset allocation affects the volatility of the returns on their assets and how their funding ratios and cash flow might be affected by various outcomes in the financial markets. Such practices almost surely would be welcomed externally. But they might also pay dividends internally, because the funds might find that the information about the volatility built into their systems changes their views about the amount of risk they want to shoulder. Public pension funds hold more than $3 trillion in assets and cover nearly 20 million workers and retirees. Those funds are clearly vital to the business of state and local governments across the country as well as to the public employees they cover. The potential improvements I have touched on today--adhering to best practices with regard to risk management and grappling with some of the difficult structural issues that currently face public pension systems--would help strengthen public pension systems and should minimize the risks to public employees, the governments that employ them, and the taxpayers that finance them both now and in the future. Footnotes 1.Paul Smith,David Wilcox, and Joyce Zickler, of the Board's staff contributed to the preparation of these remarks. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of other members of the Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), "The April 2008 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices" (April).Return to text
Governor Kevin Warsh At the Exchequer Club Luncheon, Washington, D.C. Thanks in no small measure to the scores of professionals long found in the four walls of the Federal Reserve System--and ample access to information--the Fed possesses both the commitment and resources to tackle these policy challenges. And, by virtue of the Fed's institutional credibility, bequeathed to today's Federal Open Market Committee by its predecessors, the policy response tends to be as highly anticipated as it is consequential. But in affirming our formidable assets, it is similarly not my intention to suggest that we have devised error-free policies to painlessly and smoothly achieve agreed-upon objectives.On Monetary Policy…TodayThe Fed is not omniscient. Neither are our tools uniquely and perfectly suited to ensure that the ills of yesterday do not recur. Nor can we guarantee that our policy response alone will set the economy on a steady and obvious path to unequalled prosperity. We run serious risks if we overstate our knowledge or overplay our hand. Look no further than the financial wizards in the financial sector recently who were convinced that risks were manageable and returns exponential. Milton Friedman reminded us long ago, and Edmund Phelps more recently, of the "consequences of conceit."2For all that has been learned about the practice of monetary policy, we must be mindful of the dangers of purporting to know more than we do about the relationship between central bank policies and the real economy. Humility, thus, is a particularly important attribute for a central banker, particularly when financial markets and financial intermediaries--through which the effects of monetary policy flow to the real economy--find themselves at a crossroads.Starting in August, my fellow Fed policymakers and I persistently subjected ourselves to the age-old dialectic in determining the breadth and depth of our policy response: What do we know? What do we think we know--that is, what do we suspect? What can't we know? And, perhaps most important, in light of various forms of uncertainty: What should we do about it?The more we asked ourselves these questions during this period of extraordinary tumult, the more we recognized the need to broaden our policy response beyond monetary policy's blunt traditional tool. Changes in the policy rate affect many sectors, not just those that seem out of balance. Charlie Munger, the under-heralded partner of the "Oracle of Omaha," Warren Buffett (perhaps comprising the finest investment team of the last half-century), believes that economics remains a rather insular field of practice. He seems to delight in accusing the economics profession of suffering from "Man with a Hammer Syndrome." He recounts, "[T]o the man with only a hammer, every problem looks pretty much like a nail."3I suspect Munger feels similarly about the orthodoxy of monetary policy.Consistent with Munger's admonition, the Fed saw it necessary to expand our toolkit beyond the proverbial hammer of the policy rate in the last nine months. And as I discussed in remarks last month, the Fed's nontraditional policy response included the use of innovative liquidity tools to counter the market turmoil and improve the functioning of financial and credit markets.4In my remarks today, I would like to discuss the use of the hammer--the setting of the federal funds rate--particularly in extraordinary times. Of course, determining the proper level of the federal funds rate is rarely simple, given typical imprecision on key economic variables and relationships. It is far more challenging still when the financial architecture is in the early stages of redesign, the economy is adjusting to the aftermath of a credit bubble (witnessed most acutely in the housing markets), and inflation risks are evident.The Federal Reserve has employed the hammer with considerable force in the last nine months, lowering the federal funds rate by 3-1/4 percentage points, with wide-ranging implications for the economy. Of substantial import, we have filled the toolkit with other implements to provide liquidity and improve the provisioning of credit during the turmoil. But now, policymakers may be well served encouraging a new financial architecture to emerge, aided, in part, by the actions we have taken. Even if the economy were to weaken somewhat further, we should be inclined to resist expected, reflexive calls to trot out the hammer again.Policy actions should reinforce the notion with stakeholders that further hammering needs to be done, but it needs to be accomplished by the financial institutions themselves in retooling their businesses and rebuilding the credit channel to help ensure a stronger, more durable economy. Private financial institutions should raise substantial capital, reconstitute business models, and take other actions to reinvigorate the principal transmission channel of monetary policy. These private efforts are critical to improving market functioning, and until this process is more advanced, the economy is unlikely, in my view, to return to sustainable trend-rate growth. We at the Fed have taken action to help foster this curative process to improve the real economy, but market participants will ultimately determine its speed and success.On Monetary Policy…GenerallyThe Fed is charged with promoting price stability and maximum sustainable employment. Stakeholders advocate various strategies for achieving these objectives. In recent years, most central banks have elected to adjust the policy rate in response to changing economic conditions to achieve their goals. A key question for central bankers under this approach: What level of the policy rate would bring real activity in line with its potential? In gauging this value, a central banker seeks to be forward-looking because monetary policy influences real activity with considerable lag. The same consideration applies to assessing the effect of policy actions on inflation.For analytical purposes only, let's assume that we are in a world where inflation is running well within acceptable levels and that the central bank and stakeholders have ultimate conviction it will remain as such. This, of course, smacks of the old joke about economists and can-openers.5I'll revisit this heroic assumption later in my remarks. But with the assumption in mind, monetary policy can focus on the real side of the economy.The Taylor rule provides a convenient rule-of-thumb for setting monetary policy.6The rule posits that the appropriate setting of the real federal funds rate incorporates three components. The first component is the economy's natural rate of interest. This is the real federal funds rate consistent with output equal to potential, on average, over the medium- to long-run. If policymakers set the real federal funds rate at this level, the Fed would be neither artificially boosting nor restricting the real economy over long periods. Holding the federal funds rate at the natural rate, however, may yield an undesirably slow return of real activity to normal, particularly if shocks have a persistent effect on aggregate demand and supply.To expedite the process, the Taylor rule adds a second component to the real federal funds rate, one that purports to be proportional to the size of the current output gap. By setting the real federal funds rate below the natural rate when resource utilization is loose--and, correspondingly, above the natural rate when resource utilization is tight--policy purports to help move the real economy back to normal at a speedier pace. The third component responds to the gap between actual inflation and its desired rate, pushing real rates up when inflation is too high and pushing rates down when inflation is too low.The Taylor rule provides a reasonable description of actual monetary policy behavior on average over the past 20 years. The reasonably good macroeconomic performance of this period suggests that central banks should pay some heed to its prescriptions. By design, however, the Taylor rule focuses largely on what can be observed in real-time, without accounting for some factors that influence monetary policy. For example, policymakers may try to peer, however imperfectly, into the future when setting the federal funds rate rather than responding solely to the current state of the economy. Some central bankers find this more forward-looking approach to be particularly appealing when financial market prices and other high-frequency indicators suggest that the economy is poised to change direction markedly.To implement a forward-looking strategy, a policymaker could seek to forecast the average level of the real federal funds rate consistent with the economy either approximating or expeditiously returning to potential. Such a neutral rate thus might equilibrate the real economy over the next two or three years. Then, in our hypothetical example where inflation is stable at desired levels, the neutral rate would be a sufficient guide for monetary policy.7The wisdom of emphasizing a forward-looking strategy over the Taylor rule approach may depend in part on policymakers' forecasting acumen. To estimate the neutral rate, central bankers must forecast how the forces affecting aggregate demand and supply will reconcile during the forecast period. Moreover, policymakers must project how changes in the federal funds rate--past and anticipated--will interact with asset prices, credit provision, and real-side variables. Under the best of circumstances, these forecasts are subject to meaningful uncertainty. Thus, peering into the future and acting on what wethinkwe see will invariably lead to some mistakes, certainly with the benefit of hindsight. Ignoring the future altogether, however, hardly seems the wisest course.Moreover, the Taylor rule approach does not remove uncertainty. Consider the natural rate of interest, a key element in the rule. This rate depends on many things--worldwide saving and investment propensities, the achievable trend growth rate of the economy, the natural rate of unemployment, and the state of financial markets and financial intermediation. Some of these factors may be measurable; others can only be estimated indirectly. And many of these estimates demand a judgment about the path of non-monetary policy factors that will almost assuredly change over time. Moreover, policymakers need to grapple with uncertainty from error in real-time estimates of real gross domestic product and estimates of potential output.The key for policymakers, of course, is to recognize these uncertainties that, if misunderstood or miscalculated, could lead to policy errors. Munger, the proud non-economist, recounts another lesson born of his investment career that I find particularly heartening in considering the calculation of the neutral rate: Avoid the error of false precision.8Most monetary policy frameworks, while fiercely debated in the academy, tend to suffer from a common and unavoidable weakness--relying on provisional estimates in a complex and uncertain world. This weakness argues in favor of being persistently inquisitive in search of a keener understanding of the economy. This consideration applies to the making of monetary policy in normal times; in times of turmoil, the case for humility is stronger.On Monetary Policy…in Times of Financial Market TurmoilThe Fed sets monetary policy to support the real economy through several important channels. In times of financial market turmoil, policymakers like me are especially focused on disruptions in the so-called credit channel. After all, much of the Fed's policy prescriptions are carried out through financial intermediaries--commercial banks, investment banks, others--to affect the real economy.When the economy is operating below-trend, so long as financial markets are functioning well, a lower federal funds rate can encourage lending by financial institutions to bolster the real economy.9Hence, the Fed typically establishes the federal funds rate in anticipation of a customary market response, returning output to potential within a reasonable period, as well as to achieve its price objectives. In normal times, then, the neutral rate is equivalent to the real federal funds rate that incorporates typical transmission effects and normal market functioning. Thus, subject to the qualifications I raised in the prior section, changes in the federal funds rate have a reasonably well-understood impact on the real economy, at least most of the time.What about the role of the federal funds rate when the real economy is performing smartly but financial markets are functioning with exceptionally low volatility, and liquidity and credit spreads are extremely narrow? In these periods, the relationship between the federal funds rate and real activity is more difficult to decipher. If abundant credit availability is perpetuated by investor overconfidence, I would submit, policymakers may need to target a higher federal funds rate than otherwise to help the economy attain a sustainable equilibrium. That is, a federal funds rate that is satisfactory in times of normal market functioning may turn out be lower than required to ensure that the economy performs at potential through the horizon. Making that judgment represents an important, but difficult task for policymakers.And how about when the real economy is operating below-trend in large part because financial markets are impaired, many financial intermediaries are undercapitalized, and risk and liquidity premiums are large and especially volatile? What happens when banks and other financial institutions that stand between the Fed and the real economy restrict the supply of credit beyond that implied by higher premiums or, potentially, economic fundamentals? Should markedly higher doses of monetary medicine (read: lower rates) be proffered to compensate fully for the reduced efficacy of the transmission channels?Financial turmoil lowers real activity expected to accompany a given level of the federal funds rate. Such a development is equivalent to a fall in the neutral rate. But policymakers should recognize that financial market turmoil is not a garden-variety shock to output. It is different than, say, a demand shock caused by a change in exports. Financial market turmoil can lower output growthandlimit the efficacy of the transmission mechanism concurrently. The federal funds rate, I maintain, will generally need to be lowered, and by more than in normal circumstances, to achieve an operative monetary policy rate that helps to restore the economy expeditiously to equilibrium. But policymakers need to think carefully about two issues: the degree of reduction in the federal funds rate and the pace at which the rate returns to normal. The prudence of these moves in the funds rate may ultimately depend on one's diagnosis of what ails the real economy, the risk to that diagnosis, expected benefits of changes in wealth and the cost of capital to businesses and households, and the effect of a lower federal funds rate on the sum of credit availability to the real economy. Of no less importance, it may depend on policymakers' judgment on tradeoffs with other critical policy objectives. More on that to come.The differing nature of these infrequent episodes of financial turmoil makes it difficult to place great confidence in available econometric evidence. Almost by definition, there are few historical precedents that might usefully guide forecasts of aggregate demand and supply. My favorite saw of this period has it about right: If you have seen one financial crisis, you have seen one financial crisis. So, by necessity, policymakers must make judgments about how the crisis will unfold. Economics, and the conduct of monetary policy, after all, is not physics.10At least it isn't yet. Still, a strong case for a forward-looking approach to monetary policy in these episodes seems compelling. Waiting for the effects of the turmoil to reveal themselves in spending and production data before policy action, as in an unadjusted Taylor rule approach, could risk prolonged weakness.On Monetary Policy…in Times of Inflation RisksUp to this point, I focused almost exclusively on the conduct of monetary policy in a non-inflationary environment. But we cannot assume inflation concerns away. Determining appropriate policy necessarily involves more than figuring out the neutral real federal funds rate. This reality is especially obvious at present. Inflation has been elevated for some time and prices of commodities are surging. I find these trends particularly vexing at a time when global demand growth, most likely, has slowed.Concerns about price stability and concerns about the real economy may conflict with one another in the short run. These short-run tensions arise, for example, if shocks to energy prices hit the economy, boosting overall inflation while simultaneously weakening output and employment. In the medium and long run, the Fed's dual objectives are not in conflict. Investment, productivity, and real economic growth fare best in an environment of low and stable inflation. Central banks that ignore this lesson invariably pay a substantial cost, both economic and reputational.My ode to humility would not be complete without acknowledging our imperfect understanding of the mooring of inflation expectations. Survey measures suggest that long-run inflation expectations have remained quite stable since the mid-1990s. This stability is due, in substantial measure, to our predecessors' success in bringing inflation under control after the 1970s. We cannot be certain, however, about the durability of this legacy. If a central bank enjoys a high degree of credibility with its stakeholders, the anchoring of inflation expectations gives policymakers some scope for supporting real activity in the face of adverse shocks. But, such a strategy poses risks. If the Fed were deemed too accommodative for too long, credibility could be undermined, threatening to create a persistent inflation problem that would have to be corrected, no doubt at great cost. The public couldmistakenlysee the stance of policy as a sign that our commitment to long-term price stability has wavered. That is not a perception we will countenance.The inflation news since last summer offers little solace. Oil prices are near record levels, food prices have risen rapidly, prices for a wide range of commodities are up, and dollar depreciation is among the causes pushing up import prices. Some indicators of expected long-run inflation have also risen. Given changes in investor preferences for risk-free assets amid the market turmoil, I take less signal from the seemingly satisfactory signals derived from spreads between Treasury securities and comparable Treasury inflation-protected securities.No fair recitation of inflation risks, however, should neglect the seeming steady state of core inflation. It is running at about the same pace as a year ago, and wage growth appears unlikely to accelerate. Moreover, if commodity prices level out as markets expect, prospects seem decent for a gradual moderation in inflation over time. Nonetheless, futures markets assessments of these prices have been wrong for awhile. As a result, a benign forecast for inflation carries considerable upside risk.On Monetary Policy…in Times of Possible Paradigm ShiftWe should be reminded that a country's macroeconomy is established by the microeconomic decisions of millions of individuals on the front lines of real business and consumption. Adaptation, dynamism, and flexibility are watchwords of a successful economy, but they test the capability of public authorities to encourage, measure, and incorporate. Here again, Munger, my preferred investment pro, offers a final lesson applicable to the crafting of monetary policy: Resist the tendency to overweight what can be counted and thereby underweight factors that are more important.11If the flexibility and resiliency of our labor, product, and capital markets change materially--resulting from some new policy consensus on trade policies, tax policies, or regulatory policies--the economy's potential would assuredly be affected. These changes are hard to incorporate into monetary policy, but that should not distract us from their importance. No surprise, then, that the determination of the proper level of the real federal funds rate continues to be subject to considerable debate.The Fed, of course, is not the only monetary policy maker of consequence in a globally integrated economy. Our counterparts, particularly among our major trading partners, bring their own prudential policy prescriptions to bear based on their judgments on the contours of their real economies, financial markets, and inflation risks. We should expect nothing else. Some argue that a new paradigm of global economic growth is at hand and that traditional engines of growth like the United States are stalling, but the effects on the world's other major economies will be of little consequence. Whether the economies of the rest of the world have successfully decoupled from the United States is a judgment we will have to leave to the economic historians. What I do believe, however, is that our financial markets at the center of this turmoil have not decoupled, not even a little bit. In fact, our financial institutions and financial markets have never been more integrated. Policy differences, thus, should not be taken lightly.ConclusionIn my judgment, the changes in credit availability during the past six years have less to do with the prevailing stance of policy and more to do with changes in financial markets and financial intermediaries. Returning the economy to equilibrium requires actions more befitting than changes in the federal funds rate alone. The lending facilities created and employed by the Fed are likely proving useful in this regard. Increasing liquidity by having a central bank lower the federal funds rate can reduce the risk of a more severe financial crisis, but is imperfectly suited to compensate for declines in liquidity arising from retrenchment in the financial sector for long periods.12As policymakers, we strive to distill truths about how the conduct of monetary policy, the transmission mechanism of financial markets, and other determinants--domestic and foreign--affect real economic activity. In my remarks today, I tried to expound not only on what we know, but also on what we don't. Successful economies are dynamic and flexible. Their citizens respond to changes in policy preferences, financial conditions, and global forces. Central bankers must seek a better understanding of an economy's changing fundamentals, distilling lessons learned and aspiring to reduce monetary policy to a science. In the interim, the art of monetary policy rightly will predominate.Footnotes1.The opinions I am expressing are my own and do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.Nellie LiangandDave Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text2.Milton Friedman (1968), "The Role of Monetary Policy,"American Economic Review, vol. 58 (March), pp. 1-17; Edmund S. Phelps (2008), "Our Uncertain Economy,"Wall Street Journal, March 14.Return to text3.Charles T. Munger (2003),"Academic Economics: Strengths and Faults After Considering Interdisciplinary Needs," Herb Kay Undergraduate Lecture delivered at the Economics Department, University of California, Santa Barbara, October 3.Return to text4.Kevin Warsh (2008), "Financial Market Turmoil and the Federal Reserve: The Plot Thickens," speech delivered at theNew York University School of Law Global Economic Policy Forum, New York, April 14.Return to text5.A physicist, a chemist, and an economist are shipwrecked on a desert island. Starving, they find a case of canned vegetables washed up on the beach, but they cannot locate a can opener. They consider possible solutions. The physicist says: "I've got it. We find a rock and propel it at the lid of the can at, oh, 40 meters per second at an angle of 82 degrees." The chemist thinks for awhile and responds: "No, let's weaken the can's seams with an acid made from decaying leaves, and then heat the can until the internal pressure is enough to burst it open." The economist merely shakes his head at his compatriots and says in a condescending tone: "Gentlemen, gentlemen, I have a much more elegant solution. Let's assume we have a can-opener..."Return to text6.John Taylor, professor and confidante, originally presented the construct for what later became known as the Taylor rule at a Carnegie-Rochester conference in the early 1990s; see John B. Taylor (1993), "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39, pp. 195-214, http://econpapers.repec.org/article/eeecrcspp .Return to text7.The real funds rate prescribed by the Taylor rule also would not depend on inflation, obviously, if inflation were at its desired level. This does not mean, however, that a Taylor rule policy would replicate the neutral rate. While the neutral rate depends in part on current resource utilization, it also depends on all of the other factors influencing the trajectory for the real economy. Thus, the two approaches can sometimes suggest quite different policies, even if inflation is not an issue. That said, both the Taylor rule and the forward-looking strategy will tend to prescribe similar movements in the real funds rate over the course of the business cycle.Return to text8.See Munger (2003) in footnote 3.Return to text9.This is due in part to an increase in the value of financial institution balance sheets and collateral that can be pledged to back loans.Return to text10.Kevin Warsh (2007), "The End of History?" speech delivered at the New York Association for Business Economics, New York, November 7.Return to text11.See Munger (2003) in footnote 3.Return to text12.In my view, only when private financial agents resume their role as the primary source of liquidity in markets will proper credit market functioning and support for economic growth be restored. (See Warsh (2008) in footnote 4.)Return to text Thanks in no small measure to the scores of professionals long found in the four walls of the Federal Reserve System--and ample access to information--the Fed possesses both the commitment and resources to tackle these policy challenges. And, by virtue of the Fed's institutional credibility, bequeathed to today's Federal Open Market Committee by its predecessors, the policy response tends to be as highly anticipated as it is consequential. But in affirming our formidable assets, it is similarly not my intention to suggest that we have devised error-free policies to painlessly and smoothly achieve agreed-upon objectives. On Monetary Policy…TodayThe Fed is not omniscient. Neither are our tools uniquely and perfectly suited to ensure that the ills of yesterday do not recur. Nor can we guarantee that our policy response alone will set the economy on a steady and obvious path to unequalled prosperity. We run serious risks if we overstate our knowledge or overplay our hand. Look no further than the financial wizards in the financial sector recently who were convinced that risks were manageable and returns exponential. Milton Friedman reminded us long ago, and Edmund Phelps more recently, of the "consequences of conceit."2For all that has been learned about the practice of monetary policy, we must be mindful of the dangers of purporting to know more than we do about the relationship between central bank policies and the real economy. Humility, thus, is a particularly important attribute for a central banker, particularly when financial markets and financial intermediaries--through which the effects of monetary policy flow to the real economy--find themselves at a crossroads. Starting in August, my fellow Fed policymakers and I persistently subjected ourselves to the age-old dialectic in determining the breadth and depth of our policy response: What do we know? What do we think we know--that is, what do we suspect? What can't we know? And, perhaps most important, in light of various forms of uncertainty: What should we do about it? The more we asked ourselves these questions during this period of extraordinary tumult, the more we recognized the need to broaden our policy response beyond monetary policy's blunt traditional tool. Changes in the policy rate affect many sectors, not just those that seem out of balance. Charlie Munger, the under-heralded partner of the "Oracle of Omaha," Warren Buffett (perhaps comprising the finest investment team of the last half-century), believes that economics remains a rather insular field of practice. He seems to delight in accusing the economics profession of suffering from "Man with a Hammer Syndrome." He recounts, "[T]o the man with only a hammer, every problem looks pretty much like a nail."3I suspect Munger feels similarly about the orthodoxy of monetary policy. Consistent with Munger's admonition, the Fed saw it necessary to expand our toolkit beyond the proverbial hammer of the policy rate in the last nine months. And as I discussed in remarks last month, the Fed's nontraditional policy response included the use of innovative liquidity tools to counter the market turmoil and improve the functioning of financial and credit markets.4 In my remarks today, I would like to discuss the use of the hammer--the setting of the federal funds rate--particularly in extraordinary times. Of course, determining the proper level of the federal funds rate is rarely simple, given typical imprecision on key economic variables and relationships. It is far more challenging still when the financial architecture is in the early stages of redesign, the economy is adjusting to the aftermath of a credit bubble (witnessed most acutely in the housing markets), and inflation risks are evident. The Federal Reserve has employed the hammer with considerable force in the last nine months, lowering the federal funds rate by 3-1/4 percentage points, with wide-ranging implications for the economy. Of substantial import, we have filled the toolkit with other implements to provide liquidity and improve the provisioning of credit during the turmoil. But now, policymakers may be well served encouraging a new financial architecture to emerge, aided, in part, by the actions we have taken. Even if the economy were to weaken somewhat further, we should be inclined to resist expected, reflexive calls to trot out the hammer again. Policy actions should reinforce the notion with stakeholders that further hammering needs to be done, but it needs to be accomplished by the financial institutions themselves in retooling their businesses and rebuilding the credit channel to help ensure a stronger, more durable economy. Private financial institutions should raise substantial capital, reconstitute business models, and take other actions to reinvigorate the principal transmission channel of monetary policy. These private efforts are critical to improving market functioning, and until this process is more advanced, the economy is unlikely, in my view, to return to sustainable trend-rate growth. We at the Fed have taken action to help foster this curative process to improve the real economy, but market participants will ultimately determine its speed and success. On Monetary Policy…GenerallyThe Fed is charged with promoting price stability and maximum sustainable employment. Stakeholders advocate various strategies for achieving these objectives. In recent years, most central banks have elected to adjust the policy rate in response to changing economic conditions to achieve their goals. A key question for central bankers under this approach: What level of the policy rate would bring real activity in line with its potential? In gauging this value, a central banker seeks to be forward-looking because monetary policy influences real activity with considerable lag. The same consideration applies to assessing the effect of policy actions on inflation. For analytical purposes only, let's assume that we are in a world where inflation is running well within acceptable levels and that the central bank and stakeholders have ultimate conviction it will remain as such. This, of course, smacks of the old joke about economists and can-openers.5I'll revisit this heroic assumption later in my remarks. But with the assumption in mind, monetary policy can focus on the real side of the economy. The Taylor rule provides a convenient rule-of-thumb for setting monetary policy.6The rule posits that the appropriate setting of the real federal funds rate incorporates three components. The first component is the economy's natural rate of interest. This is the real federal funds rate consistent with output equal to potential, on average, over the medium- to long-run. If policymakers set the real federal funds rate at this level, the Fed would be neither artificially boosting nor restricting the real economy over long periods. Holding the federal funds rate at the natural rate, however, may yield an undesirably slow return of real activity to normal, particularly if shocks have a persistent effect on aggregate demand and supply. To expedite the process, the Taylor rule adds a second component to the real federal funds rate, one that purports to be proportional to the size of the current output gap. By setting the real federal funds rate below the natural rate when resource utilization is loose--and, correspondingly, above the natural rate when resource utilization is tight--policy purports to help move the real economy back to normal at a speedier pace. The third component responds to the gap between actual inflation and its desired rate, pushing real rates up when inflation is too high and pushing rates down when inflation is too low. The Taylor rule provides a reasonable description of actual monetary policy behavior on average over the past 20 years. The reasonably good macroeconomic performance of this period suggests that central banks should pay some heed to its prescriptions. By design, however, the Taylor rule focuses largely on what can be observed in real-time, without accounting for some factors that influence monetary policy. For example, policymakers may try to peer, however imperfectly, into the future when setting the federal funds rate rather than responding solely to the current state of the economy. Some central bankers find this more forward-looking approach to be particularly appealing when financial market prices and other high-frequency indicators suggest that the economy is poised to change direction markedly. To implement a forward-looking strategy, a policymaker could seek to forecast the average level of the real federal funds rate consistent with the economy either approximating or expeditiously returning to potential. Such a neutral rate thus might equilibrate the real economy over the next two or three years. Then, in our hypothetical example where inflation is stable at desired levels, the neutral rate would be a sufficient guide for monetary policy.7 The wisdom of emphasizing a forward-looking strategy over the Taylor rule approach may depend in part on policymakers' forecasting acumen. To estimate the neutral rate, central bankers must forecast how the forces affecting aggregate demand and supply will reconcile during the forecast period. Moreover, policymakers must project how changes in the federal funds rate--past and anticipated--will interact with asset prices, credit provision, and real-side variables. Under the best of circumstances, these forecasts are subject to meaningful uncertainty. Thus, peering into the future and acting on what wethinkwe see will invariably lead to some mistakes, certainly with the benefit of hindsight. Ignoring the future altogether, however, hardly seems the wisest course. Moreover, the Taylor rule approach does not remove uncertainty. Consider the natural rate of interest, a key element in the rule. This rate depends on many things--worldwide saving and investment propensities, the achievable trend growth rate of the economy, the natural rate of unemployment, and the state of financial markets and financial intermediation. Some of these factors may be measurable; others can only be estimated indirectly. And many of these estimates demand a judgment about the path of non-monetary policy factors that will almost assuredly change over time. Moreover, policymakers need to grapple with uncertainty from error in real-time estimates of real gross domestic product and estimates of potential output. The key for policymakers, of course, is to recognize these uncertainties that, if misunderstood or miscalculated, could lead to policy errors. Munger, the proud non-economist, recounts another lesson born of his investment career that I find particularly heartening in considering the calculation of the neutral rate: Avoid the error of false precision.8Most monetary policy frameworks, while fiercely debated in the academy, tend to suffer from a common and unavoidable weakness--relying on provisional estimates in a complex and uncertain world. This weakness argues in favor of being persistently inquisitive in search of a keener understanding of the economy. This consideration applies to the making of monetary policy in normal times; in times of turmoil, the case for humility is stronger. On Monetary Policy…in Times of Financial Market TurmoilThe Fed sets monetary policy to support the real economy through several important channels. In times of financial market turmoil, policymakers like me are especially focused on disruptions in the so-called credit channel. After all, much of the Fed's policy prescriptions are carried out through financial intermediaries--commercial banks, investment banks, others--to affect the real economy. When the economy is operating below-trend, so long as financial markets are functioning well, a lower federal funds rate can encourage lending by financial institutions to bolster the real economy.9Hence, the Fed typically establishes the federal funds rate in anticipation of a customary market response, returning output to potential within a reasonable period, as well as to achieve its price objectives. In normal times, then, the neutral rate is equivalent to the real federal funds rate that incorporates typical transmission effects and normal market functioning. Thus, subject to the qualifications I raised in the prior section, changes in the federal funds rate have a reasonably well-understood impact on the real economy, at least most of the time. What about the role of the federal funds rate when the real economy is performing smartly but financial markets are functioning with exceptionally low volatility, and liquidity and credit spreads are extremely narrow? In these periods, the relationship between the federal funds rate and real activity is more difficult to decipher. If abundant credit availability is perpetuated by investor overconfidence, I would submit, policymakers may need to target a higher federal funds rate than otherwise to help the economy attain a sustainable equilibrium. That is, a federal funds rate that is satisfactory in times of normal market functioning may turn out be lower than required to ensure that the economy performs at potential through the horizon. Making that judgment represents an important, but difficult task for policymakers. And how about when the real economy is operating below-trend in large part because financial markets are impaired, many financial intermediaries are undercapitalized, and risk and liquidity premiums are large and especially volatile? What happens when banks and other financial institutions that stand between the Fed and the real economy restrict the supply of credit beyond that implied by higher premiums or, potentially, economic fundamentals? Should markedly higher doses of monetary medicine (read: lower rates) be proffered to compensate fully for the reduced efficacy of the transmission channels? Financial turmoil lowers real activity expected to accompany a given level of the federal funds rate. Such a development is equivalent to a fall in the neutral rate. But policymakers should recognize that financial market turmoil is not a garden-variety shock to output. It is different than, say, a demand shock caused by a change in exports. Financial market turmoil can lower output growthandlimit the efficacy of the transmission mechanism concurrently. The federal funds rate, I maintain, will generally need to be lowered, and by more than in normal circumstances, to achieve an operative monetary policy rate that helps to restore the economy expeditiously to equilibrium. But policymakers need to think carefully about two issues: the degree of reduction in the federal funds rate and the pace at which the rate returns to normal. The prudence of these moves in the funds rate may ultimately depend on one's diagnosis of what ails the real economy, the risk to that diagnosis, expected benefits of changes in wealth and the cost of capital to businesses and households, and the effect of a lower federal funds rate on the sum of credit availability to the real economy. Of no less importance, it may depend on policymakers' judgment on tradeoffs with other critical policy objectives. More on that to come. The differing nature of these infrequent episodes of financial turmoil makes it difficult to place great confidence in available econometric evidence. Almost by definition, there are few historical precedents that might usefully guide forecasts of aggregate demand and supply. My favorite saw of this period has it about right: If you have seen one financial crisis, you have seen one financial crisis. So, by necessity, policymakers must make judgments about how the crisis will unfold. Economics, and the conduct of monetary policy, after all, is not physics.10At least it isn't yet. Still, a strong case for a forward-looking approach to monetary policy in these episodes seems compelling. Waiting for the effects of the turmoil to reveal themselves in spending and production data before policy action, as in an unadjusted Taylor rule approach, could risk prolonged weakness. On Monetary Policy…in Times of Inflation RisksUp to this point, I focused almost exclusively on the conduct of monetary policy in a non-inflationary environment. But we cannot assume inflation concerns away. Determining appropriate policy necessarily involves more than figuring out the neutral real federal funds rate. This reality is especially obvious at present. Inflation has been elevated for some time and prices of commodities are surging. I find these trends particularly vexing at a time when global demand growth, most likely, has slowed. Concerns about price stability and concerns about the real economy may conflict with one another in the short run. These short-run tensions arise, for example, if shocks to energy prices hit the economy, boosting overall inflation while simultaneously weakening output and employment. In the medium and long run, the Fed's dual objectives are not in conflict. Investment, productivity, and real economic growth fare best in an environment of low and stable inflation. Central banks that ignore this lesson invariably pay a substantial cost, both economic and reputational. My ode to humility would not be complete without acknowledging our imperfect understanding of the mooring of inflation expectations. Survey measures suggest that long-run inflation expectations have remained quite stable since the mid-1990s. This stability is due, in substantial measure, to our predecessors' success in bringing inflation under control after the 1970s. We cannot be certain, however, about the durability of this legacy. If a central bank enjoys a high degree of credibility with its stakeholders, the anchoring of inflation expectations gives policymakers some scope for supporting real activity in the face of adverse shocks. But, such a strategy poses risks. If the Fed were deemed too accommodative for too long, credibility could be undermined, threatening to create a persistent inflation problem that would have to be corrected, no doubt at great cost. The public couldmistakenlysee the stance of policy as a sign that our commitment to long-term price stability has wavered. That is not a perception we will countenance. The inflation news since last summer offers little solace. Oil prices are near record levels, food prices have risen rapidly, prices for a wide range of commodities are up, and dollar depreciation is among the causes pushing up import prices. Some indicators of expected long-run inflation have also risen. Given changes in investor preferences for risk-free assets amid the market turmoil, I take less signal from the seemingly satisfactory signals derived from spreads between Treasury securities and comparable Treasury inflation-protected securities. No fair recitation of inflation risks, however, should neglect the seeming steady state of core inflation. It is running at about the same pace as a year ago, and wage growth appears unlikely to accelerate. Moreover, if commodity prices level out as markets expect, prospects seem decent for a gradual moderation in inflation over time. Nonetheless, futures markets assessments of these prices have been wrong for awhile. As a result, a benign forecast for inflation carries considerable upside risk. On Monetary Policy…in Times of Possible Paradigm ShiftWe should be reminded that a country's macroeconomy is established by the microeconomic decisions of millions of individuals on the front lines of real business and consumption. Adaptation, dynamism, and flexibility are watchwords of a successful economy, but they test the capability of public authorities to encourage, measure, and incorporate. Here again, Munger, my preferred investment pro, offers a final lesson applicable to the crafting of monetary policy: Resist the tendency to overweight what can be counted and thereby underweight factors that are more important.11If the flexibility and resiliency of our labor, product, and capital markets change materially--resulting from some new policy consensus on trade policies, tax policies, or regulatory policies--the economy's potential would assuredly be affected. These changes are hard to incorporate into monetary policy, but that should not distract us from their importance. No surprise, then, that the determination of the proper level of the real federal funds rate continues to be subject to considerable debate. The Fed, of course, is not the only monetary policy maker of consequence in a globally integrated economy. Our counterparts, particularly among our major trading partners, bring their own prudential policy prescriptions to bear based on their judgments on the contours of their real economies, financial markets, and inflation risks. We should expect nothing else. Some argue that a new paradigm of global economic growth is at hand and that traditional engines of growth like the United States are stalling, but the effects on the world's other major economies will be of little consequence. Whether the economies of the rest of the world have successfully decoupled from the United States is a judgment we will have to leave to the economic historians. What I do believe, however, is that our financial markets at the center of this turmoil have not decoupled, not even a little bit. In fact, our financial institutions and financial markets have never been more integrated. Policy differences, thus, should not be taken lightly. ConclusionIn my judgment, the changes in credit availability during the past six years have less to do with the prevailing stance of policy and more to do with changes in financial markets and financial intermediaries. Returning the economy to equilibrium requires actions more befitting than changes in the federal funds rate alone. The lending facilities created and employed by the Fed are likely proving useful in this regard. Increasing liquidity by having a central bank lower the federal funds rate can reduce the risk of a more severe financial crisis, but is imperfectly suited to compensate for declines in liquidity arising from retrenchment in the financial sector for long periods.12 As policymakers, we strive to distill truths about how the conduct of monetary policy, the transmission mechanism of financial markets, and other determinants--domestic and foreign--affect real economic activity. In my remarks today, I tried to expound not only on what we know, but also on what we don't. Successful economies are dynamic and flexible. Their citizens respond to changes in policy preferences, financial conditions, and global forces. Central bankers must seek a better understanding of an economy's changing fundamentals, distilling lessons learned and aspiring to reduce monetary policy to a science. In the interim, the art of monetary policy rightly will predominate. Footnotes 1.The opinions I am expressing are my own and do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.Nellie LiangandDave Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, provided valuable contributions to these remarks.Return to text 2.Milton Friedman (1968), "The Role of Monetary Policy,"American Economic Review, vol. 58 (March), pp. 1-17; Edmund S. Phelps (2008), "Our Uncertain Economy,"Wall Street Journal, March 14.Return to text 3.Charles T. Munger (2003),"Academic Economics: Strengths and Faults After Considering Interdisciplinary Needs," Herb Kay Undergraduate Lecture delivered at the Economics Department, University of California, Santa Barbara, October 3.Return to text 4.Kevin Warsh (2008), "Financial Market Turmoil and the Federal Reserve: The Plot Thickens," speech delivered at theNew York University School of Law Global Economic Policy Forum, New York, April 14.Return to text 5.A physicist, a chemist, and an economist are shipwrecked on a desert island. Starving, they find a case of canned vegetables washed up on the beach, but they cannot locate a can opener. They consider possible solutions. The physicist says: "I've got it. We find a rock and propel it at the lid of the can at, oh, 40 meters per second at an angle of 82 degrees." The chemist thinks for awhile and responds: "No, let's weaken the can's seams with an acid made from decaying leaves, and then heat the can until the internal pressure is enough to burst it open." The economist merely shakes his head at his compatriots and says in a condescending tone: "Gentlemen, gentlemen, I have a much more elegant solution. Let's assume we have a can-opener..."Return to text 6.John Taylor, professor and confidante, originally presented the construct for what later became known as the Taylor rule at a Carnegie-Rochester conference in the early 1990s; see John B. Taylor (1993), "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39, pp. 195-214, http://econpapers.repec.org/article/eeecrcspp .Return to text 7.The real funds rate prescribed by the Taylor rule also would not depend on inflation, obviously, if inflation were at its desired level. This does not mean, however, that a Taylor rule policy would replicate the neutral rate. While the neutral rate depends in part on current resource utilization, it also depends on all of the other factors influencing the trajectory for the real economy. Thus, the two approaches can sometimes suggest quite different policies, even if inflation is not an issue. That said, both the Taylor rule and the forward-looking strategy will tend to prescribe similar movements in the real funds rate over the course of the business cycle.Return to text 8.See Munger (2003) in footnote 3.Return to text 9.This is due in part to an increase in the value of financial institution balance sheets and collateral that can be pledged to back loans.Return to text 10.Kevin Warsh (2007), "The End of History?" speech delivered at the New York Association for Business Economics, New York, November 7.Return to text 11.See Munger (2003) in footnote 3.Return to text 12.In my view, only when private financial agents resume their role as the primary source of liquidity in markets will proper credit market functioning and support for economic growth be restored. (See Warsh (2008) in footnote 4.)Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among First Bank of Snook, Snook, Texas, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, and the State of Texas Department of Banking.A copy of the Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Integrity Bancshares, Inc., Alpharetta, Georgia, a registered bank holding company that owns and controls Integrity Bank, Alpharetta, Georgia, a state chartered nonmember bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and the Banking Commissioner of the State of Georgia.A copy of the Agreement is attached.