The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application filed by First National Bank Group, Inc., Edinburg, to acquire up to 9.9 percent of the voting shares and control of Southside Bancshares, Incorporated, Tyler, both in Texas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the proposal by Frandsen Financial Corporation, Arden Hills, Minnesota, to acquire First National Bank of Montgomery, Montgomery, Minnesota.Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the proposal by Royal Bank of Canada, Montreal, Canada, and its subsidiary bank holding companies to acquire Alabama National BanCorporation, Birmingham, Alabama, and its subsidiary banks. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board announced Wednesday that the Consumer Advisory Council will hold its next meeting on Thursday, March 6. The meeting will take place in Dining Room E, Terrace Level, in the Board’s Martin Building. The session will begin at 9:00 a.m. and is open to the public. Anyone planning to attend the meeting should, for security purposes, register no later than Tuesday, March 4, by completing the form found online at: https://www.federalreserve.gov/secure/forms/cacregistration.cfm. Additionally, attendees must present photo identification to enter the building. The Council’s function is to advise the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under various consumer financial services laws and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics: Reports by committees and other matters initiated by the Council members may also be discussed. The Board invites comments from the public on any of these matters. The Board’s notice is attached. Federal Register Notice52 KB PDF|TEXT
Patrick M. Parkinson, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance, and Government Sponsored Enterprises, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Kanjorski, Ranking Member Pryce, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the potential effects on financial stability of further financial deterioration and ratings downgrades of financial guarantors. Role of the Financial Guarantors in the Financial SystemThe nine U.S. companies whose business focuses on providing insurance against credit defaults together insure about $2-1/2 trillion of domestic and international securities. Historically, they focused on insuring the timely payment of principal and interest on U.S. municipal bonds. This remains a very important business line. Indeed, as of September 30, 2007, the guarantors insured about $1-1/2 trillion of such bonds, more than half of all U.S. municipal bonds outstanding. The vast majority of the underlying bonds were rated investment grade. However, insurance from AAA-rated guarantors raised the ratings of the insured bonds to AAA, which lowered interest costs to the issuers and made the bonds attractive to a wider range of investors. In recent years the financial guarantors expanded rapidly into insuring asset-backed securities (ABS), especially collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). By September 30, 2007, they had guaranteed more than $1 trillion of ABS, including over $700 billion of U.S. ABS. The U.S. ABS included about $200 billion of U.S. residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) and securities backed by home-equity loans and about $125 billion of CDOs collateralized by ABS (CDOs of ABS) that contained U.S. subprime RMBS. In addition, they have guaranteed more than $300 billion of U.S. and international corporate CDOs. In the case of CDOs, the guarantors typically used credit derivative contracts to insure the super senior tranches. That is, they insured securities that would suffer credit losses only if the losses on the underlying collateral were so severe that all other tranches, including some tranches rated AAA, were wiped out. The possibility of such severe credit losses was seen as remote, and these securities indeed have suffered little or no credit losses to date. However, in the case of CDOs collateralized by subprime RMBS that were originated between late 2005 and 2007, the possibility of loss is no longer seen as remote. In many cases, super senior tranches of such CDOs of ABS are trading at substantial discounts to par value. The growing possibility of credit losses on these securities has caused some of the guarantors to report financial losses and the rating agencies to require those guarantors to raise capital to maintain or regain their AAA ratings. Those guarantors reportedly are exploring various options for bolstering their financial strength, but it is not clear that all of them will succeed. Thus, it is well worth thinking through how further downgrades of some guarantors' credit ratings might affect overall financial stability. Channels Through Which Financial Stability Might Be Adversely AffectedSuch downgrades might adversely affect financial stability through several channels. These include: (1) the potential for disruptions to municipal bond markets, (2) potential losses and liquidity pressures on banks and securities firms that have exposures to the guarantors, and (3) the potential for further erosion of investor confidence in financial markets generally. Further downgrades at some guarantors could spark a retreat from the municipal bond market by some retail and institutional investors. Of particular concern is the potential for disruptions to the markets for short-term securities based on municipal and other tax-exempt debt. In recent years, heavy demand for short-term securities, especially from money market funds and other short-term investment pools, has generated a large market for facilities that transform long-term, tax-exempt bonds into short-term securities. These short-term securities include "tender option bonds" and "variable-rate demand obligations," which typically have credit support from one of the guarantors and liquidity support from a large bank or security firm, and "auction rate securities," which often have credit support from a guarantor, but no explicit liquidity support. If guarantors are downgraded to below AA-, many money funds will be required to put tender option bonds and variable demand obligations back to the liquidity providers. Investors may also choose to put securities back in advance of potential downgrades. Indeed, some money market funds reportedly have already exercised this option with respect to securities insured by those guarantors with significant exposure to CDOs of subprime RMBS. Finally, earlier this week there was a rash of failures of auctions for student loan auction rate securities (ARS). Although largely unrelated to concerns about financial guarantors, this development undermined confidence in ARS generally, and subsequently quite a few auctions for municipal ARS have failed. It appears that financial stress at the guarantors has restrained municipal bond issuance in recent weeks, though these effects are difficult to disentangle from the effects of tighter budgets for many municipalities. A deepening concern about the financial condition of some of the guarantors could at least temporarily limit the availability of credit and increase the cost of funding for some lower-rated or smaller municipalities. Over time, however, funding for those municipalities would be restored as the downgraded firms were replaced by the surviving healthy firms and by new entrants. As has been widely reported, a large, well-capitalized insurance group recently has opened a company that has been licensed to enter the business of insuring municipal bonds. U.S. banks' direct exposures to losses from downgrades of guarantors' ratings appear to be moderate relative to the banks' capital. Although some securities firms also have such exposures, I will leave assessment of the magnitude of those exposures to the witness from the Securities and Exchange Commission. Banks hold large amounts of municipal bonds in their investment portfolios, but the actual risk exposure is far smaller. As noted previously, the guarantors typically have insured only investment-grade municipal debt. Thus, the credit risk of the underlying securities is low, even without insurance. Likewise, as noted previously, some banks could be obligated to purchase at par tender option bonds and variable-rate demand obligations that have been downgraded as a result of problems at the financial guarantors. Banks may also feel compelled by reputational concerns to purchase ARS that they have marketed to investors, even though they have no legal obligation to do so. Here again, however, losses to the banks would be limited by the relatively strong credit quality of the underlying bonds. Of greater concern is the potential for losses at banks that have hedged their holdings of super senior tranches of CDOs of ABS with credit protection purchased from the guarantors. These hedges lose value when the financial condition of the guarantors deteriorates. In fact, many banks already have written down the value of their hedges significantly to reflect the market view that some guarantors may not meet their obligations on the protection they sold to the banks. Thus, further downgrades of the guarantors may not necessarily require those banks to write down the value of their hedges significantly further. However, as long as the concerns about the ability of some guarantors to meet their obligations persist, any further declines in the value of the banks' holdings of CDOs of ABS will not be fully offset by increases in the value of their hedges. Even if banks' losses from exposures to the guarantors are moderate relative to capital, banks could experience significant balance sheet and liquidity pressures if they take significant volumes of tender option bonds, variable-rate demand obligations, or ARS onto their balance sheets. The banks that have these exposures are currently well capitalized. However, if these banks take on significant-enough volumes of such securities, the resulting downward pressure on capital ratios might prompt some of them to raise additional capital or constrain somewhat the growth of their balance sheets to ensure that they remain well capitalized. Efforts to constrain the growth of their balance sheets could be reflected in somewhat tighter credit standards and terms for a variety of bank borrowers, including households and businesses. Many banks already have tightened lending standards and terms, likely in part because of balance sheet pressures associated with recent turmoil in financial markets. Further tightening would add to the financial headwinds that the economy already is encountering. In addition to the direct effects of stress at financial guarantors on the municipal bond markets and banks, stress at guarantors could have adverse indirect effects on investor confidence in the financial markets generally. Investors could demand higher risk premiums for holding financial assets, which would place downward pressure on asset prices. If the drop in confidence was sudden, asset markets could become less liquid and asset prices could become more volatile. These effects would increase market risks and counterparty credit risks to banks and other financial market participants, which could prompt a pullback from risk-taking. However, a sudden drop in confidence seems unlikely. Financial market participants seem well aware of the difficulties the guarantors are facing and of the potential for further ratings downgrades. Indeed, spreads on credit default swaps for several of the guarantors exceed 1,000 basis points, which suggests that the market already is expecting further bad news regarding those companies' financial condition. Federal Reserve's Efforts to Monitor and Assess the Effects on Financial StabilityThe Federal Reserve has been carefully monitoring and assessing the channels through which deterioration in the financial condition of the guarantors could adversely affect financial stability. As primary supervisor of state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System and umbrella supervisor for bank holding companies, the Federal Reserve has collected and analyzed information on banking organizations' exposures to the financial guarantors. In these efforts we have worked closely with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, which is the primary supervisor of national banks, including the largest U.S. banks. We have also shared information with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which is carefully monitoring and assessing the exposures of securities firms, especially the very large securities firms that it supervises on a consolidated basis. We also have been monitoring closely developments in municipal securities markets and in the markets for RMBS and CDOs, from which the principal pressures on the guarantors have originated. More generally, we have been analyzing the underlying causes of the recent financial turmoil and contributing to efforts by the President's Working Group on Financial Markets and the Group of Seven's Financial Stability Forum to develop recommendations for addressing the weaknesses in markets and institutions that the financial turmoil has made evident.
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At East Carolina University's Beta Gamma Sigma Distinguished Lecture Series, Greenville, North Carolina The ultimate purpose of a central bank should be to promote the public good through policies that foster economic prosperity. Research in monetary economics describes this purpose by specifying monetary policy objectives in terms of stabilizing both inflation and economic activity. Indeed, this specification of monetary policy objectives is exactly what is suggested by the dual mandate that the Congress has given to the Federal Reserve to promote both price stability and maximum employment.1 We might worry that, under some circumstances, the objectives of stabilizing inflation and economic activity could conflict, particularly in the short run. However, economic research over the past three decades suggests that such conflicts may not, in fact, be that serious. Indeed, stabilizing inflation and stabilizing economic activity are mutually reinforcing not only in the long run, but in the short run as well. In my remarks today, I would like to outline how economic researchers came to that conclusion, and in so doing, explain why it is so important to achieve and maintain price stability.2 The Long RunBoth economic theory and empirical evidence indicate that the stabilization of inflation promotes stronger economic activity in the long run.3Two principles underlie that conclusion. The first principle is that low inflation is beneficial for economic welfare. Rates of inflation significantly above the low levels of recent years can have serious adverse effects on economic efficiency and hence on output in the long run. The distortions from a moderate to high level of long-run inflation are many. High inflation can cause confusion among households and firms, thereby distorting savings and investment decisions (Lucas, 1972; Briault, 1995; Shafir, Diamond, and Tversky, 1997). The interaction of inflation and the tax code, which is often applied to nominal income, can have adverse effects, especially on the incentive of firms to invest in productive capital (Feldstein, 1997). Infrequent nominal price adjustment implies that high inflation results in distorted relative prices, thereby leading to an inefficient allocation of resources (Woodford, 2003). And high inflation distorts the financial sector as firms and households demand greater protection from inflation’s erosion of the value of cash holdings (English, 1999). The second principle is the lack of a long-run tradeoff between unemployment and the inflation rate. Rather, the long-run Phillips curve is vertical, implying that the economy gravitates to some natural rate of unemployment in the long run no matter what the rate of inflation is (Friedman, 1968; Phelps, 1968).4The natural rate, in turn, is determined by the structure of labor and product markets, including elements such as the ease with which people who lose their jobs can find new employment and the pace at which technological progress creates new industries and occupations while shrinking or eliminating others. Importantly, those structural features of the economy are outside the control of monetary policy. As a result, any attempt by a central bank to keep unemployment below the natural rate would prove fruitless. Such a strategy would only lead to higher inflation that, as the first principle suggests, would lower economic activity and household welfare in the long run. Empirical evidence has starkly demonstrated the adverse effects of high inflation (e.g., see the surveys in Fischer, 1993, and Anderson and Gruen, 1995). In most industrialized countries, the late 1960s to early 1980s was a period during which inflation rose to high levels while economic activity stagnated. While many factors contributed to the improved economic performance of recent decades, policymakers' focus on low and stable inflation was likely an important factor.5 The Short RunAlthough there is no long-run tradeoff between unemployment and inflation, in the short run, expansionary monetary policy that raises inflationcanlower unemployment and raise employment. That is, the short-run Phillips curve isnotvertical. That fact would seem to suggest that achieving the dual goals of price stability and maximum sustainable employment might at times conflict. However, several lines of research provide support for the view that stabilization of inflation and economic activity can be complementary rather than in conflict. Economists have long recognized that some sources of economic fluctuations imply that output stability and inflation stability are mutually reinforcing. Consider a negative shock to aggregate demand (such as a decline in consumer confidence) that causes households to cut spending. The drop in demand leads, in turn, to a decline in actual output relative to its potential--that is, the level of output that the economy can produce at the maximum sustainable level of employment. As a result of increased slack in the economy, future inflation will fall below levels consistent with price stability, and the central bank will pursue an expansionary policy to keep inflation from falling. The expansionary policy will then result in an increase in demand that boosts output toward its potential to return inflation to a level consistent with price stability. Stabilizing output thus stabilizes inflation and vice versa under these conditions. For example, the Federal Reserve reduced its target for the federal funds rate a total of 5-1/2 percentage points during the 2001 recession; that stimulus not only contributed to economic recovery but also helped to avoid an unwelcome decline in inflation below its already low level. At other times, a tightening of the stance of monetary policy has prevented the economy from overheating and generating a boom-bust cycle in the level of employment as well as an undesirable upward spurt of inflation. One critical precondition for effective central-bank easing in response to adverse demand shocks is anchored long-run inflation expectations. Otherwise, lowering short-term interest rates could raise inflation expectations, which might lead to higher, rather than lower, long-term interest rates, thereby depriving monetary policy of one of its key transmission channels for stimulating the economy. The role of expectations illustrates two additional basic principles of monetary policy that help explain why stabilizing inflation helps stabilize economic activity: First, expectations of future policy actions and accompanying economic conditions play a crucial role in determining the effects of current policy actions on the economy. Second, monetary policy is most effective when the central bank is firmly committed, through its actions and statements, to a "nominal anchor"--such as to keeping inflation low and stable. A strong commitment to stabilizing inflation helps anchor inflation expectations so that a central bank will not have to worry that expansionary policy to counter a negative demand shock will lead to a sharp rise in expected inflation--a so-called inflation scare (Goodfriend, 1993, 2005). Such a scare would not only blunt the effects of lower short-term interest rates on real activity but would also push up actual inflation in the future. Thus, a strong commitment to a nominal anchor enables a central bank to react more aggressively to negative demand shocks and, therefore, to prevent rapid declines in employment or output. Unlike demand shocks, which drive inflation and economic activity in the same direction and thus present policymakers with a clear signal for how to adjust policy, supply shocks, such as the increases in the price of energy that we have been experiencing lately, drive inflation and output in opposite directions. In this case, because tightening monetary policy to reduce inflation can lead to lower output, the goal of stabilizing inflation might conflict with the goal of stabilizing economic activity. Here again, a strong, previously established commitment to stabilizing inflation can help stabilize economic activity, because supply shocks, such as a rise in relative energy prices, are likely to have only a temporary effect on inflation in such circumstances. When inflation expectations are well anchored, the central bank does not necessarily need to raise interest rates aggressively to keep inflation under control following an aggregate supply shock. Hence, the commitment to price stability can help avoid imposing unnecessary hardship on workers and the economy more broadly. The experience of recent decades supports the view that a substantial conflict between stabilizing inflation and stabilizing output in response to supply shocks does not arise if inflation expectations are well anchored. The oil shocks in the 1970s caused large increases in inflation not only through their direct effects on household energy prices but also through their "second round" effects on the prices of other goods that reflected, in part, expectations of higher future inflation. Sharp economic downturns followed, driven partly by restrictive monetary policy actions taken in response to the inflation outbreaks. In contrast, the run-up in energy prices since 2003 has had only modest effects on inflation for other goods; as a result, monetary policy has been able to avoid responding precipitously to higher oil prices. More generally, the period from the mid-1960s to the early 1980s was one of relatively high and volatile inflation; at the same time, real activity was very volatile. Since the early 1980s, central banks have put greater weight on achieving low and stable inflation, while during the same period, real activity stabilized appreciably. Many factors were likely at work, but this experience suggests that inflation stabilization does not have to come at the cost of greater volatility of real activity; in fact, it suggests that, by anchoring inflation expectations, low and stable inflation is an important precondition for macroeconomic stability. Research over the past decade using so-called New Keynesian models has added further support to the proposition that inflation stabilization may contribute to stabilizing employment and output at their maximum sustainable levels. This research has also led to a deeper understanding of the benefits of price stability and the setting of monetary policy in response to changes in economic activity and inflation. In particular, research has emphasized the interaction between stabilizing inflation and economic activity and has found that price stability can contribute to overall economic stability in a range of circumstances. The intuition that leads to the conclusion that stabilizing inflation promotes maximum sustainable output and employment is simple, and it holds in a range of economic models whose policy prescriptions have been dubbed the New Neoclassical Synthesis. To begin, the prices of many goods and services adjust infrequently. Accordingly, under general price inflation, the prices of some goods and services are changing while other prices do not, thus distortingrelativeprices between different goods and services. As a consequence, the profitability of producing the various goods and services no longer reflects the relative social costs of producing them, which in turn yields an inefficient allocation of resources. A policy of price stability minimizes those inefficiencies (Goodfriend and King, 1997; Rotemberg and Woodford, 1997; Woodford, 2003). There are several subtleties here. First, in some circumstance, relative pricesshouldchange. For example, the rapid technological advances in the production of information-technology goods witnessed over the past decades mean that the prices of these goods relative to other goods and services should decline, because fewer economic resources are required for their production. Conversely, shifts in the balance between global demand for, and supply of, oil require that relative prices change to achieve an appropriate reallocation of resources--in this case, the reduced use of expensive energy. Thus, the policy prescription refers to stability of the price level as a whole, not to the stability of each individual price. Second, the New Neoclassical Synthesis suggests that only those prices that move sluggishly, referred to as sticky prices, should be stabilized. Indeed, these models indicate that monetary policy should try to get the economy to operate at the same level that would prevail if all prices were flexible--that is, at the so-called natural rate of output or employment. Stabilizing sticky prices helps the economy get close to the theoretical flexible-price equilibrium because it keeps sticky prices from moving away from their appropriate relative level while flexible prices are adjusting to their own appropriate relative level. The New Neoclassical Synthesis, therefore, does not suggest that headline inflation, in which the weight on flexible prices is larger, should be stabilized. For example, to the extent that households directly consume energy goods with flexible prices, such as gasoline, headline inflation should be allowed to increase in response to an oil price shock. At the same time, insofar as energy enters as an input in the production of goods whose prices are sticky, stabilizing the level of sticky prices would require that the increase in energy-intensive goods prices be offset by declines in the prices of other goods. That reasoning suggests that monetary policy should focus on stabilizing a measure of "core" inflation, which is made up mostly of sticky prices. Simulations with FRB/US, the model of the U.S. economy created and maintained by the staff of the Federal Reserve Board (Mishkin, 2007b), illustrate this point. To keep the simulations as simple as possible, I have assumed that the economy begins at full employment with both headline and core inflation at desired levels. The economy is then assumed to experience a shock that raises the world price of oil about $30 per barrel over two years; the shock is assumed to slowly dissipate thereafter. In each of two scenarios, a Taylor rule is assumed to govern the response of the federal funds rate; the only difference between the two scenarios is that in one, the federal funds rate responds to core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation, whereas in the other, it responds to headline PCE inflation.6Figure 1illustrates the results of those two scenarios. The federal funds rate jumps higher and faster when the central bank responds to headline inflation rather than to core inflation, as would be expected (top-left panel). Likewise, responding to headline inflation pushes the unemployment rate markedly higher than otherwise in the early going (top-right panel), and produces an inflation rate that is slightly lower than otherwise, whether measured by core or headline indexes (bottom panels). More important, even for a shock as persistent as this one, the policy response under headline inflation has to be unwound in the sense that the federal funds rate must drop substantially below baseline once the first-round effects of the shock drop out of the inflation data.7 The basic point from these simulations is that monetary policy that responds to headline inflation rather than to core inflation in response to an oil price shock pushes unemployment markedly higher than monetary policy that responds to core inflation. In addition, because this policy has larger swings in the federal funds rate that must be reversed, it leads to more pronounced swings in unemployment. On the other hand, monetary policy that responds to core inflation does not lead to appreciably worse performance on stabilizing inflation than does monetary policy that responds to headline inflation. Stabilizing core inflation, therefore, leads to better economic outcomes than stabilizing headline inflation. Although the simplest sticky-price models imply that stabilizing sticky-price inflation and economic activity are two sides of the same coin, the presence of other frictions besides sticky prices can lead to instances in which completely stabilizing sticky-price inflation would not imply stabilizing employment (or output) around their natural rates. For example, in response to an increase in productivity (a positive technology shock), the real wage has to rise to reflect the higher marginal product of labor inputs, which requires either prices to fall or nominal wages to rise for employment to reach its natural rate. If both nominal wages and prices are sticky, a policy of completely stabilizing prices will force the necessary real wage adjustment to occur entirely through nominal wage adjustment, thereby impeding the adjustment of employment to its efficient level (Blanchard, 1997; Erceg, Henderson, and Levin, 2000). Indeed, if wages are much stickier than prices, the best strategy is to stabilize nominal wage inflation rather than price inflation, thereby allowing price inflation to decline to achieve the required increase in real wages. Fluctuations in inflation and economic activity induced by variation over time in sources of economic inefficiency, such as changes in the markups in goods and labor markets or inefficiencies in labor market search, could also drive a wedge between the goals of stabilizing inflation and economic activity (Blanchard and Galí, 2006; Galí, Gertler, and López-Salido, 2007). For example, in sectors of the economy subject to little competitive pressure, prices that firms set tend to be higher and output lower than would prevail under greater competition. Monetary policy is, of course, unable to offset permanently high markups because of the principle, mentioned earlier, that the long-run Phillips curve is vertical. However, a temporary increase in monopoly power that raises markups would exert upward pressure on prices without, at the same time, reducing the productive potential of the economy. That would, indeed, be a case of a tradeoff between stabilizing inflation and stabilizing output. These examples narrow the degree to which the recent findings of congruence between stabilizing inflation and economic activity apply in all cases, but they do not necessarily overturn the findings. The example of sticky wages would not invalidate the view that stabilizing inflation stabilizes economic activity if wages are sticky, for example, because they are held constant in order to operate as an "insurance" contract between employers and workers (Goodfriend and King, 2001). And for many of the inefficient shocks that drive a wedge between the sustainable level of output and the level of output associated with price stability, monetary policy may be the wrong tool to offset their effects (Blanchard, 2005). Of course, central banks at times will still face difficult decisions regarding the short-run tradeoff between stabilizing inflation and output. For example, judging from the fit of New Keynesian Phillips curves, a substantial fraction of overall inflation variability seems related to supply-type shocks that create a tradeoff between inflation and output-gap stabilization (Kiley, 2007b). But the key insight from recent research--that the interaction between inflation fluctuations and relative price distortions should lead to a focus on the stability of nominal prices that adjust sluggishly--will likely prove to have important practical implications that can help contribute to inflation and employment stabilization. Stabilizing Inflation as a Robust Policy in the Presence of UncertaintyThe discussion so far has been based on the premise that the central bank knows the efficient, or natural, rate of output or employment. However, the natural rates of employment and outputcannotbe directly observed and are subject to considerable uncertainty--particularly in real time. Indeed, economists do not even agree on the economic theory or econometric methods that should be used to measure those rates. These concerns are perhaps even more severe in the most recent models, where fluctuations in natural rates of output or employment can be very substantial (for example, Rotemberg and Woodford, 1997; Edge, Kiley, and Laforte, forthcoming). Furthermore, because the natural rates in the most recent models are defined as the counterfactual levels of output and employment that would be obtained if prices and wages were completely flexible, the estimated fluctuations in natural rates generated by the research are very sensitive to model specification. If a central bank errs in measuring the natural rates of output and employment, its attempts to stabilize economic activity at those mismeasured natural rates can lead to very poor outcomes. For example, most economists now agree that the natural unemployment rate shifted up for many years starting in the late 1960s and that the growth of potential output shifted down for a considerable time after 1970. However, perhaps because those shifts were not generally recognized until much later (Orphanides and van Norden, 2002; Orphanides, 2003), monetary policy in the 1970s seems to have been aimed at achievingunsustainablelevels of output and employment. Hence, policymakers may have unwittingly contributed to accelerating inflation that reached double digits by the end of the decade as well as undesirable swings in unemployment. And although subsequent monetary policy tightening was successful in regaining control of inflation, the toll was a severe recession in 1981-82, which pushed up the unemployment rate to around 10 percent. Uncertainty about the natural rates of economic activity implies that less weight may need to be put on stabilizing output or employment around what is likely to be a mismeasured natural rate (Orphanides and Williams, 2002). Furthermore, research with New Keynesian models has found that overall economic performance may be most efficiently achieved by policies with a heavy focus on stabilizing inflation (for example, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2007). ConclusionBecause monetary policy has not one but two objectives, stabilizing inflation and stabilizing economic activity, it might seem obvious that those objectives would usually, if not always, conflict. As so often occurs with the "obvious," however, the impression turns out to be incorrect. The economic research that I have discussed today demonstrates, rather, that the objectives of price stability and stabilizing economic activity are often likely to be mutually reinforcing. Thus, the answer to the title of this speech--"Does stabilizing inflation contribute to stabilizing economic activity?"--is, for the most part, yes. A key policy recommendation from the past three decades of research in monetary economics is that monetary policy makers must always keep their eye on inflation and emphasize the importance of price stability in their actions and communications. Doing so does not mean that monetary policy makers are less concerned about stabilizing economic activity. Rather, by appropriately focusing on stabilizing inflation along the lines I have outlined here, monetary policy is more likely to better stabilize economic activity. ReferencesAnderson, Palle, and David Gruen (1995). "Macroeconomic Policies and Growth," in Palle Anderson, Jacqueline Dwyer, and David Gruen, eds.,Productivity and Growth: Proceedings of a Conference held at the H.C. Coombs Centre for Financial Studies, Kirribilli, Australia, July 10-11. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, pp. 279-319. Blanchard, Olivier (1997). "Comment on 'The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role of Monetary Policy,'" in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 12. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 289-93. Blanchard, Olivier (2005). "Comment on 'Inflation Targeting in Transition Economies: Experience and Prospects,'" in Ben S. Bernanke and Michael Woodford, eds.,The Inflation-Targeting Debate. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 413-21. Blanchard, Olivier, and Jordi Galí (2006). "A New Keynesian Model with Unemployment," unpublished paper, Universitat Pompeu Fabra. Bodenstein, Martin, Christopher Erceg, and Luca Guerrieri (2007). "Optimal Monetary Policy in a Model with Distinct Core and Headline Inflation Rates," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni (2006)."Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?"Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 88 (August), pp. 445-62. Briault, Clive (1995)."The Costs of Inflation (59 KB PDF),"Bank ofEnglandQuarterly Bulletin, vol. 35 (February), pp. 33-45. Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas J. Sargent (2001). "Evolving Post-World War II U.S. Inflation Dynamics," in Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 16. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 331-73. Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas J. Sargent (2005)."Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Policies and Outcomes in the Post WWII US,"Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 8 (April, Monetary Policy and Learning), pp. 262-302. Edge, Rochelle M., Michael T. Kiley, and Jean-Philippe Laforte (forthcoming). "Natural Rate Measures in an Estimated DSGE Model of the U.S. Economy,"Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control. Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000)."Optimal Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,"Journal of MonetaryEconomics,vol. 46 (October), pp. 281-313. English, William B. (1999)."Inflation and Financial Sector Size,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 44 (December), pp. 379-400. Feldstein, Martin (1997). "The Costs and Benefits of Going from Low Inflation to Price Stability," in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds.,Reducing Inflation:Motivation and Strategy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 123-66. Fischer, Stanley (1993)."The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 32 (December), pp. 485-512. Friedman, Milton (1968). "The Role of Monetary Policy,"American Economic Review, vol. 58 (March), pp. 1-17. Galí, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and J. David López-Salido (2007)."Markups, Gaps, and the Welfare Costs of Business Fluctuations,"Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 89 (February), pp. 44-59. Goodfriend, Marvin (1993)."Interest Rate Policy and the Inflation Scare Problem: 1979-1992 (636 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,Economic Quarterly, vol. 79 (Winter), pp. 1-23. Goodfriend, Marvin (2005). "Inflation Targeting in the United States?" in Ben S. Bernanke and Michael Woodford, eds.,The Inflation-Targeting Debate. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 311-37. Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert G. King (1997). "The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role of Monetary Policy," in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 12. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 231-83. Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert G. King (2001)."The Case for Price Stability (477 KB PDF),"in A. Garcia-Herrero, V. Gaspar, L. Hoogduin, J. Morgan, and B. Winkler, eds.,Why Price Stability?Proceedings of the First ECB Central Banking Conference. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, pp. 53-94. Kiley, Michael T. (2007a)."Is Moderate-to-High Inflation Inherently Unstable? (390 KB PDF)"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 3 (June), pp. 173-201. Kiley, Michael T. (2007b)."A Quantitative Comparison of Sticky-Price and Sticky-Information Models of Price Setting,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 39 (February, S1), pp. 101-25. Lucas, Robert E. (1972)."Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,"Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 4 (April), pp. 103-24. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007a)."Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate,"speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007b)."Headline versus Core Inflation in the Conduct of Monetary Policy,"speech delivered at the Business Cycles, International Transmission and Macroeconomic Policies Conference, HEC Montreal, Montreal, October 20. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007c)."Will Monetary Policy Become More of a Science?"Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-44. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Orphanides, Athanasios (2003)."Monetary Policy Evaluation with Noisy Information,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (April, Swiss National Bank/Study Center Gerzensee Conference on Monetary Policy under Incomplete Information), pp. 605-31. Orphanides, Athanasios, and Simon van Norden (2002)."The Unreliability of Output-Gap Estimates in Real Time,"Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 84 (November), pp. 569-83. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (2002)."Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown Natural Rates,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2002 (December), pp. 63-145. Phelps, Edmund S. (1968)."Money-Wage Dynamics and Labor-Market Equilibrium,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 76 (July/August, Part 2), pp. 678-711. Primiceri, Giorgio (2005). "Time Varying Structural Vector Autoregressions and Monetary Policy,"Review of Economic Studies, vol. 72 (July), pp. 821-52. Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford (1997). "An Optimization-Based Econometric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy," in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 12. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 297-346. Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martín Uribe (2007)."Optimal Simple and Implementable Monetary and Fiscal Rules,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 54 (September), pp. 1702-25. Shafir, Eldar, Peter Diamond, and Amos Tversky (1997)."Money Illusion,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 112 (May), pp. 341-74. Sims, Christopher A., and Tao Zha (2006)."Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary Policy?"American Economic Review, vol. 96 (March), pp. 54-81. Woodford, Michael (2003).Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.Princeton: Princeton University Press. Footnotes 1.The Federal Reserve’s congressional mandate is actually couched in terms of the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. However, as I have discussed in Mishkin (2007a), the mandate is more appropriately interpreted in terms of the dual goals of price stability and maximumsustainableemployment, and this formulation is what is consistent with stabilizing both inflation and economic activity.Return to text 2.I thankMichael KileyandThomas Laubachfor their assistance and helpful comments. Note that these remarks reflect only my own views and not necessarily those of others on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 3.Mishkin (2007c) outlines a set of principles that form the basis of the science of monetary policy that is currently practiced.Return to text 4.The deleterious effects of inflation on economic efficiency imply that the level of sustainable employment may even be higher at lower rates of inflation. Thus, the goals of price stability and high employment are likely to be complementary, rather than competing, and so there is no policy tradeoff between the goals of price stability and maximum sustainable employment. A further possibility is that low inflation may even help increase the rate of economic growth. Although time-series studies of individual countries and cross-national comparisons of growth rates are not in total agreement (Anderson and Gruen, 1995), the consensus has developed that inflation is detrimental to economic growth, particularly when inflation rates are high.Return to text 5.Cogley and Sargent (2001, 2005), Boivin and Giannoni (2006), and Kiley (2007a) provide evidence that monetary policy that stabilized inflation played an important role in stabilizing real activity. However, Primiceri (2005) and Sims and Zha (2006) argue that "good luck" from a reduction in the volatility of shocks was more important in stabilizing output.Return to text 6.The Taylor rule is written as follows:, whereRis the nominal policy rate;r*is the equilibrium real short-term rate;is the four-quarter inflation rate, either core or headline;is the inflation target, taken to be the baseline inflation rate; andis the output gap. Under that specification, the response coefficient on each gap variable is 1.Return to text 7.The scenarios were constructed with a rule that assumes no knowledge of how long the oil price shock will last. Research done by the staff of the Federal Reserve Board using other types of models also suggests that when the persistence of shocks is uncertain, the use of core inflation rather than headline inflation in central-bank reaction functions can improve policy outcomes (Bodenstein, Erceg, and Guerrieri, 2007).Return to text Figure 1Implications of Responding to Core versus Headline PCE Inflation(Persistent oil price shock with the FRB/US Model, levels relative to baseline) Return to text
On February 11, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $30 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 20.73% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on February 14, 2008, and will mature on March 13, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by noon EST on February 12, 2008. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EST on February 12, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On February 25, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $30 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 69.85% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on February 28, 2008, and will mature on March 27, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by noon EST on February 26, 2008. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EST on February 26, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
The Federal Reserve will conduct two auctions of 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility (TAF) in February. It will offer $30 billion in an auction to be held on Monday, February 11 and $30 billion in an auction to be held on Monday, February 25. To facilitate participation by smaller institutions, the minimum bid size will be reduced to $5 million, from $10 million in the previous auctions. The minimum bid rate, along with further details, will be announced at noon EST, the Friday before each auction. The results of each auction will be announced at 10 a.m. EST on the Tuesday following each auction; final settlement will occur on the Thursday following each auction. The Federal Reserve intends to conduct biweekly TAF auctions for as long as necessary to address elevated pressures in short-term funding markets. Decisions regarding auctions in March will be announced by Friday, February 29.
The Federal Reserve will conduct two auctions of 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility (TAF) in March. It will offer $30 billion in an auction to be held on Monday, March 10 and $30 billion in an auction to be held on Monday, March 24.Some technical changes in procedures will be implemented for the March auctions to improve the overall efficiency of the auction process. The minimum bid rate and other auction details will be announced at 10 a.m. EDT on Monday, the auction day. Previously, this information had been provided on the Friday before each auction. In addition, the bidding period will be shortened to two hours--from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. EDT--from the three-hour bidding period that had been used in previous auctions. The results of each auction will be announced at 10 a.m. EDT on the Tuesday following each auction; final settlement will occur on the Thursday following each auction.The Federal Reserve intends to conduct biweekly TAF auctions for as long as necessary to address elevated pressures in short-term funding markets. Decisions regarding auctions in April will be announced by Friday, March 28.
On February 11, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $30 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this Announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction Parameters Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the Opening Time and Closing Time on the Bid Submission Date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EST on the Notification Date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EST on the Notification Date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EST on the Notification Date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
On February 25, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $30 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this Announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction ParametersOffering Amount:$30 billionTerm:28-day loanBid Submission Date:February 25, 2008Opening Time:10 a.m. ESTClosing Time:1 p.m. ESTNotification Date:February 26, 2008Settlement Date:February 28, 2008Maturity Date:March 27, 2008Minimum Bid Amount (per bid):$5 millionBid Increment:$100,000Maximum Bid Amount (per institution):$3 billion (10% of Offering Amount)Minimum Bid Rate:2.81 percentIncremental Bid Rate:0.001 percentMinimum Award:$10,000Maximum Award:$3 billion (10% of Offering Amount) Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the Opening Time and Closing Time on the Bid Submission Date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EST on the Notification Date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EST on the Notification Date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EST on the Notification Date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the Global Association of Risk Management Professionals Annual Risk Convention, New York, New York I am delighted to have been invited by GARP to share a few of my thoughts about risk management practices at financial institutions. Recent events remind us that markets can be quite complex and difficult to predict and that sound risk management is fundamental to the health and resiliency of both individual financial institutions and financial markets generally. Today I want to highlight two fundamental elements of sound risk management: information and incentives. These two elements lie at the very heart of good risk management. Information is vital to good decisionmaking, and incentives send the right signals and create beneficial outcomes both within individual institutions and to the financial system as a whole. I should note that my thoughts on recent events are preliminary. Because risk-management challenges have affected a number of global institutions, we are working very closely with our supervisory counterparts in other countries to learn from recent events and to coordinate with financial institutions in determining what additional steps may need to be taken. As part of this important international effort, we should seek to align market participants' incentives with our own supervisory objectives; otherwise, behavior will not be altered appropriately and the proposed remedies will not prove durable. Key Elements of Sound Risk ManagementAs is well known to the impressive international group of risk professionals in this audience, models are critical to understanding the nuances of risks embedded in complex financial transactions and portfolios, but I am sure all of you would agree that sophisticated techniques cannot be relied upon without the proper risk-management foundation. Integral to this foundation are timely and accurate information and the will and ability to act on it. Since the fortunes of even the most technically sophisticated financial institutions ultimately depend on the decisions and judgments of individual managers and traders, senior management must ensure that the right incentives are in place so that risk taking is appropriately captured in business-line performance evaluation and employee compensation. Senior management must understand the risks assumed by each individual business line and communicate the firm's strategy and risk appetite back down to those business lines. At the same time, senior management must send each business-line manager clear signals about which risk levels are tolerable and which practices are not acceptable. In this way, information and incentives are threads of sound risk management that must be woven into the fabric of each firm's management culture. Enterprise-wide Risk Assessments A good risk-management structure must encompass risks across the entire firm, gathering and processing information on an enterprise-wide basis in real time. Good information is the lifeblood of sound risk management. In short, you cannot manage your risks if you do not know what they are. Managers of financial institutions need to ensure that they fully understand the risks assumed by each of their institutions' business lines, and for that they need high-quality information--both qualitative and quantitative. Aggregating information across a large, diversified financial institution is not easy and should be done with appropriate care and with adequate resources for checking timeliness and veracity. Risk managers should live by the adage "Trust but verify," being careful not to rely on assessments or data from others without conducting proper due diligence. It is also worth noting that financial institutions should gather a wide range of relevant informationbeforethey see market troubles brewing. In other words, scrambling for information once turbulence sets in is not good practice. Understanding a firm's true risk exposures requires examining not just risks on the balance sheet, but also off-balance-sheet risks that are sometimes more difficult to identify and often not so easy to quantify. Latent risks from certain complex products and certain risky activities should be properly recognized, because they can manifest themselves when market turbulence sets in. Stress testing and scenario analysis are of paramount importance here. Even when risks are properly identified and measured, that information needs to be presented to senior management and to others in the firm who can use it in their decisionmaking, and presented in a timely way. In other words, information should be adequately distributed both vertically and horizontally. Adequate distribution of information allows for an enterprise-wide perspective on risks that affect the whole organization. Information must be provided up to senior management, but their views and analysis then must be sent back down through the business lines. To put it another way, institutions should develop an "information circulatory system" to ensure the flow of information that is crucial to the health of the firm. It is also clear that financial institutions should draw on several types of information from various sources when assessing their risks, particularly when dealing with complex products. No single source of information is perfect or adequate. Management benefits from having a number of tools at its disposal to assess risk positions that draw on differing underlying assumptions. Properly designed, these tools offer different perspectives on exposures and are flexible enough to allow perspectives on risk to change as business conditions change and new data become available. Governance Structure To ensure sound risk management, boards of directors and senior management at financial institutions must also establish an overall governance and control structure that is credible, robust, and consistent throughout the firm. It is critical that senior management set the tone at the top, communicate it, and lead by example. This strategy should be clearly articulated and should be recognizable in the actions of the firm's employees. Business lines should be held equally accountable and there should not be any special treatment for "star" employees, even if they are bringing sizable revenues into the institution in a particularly year. While certain financial institutions may choose to conduct business on a decentralized basis, they must always remember that in the end the exposures and obligations are rolled up and combined into one consolidated legal entity. In addition, the institution's commitment to and emphasis on risk management should be eminently visible--both within and outside of the organization. For example, the firm should demonstrate that its risk managers have direct access to top management and play a key role in decisionmaking. They also must be able to speak authoritatively about the risk profile and risk-management strategy of the whole organization to market participants and counterparties. Durability of Risk-Management Structures Of course, risk-management structures are successful only if they are sturdy and durable. These structures and their associated strategies should be embedded in the firm's culture and not be dependent on just one or a few people. They should be part of the fabric of the organization, not just a few catchy phrases repeated from time to time. For example, understanding and living up to the firm's risk-management standards should be a prerequisite for advancement to a senior management position. Effective risk management remains sturdy and durable only if supported by strong and independent risk functions that produce unbiased information. Having independent risk managers with a certain amount of authority allows for clear, dispassionate thinking about the entire firm's risk profile, with no favoritism toward any business unit. Senior management should encourage risk managers to dig deep to uncover latent risks and point out cases in which certain business lines are assuming too much risk. In other words, it is good to have a few people within the institution who--to paraphrase a former Federal Reserve Chairman--know when to take away the punch bowl. Being the party pooper, however, can be very difficult in any organization, and that is why it is crucial for the risk manager to be known as an independent voice who is influential with top management. Ensuring Adherence to Risk-Management Practices Any successful organization needs to develop appropriate mechanisms to ensure adherence to and sustainability of its risk-management structures, and incentives structures are a key mechanism for this purpose. Appropriate incentives reward good behavior and penalize inappropriate behavior. Of course, incentives work best when they are known well in advance, that is, when they serve asex antesignals of what should and should not be done. Naturally, in very large organizations it is difficult for senior management to monitor each individual, so incentives need to be consistent, permeate even the lowest levels of the organization, and remind each individual that his or her risk-taking affects the whole enterprise. Limits and controls can be useful tools for creating the right incentives and sending appropriate signals, but they of course need to be tailored individually to each firm. Problems can arise when incentives are not properly structured and appropriate "risk discipline" is not exercised--for example, when limits and controls are not set or, if they are set, when adherence to them is not monitored or enforced. Such controls are incentives for business-line leaders to assume only the risks that the firm can absorb because they penalize those who try to take on excessive risk or inadequate mitigation in the name of short-term profit maximization. One good practice is to have reliable, interconnected enforcement mechanisms within the institution, mechanisms that can--and will--enforce limits. An example is a good centralized treasury function. Risk-Adjusted Performance Evaluation and Compensation In trading and certain other activities, there is a tendency for business-line heads or individual employees to focus on their short-term compensation and not think about the long-term risks that their activities create for the firm. But it is the responsibility of senior management to provide the proper incentives and controls to counter the potential for individuals within financial firms to discount risks to the broader institution, and of course to ensure that nefarious activity is promptly uncovered and stopped. Clearly, it is up to financial institutions themselves--not bank supervisors--to decide how compensation should be structured, but managers and boards of directors should understand the consequences of providing too many short-term and one-sided incentives. They would benefit from thinking about compensation on more of a risk-adjusted basis. Accordingly, I encourage institutions to think about ways to alter existing compensation schemes to include some types of deferred compensation, since the risks of certain investments or trades may not manifest themselves in the near term. Thus, it makes sense to try to match the tenor of compensation with the tenor of the risk profile and thus explicitly to take into account the longer-run performance of the portfolio or division in which the employee operates. This type of compensation arrangement is already in use at many nonfinancial firms. Of course, star performers may prefer to have compensation more front-loaded and threaten to leave a firm for another one that would not have the same longer-term risk-sensitive compensation structure. It is important for firms to have the flexibility to choose how they reward their employees, but it may be valuable to consider the development of industry-wide principles of sound risk management that would touch upon incentive-compensation issues. Such principles could foster market discipline in firms if investors were to view the principles as best practices and were to more heavily discount the reported short-term earnings of firms that failed to adopt best practices. Although reaching consensus on principles for compensation would be difficult, it seems well worth the effort. Reflecting Risk-Management Practices outside the Firm Information and incentives play an important role not just within an institution, but also outside it. By this I mean the ability of the marketplace--and supervisors, when necessary--to gather information about financial institutions and give the right signals to bank management about risk taking. Naturally, this requires proper disclosure of information by the financial institution so that depositors, counterparties, shareholders, and other market participants can judge the riskiness of the institution and act accordingly. Institutions that are able to provide a continual and accurate flow of information to market participants generally benefit from such transparency. Certainly, this is an important part of the motivation behind pillar 3 of the new Basel II capital rules emphasizing the role of public disclosure. This benefit can be even more prominent during financial turbulence, when market participants become fearful of latent risks and "surprise" losses. Confidence in the risk-management practices of individual firms can be valuable in maintaining confidence in the markets in which they operate. Risk-Management Performance during Recent Market EventsAlthough some of the risk-management techniques applied during the past nine months were successful, in other areas challenges remain. In risk identification and quantification, as well as liquidity-risk management, for example, the importance of information and incentives is evident. A number of risk-measurement and risk-quantification challenges relate to valuation practices, particularly with new products. As I noted in a speech last fall, firms should have greater motivation for applying proper valuation practices as part of good risk management.1At the center of these practices is the ability to make appropriate judgments about the quality of information being used for valuations. The process usually starts with an initial experimentation phase in which market participants learn a great deal about the product's expected performance and risk characteristics, preferably under different market conditions. Conducting due diligence about new products can be costly and take time, but it is usually worth it. Unfortunately, in some recent cases new products were developed very quickly and not properly road tested. In observing the valuation challenges, the "Trust but verify" adage has equal application. Market participants must ensure that they do not make valuation decisions based solely on excessive reliance on external ratings or evaluations, but that they also undertake their own assessment. And I would suggest that the value of independent due diligence on the part of market participants is especially high for newer and more-complex products. We all know that reductions in market liquidity played a large role in recent events, affecting the valuation of financial products. As with other risk areas, a number of practices were applied over the past nine months to identify and try to quantify the potential for disruptions in market liquidity. Good practices included attempts by business lines and trading desks to embed market-liquidity premiums or to apply market-liquidity haircuts in pricing models and valuations. That is, there was an understanding that information in benign periods did not reveal the full set of potential outcomes, and that disruption of market liquidity had the potential to affect market prices by driving down the value of certain instruments and to create losses. Conversely, problems arose when some managers did not make market-liquidity adjustments in their quantitative estimates and models and simply relied on recent information from good times, when there was ample liquidity. The Basel Committee's working group on liquidity began an exercise to review liquidity-supervision practices early last year and just last week issued a public report that builds on the Basel sound practices for managing liquidity risk issued in 2000. The report emphasizes that financial institutions should conduct stress tests and contingency planning exercises to prepare for potential problems in both funding and market liquidity, capturing market-wide events, events affecting multiple markets or currencies simultaneously, and the combination of idiosyncratic and market-wide shocks. In conducting this analysis, firms should better integrate stress tests and contingency funding plans. As with other risk areas, weaker performance in funding and liquidity-risk management can sometimes stem from inadequate information and poor incentives. During recent events, firmwide liquidity-management strategies were most effective when they included proper incentives and all relevant information, including information about the potential for certain exposures to be added to a firm's balance sheet--so-called unplanned asset expansions. Successful plans also contained information about the potential liquidity needs of individual business lines and how those might affect funding for the entire organization. In other words, individual business lines were instructed to evaluate their likely needs for funding and relate those needs to the treasury function. In some cases, managers have considered the potential adverse liquidity outcomes from engaging in certain businesses and therefore have decided to limit their involvement or stay out of those activities altogether. Concluding ThoughtsThe banking industry has the primary responsibility for fostering a culture of effective risk management, but of course supervisors have their own role to play in ensuring the safety and soundness of individual firms and a viable financial system. Therefore, both should continue to work hard to improve risk management in light of recent market events. U.S. supervisors are cooperating with their counterparts in other countries to help the industry address risk-management issues--bilaterally as well as through international forums such as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the Financial Stability Forum. I am delighted to represent the Federal Reserve in both forums. Of course, appropriate remedies will not be developed overnight and, when they are developed, may take some time to implement. Institutions should make appropriate adjustments to risk management and should do so thoughtfully and carefully. Indeed, firms should focus on long-term improvements in their risk-management culture and remember that practicing good risk management is an ongoing process that needs to be continually updated and reviewed for its efficacy. Given the challenges in information flows and incentives I highlighted earlier, firms should devote particular attention to these two areas. Even an institution that was relatively untouched by recent events should remain vigilant about the next potential source of turbulence, to ensure that it is prepared to analyze information about its risk exposures and distribute that information throughout the firm. Going forward, therefore, senior management at financial institutions should ensure that they have complete and timely information about risk and demonstrate the ability and will to act on it. They should also be aware that the next crisis could come precisely in the area where they are most exposed or have weaknesses. That is, a certain degree of humility is wise, because all firms have a limited understanding of what might happen next. All senior managers would benefit from taking a fresh look at the incentive structures within their firm. For example, are all parties being compensated on a risk-adjustedbasis that takes into account longer-term performance? Is management able to determine how risk taking at the business-unit level affects firm-wide risks? Do business units have the right incentives to consider their units' risk taking in the context of the entire institution? These and other questions deserve attention, given some of the risk-management challenges seen lately. But I am confident that the industry can find appropriate solutions, and supervisors will assist them in those efforts. Footnotes 1.Randall S. Kroszner, 2007,"Innovation, Information, and Regulation in Financial Markets,"speech delivered at the Philadelphia Fed Policy Forum, Philadelphia, November 30.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from January 21 through January 30, 2008.The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on January 29-30, 2008, and of conference calls held on January 9 and January 21, 2008. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the January 29-30, 2008, meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. Summaries of economic projections are released on an approximately quarterly schedule. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in the minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes and the Summary of Economic Projections can be viewed on the Board’s website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc.htm. Minutes of Federal Open Market CommitteeJanuary 9, 21, and 29-30, 2008:357 KB PDF|HTML
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, New York The paper being discussed today, "Leveraged Losses: Lessons from the Mortgage Meltdown," by David Greenlaw, Jan Hatzius, Anil Kashyap, and Hyun Song Shin, examines the following puzzle: How could the recent residential mortgage-market meltdown, which the authors estimate will lead to credit losses of around $400 billion--less than 2 percent of the outstanding $22 trillion in U.S. equities--possibly have such large negative effects on economic activity in the United States? After all, a 2 percent decline in stock market prices sometimes happens on a daily basis and yet leads to hardly a ripple in the U.S. economy. The authors conclude that these losses have such a large potential impact because they are borne by highly leveraged financial institutions, primarily banks. Their theory is basically as follows: Because banks have so much leverage, they contract their lending by a multiple of their credit losses in order to restore their balance sheets. The resulting contraction in bank lending then leads to a substantial decline in aggregate spending, because bank loans cannot be replaced by credit from other sources. Banks are "special"--that is, they have intermediation capabilities not fully shared by other financial market participants, and those capabilities allow banks to overcome informational barriers between borrowers and lenders and thus make loans that otherwise could not be made.I find the basic story the paper tells to be reasonably plausible and, therefore, find the paper to be valuable. I do, however, want to put the analysis of the paper in a broader perspective and provide some different views on their results.1The Residential Mortgage Meltdown: A Financial Development PerspectiveThe first part of the paper provides a nice summary of how recent events in the credit markets led to the subprime meltdown. Let me offer my own view on how the recent disruptions to financial markets have many features in common with typical cycles in financial development.Financial markets perform the essential economic function of channeling funds to those who have productive investment opportunities (which can include consumer purchases of goods and houses). As I have argued elsewhere,2this function of financial markets is critical to a well-functioning economy; without it, countries, and their populations, cannot get rich. Enabling financial markets to effectively perform this essential function is by no means easy; financial markets must solve information problems to ensure that funds actually go to those with productive investments, so that they can pay back those who have lent to them. Financial development involves innovations or liberalization of financial markets that improve the flow of information. Unfortunately, however, financial liberalization and innovation, often have flaws and do not solve information problems as well as markets may have hoped they would. When these flaws become evident, financial markets sometimes seize up, often with very negative consequences for the economy.I would argue that we have been experiencing exactly such a cycle in recent years. Advances in information and communications technology have allowed for faster and more disaggregated mortgage underwriting decisions. A mortgage broker with an Internet connection could quickly fill out an online form and price a loan for a customer with the help of credit-scoring technology. The same technological improvements would allow the resulting loan to be cheaply bundled with other mortgages to produce mortgage-backed securities, which could then be sold off to investors. Advances in financial engineering could take the securitization process even further by aggregating slices of mortgage-backed securities into more complicated structured products, such as collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), to tailor the credit risks of various types of assets to risk profiles desired by different kinds of investors.As has been true of many financial innovations in the past, the benefits of this disaggregated originate-to-distribute model may have been obvious, but the problems less so. The originate-to-distribute model, unfortunately, created some severe incentive problems, which are referred to as principal-agent problems, or more simply as agency problems, in which the agent (the originator of the loans) did not have the incentives to act fully in the interest of the principal (the ultimate holder of the loan). Originators had every incentive to maintain origination volume, because that would allow them to earn substantial fees, but they had weak incentives to maintain loan quality. When loans went bad, originators lost money, mainly because of the warranties they provided on loans; however, those warranties often expired as quickly as ninety days after origination. Furthermore, unlike traditional players in mortgage markets, originators often saw little value in their charters, because they often had little capital tied up in their firm. When hit with a wave of early payment defaults and the associated warranty claims, they simply went out of business. While the lending boom lasted, however, originators earned large profits.Many securitizers of mortgage-backed securities and resecuritizers, such as CDO managers, also, in retrospect, appear to have been motivated more by issuance and arrangement fees and less by concern for the longer-run performance of these securities.These agency problems combined to lower underwriting standards, so that borrowers with weaker financial histories had access to larger loans. When the housing market cooled and house prices no longer rose at a rapid pace, these subprime borrowers found themselves unable to either repay their loans or refinance out of them. Investors apparently failed to realize the importance of these agency problems and, it seems, did not insist on practices to align the incentives of originators, securitizers, and resecuritizers with the underlying risks.When these problems came to light with the end of the house-price boom, investors--including leveraged financial institutions--took large losses as mortgage-related assets were marked down in anticipation of high defaults. The market for newly issued subprime and alt-A mortgage-backed securities virtually closed. In addition, investors realized that they were sadly mistaken regarding their assumption that structured credit products with high credit ratings embodied very little risk. The unprecedented losses on, and downgrades of, those products suggested that they were far more opaque than investors had suspected, and that investors had had too much confidence in the ability of the credit rating agencies to assess the true risk of these securities. The result was that the originate-to-distribute business model, as well as structured credit products more broadly, have come into question. In turn, this situation has had a chilling effect on securities markets and has put pressure on the balance sheets of leveraged financial institutions.Although the perspective I have outlined here is consistent with the story told in the paper, it does emphasize that there are two parts of the recent disruption in the credit market: credit losses at banks and the near-collapse of broad classes of securities markets. This perspective raises the issue, which I will return to later, of whether the negative consequences of the decline in intermediation required both of these elements to be present.Estimating Mortgage-Credit LossesThe paper performs a very useful function by providing estimates of the credit losses likely to be realized on the current stock of outstanding loans. Not only is this calculation crucial for their analysis, it is a useful survey of three different methodologies for arriving at loss estimates. The authors first use a standard vintage curve analysis on outstanding mortgage-backed securities. Although this method makes the strong assumption that future loss curves will follow the same shape as previous loss curves, albeit at much higher levels, it provides a reasonable rough guess of the magnitudes of the losses.The second method the authors use is ABX pricing of subprime mortgages plus standard loss estimates on prime and near-prime mortgages to come up with loss estimates. ABX prices, in principle, ought to reflect the up-to-the-minute credit losses expected by market participants as well as changes in the price of liquidity and market risk. Indeed, I was worried that ABX pricing might overestimate credit losses because it carries premiums for these other risks, and trading may be light. For example, the AAA-rated tranches of recent vintages are trading for around sixty-six cents on the dollar, which seems to build in either extreme credit-loss estimates or compensation for other risks. However, the authors weight the various vintages and tranches of the ABX by outstanding dollar amounts and get reasonable estimates, which suggests that this approach to estimating mortgage-credit losses may have some value.The authors' third method is quite clever and uses state-level foreclosure models to estimate how declines in house prices would increase foreclosure starts and thus lead to losses.Figure 1displays a reasonably tight relationship between the rate of foreclosures started in the third quarter of 2007 and the previous four-quarter change in house prices in the fifty states and the District of Columbia. This figure provides some backing for their approach, which, in effect, uses the historical relationship between house price declines and foreclosure starts in states that have had significant house price declines to estimate the likely effect of current projected house price declines on foreclosure starts. However, their method requires the assumption that future foreclosures will respond to house prices as they have in the past. In addition, past experience was with prime mortgages, because there was little subprime lending. Will foreclosures in the subprime market in the current episode have a similar pattern of behavior to that which has occurred for prime mortgages?Although each method of calculating mortgage credit losses has problems, the beauty of the authors' approach is that they go at the problem in very different ways. It is striking that three very different methodologies produce similar estimates of around $400 billion in total credit losses over the next couple of years. The authors then estimate that roughly half of mortgage loans are held by U.S. leveraged financial institutions, which include commercial banks, thrifts, hedge funds, the government-sponsored enterprises, and others, and come up with losses to this sector of around $200 billion. This estimate might not be unreasonable, but it is very rough, because it assumes that institutions do not differ significantly in the kinds of risk they take on and that mortgage-related securities are evenly distributed across these financial institutions.Effect of Credit Losses on Domestic LendingThe authors go on to show that what might appear to be a small amount of losses to financial institutions can lead to an amplified decline in domestic lending. This amplification can then explain how modest losses can lead to a substantial effect on the overall economy. Their calculation is fairly straightforward. They assume that leveraged financial institutions have a target 10-to-1 leverage ratio, so that each dollar of a loss of capital will lead to a contraction of their balance sheet, and hence lending, by $10. Assuming that institutions can make up half of their $200 billion mortgage credit losses by raising new capital, leaving them with a decline of capital of around $100 billion, they come up with a contraction of domestic lending near $1 trillion. Actually, the authors' calculation is a bit more complicated than my simple characterization. They assume that the target leverage of banks and others decreases, as it has in previous lending cycles, but they also net out reduced lending from one leveraged entity to another. On balance, under their baseline scenario, they predict that lending to the unleveraged sector will decline by about $910 billion.These mechanical calculations are useful, but they miss some important subtleties. First, small losses can hit key institutions, such as bond and mortgage insurers, and have large, unpredictable effects. Second, if leveraged financial institutions such as banks were the only ones that had credit losses and, as a result, cut back lending, other institutions or securities issuance could replace some of the lost lending. Put another way, although banks are special because they have advantages in processing information and making loans, a big contraction in their assets would not necessarily choke off all lending. Banks are special, but not that special. As I discussed earlier, a key characteristic of this episode of financial disruption is that it has spread far beyond leveraged financial institutions. It has led to a sharp decline in securities issuance; this decline has to be an important part of the story of why the current financial market turmoil is affecting economic activity. In other words, mortgage credit losses are a problem because they are hitting bank balance sheets at the same time that the securitization market is experiencing difficulties.Effect of Decreased Leveraged Institution Lending on Aggregate SpendingThe paper then examines the well-known correlation between growth in debt and gross domestic product (GDP) to estimate the effect of the $910 billion decline in leveraged institution lending on economic growth. The authors first estimate an ordinary-least-squares (OLS) regression of quarterly GDP growth on four lags of GDP growth and the past four-quarter growth rate of domestic nonfinancial debt growth. They find that if debt growth falls by 1 percentage point and stays below baseline for a year, quarterly GDP growth is predicted to fall by 0.14 percentage point initially and by 0.22 percentage point over time. The authors rightfully recognize, however, that the coefficient on debt growth may be biased upward because of reverse causality--that is, causality might run from higher economic growth to higher debt growth, because when desired purchases increase, households and business finance them by borrowing more. Another way of stating the problem is that the debt-growth coefficient may not only reflect the affects of changes in credit supply but also changes in the demand for credit.To deal with the possible bias in the OLS regression and estimate the effect of credit supply on economic growth, the authors appropriately turn to instrumental variable (IV) estimation by instrumenting debt growth in their regression with two instruments, the Treasury-Eurodollar (TED) spread and the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on the willingness of banks to make installment loans. The IV estimate of the coefficient on debt growth more than doubles, so that a 1 percentage point decline in debt growth predicts a decline of 0.34 percentage point in GDP initially and 0.44 percentage points in the long run. Because a standard reverse causality story from GDP growth to debt growth suggests that the OLS estimate of the debt-growth coefficient is upwardly biased, the finding that the IV estimate is larger than the OLS estimate is indeed quite surprising.This surprising finding raises several questions. It can call into question the validity of the instruments, which, to be valid, need to be correlated with debt growth and yet be unaffected by economic growth. This assumption, however, is unlikely to be correct because poor prospects for economic growth surely raise credit risk, thereby leading to a higher TED spread and less willingness to lend on the part of banks. Thus, a higher TED spread and less willingness to lend may reflect the likelihood of tougher economic times ahead andnotan exogenous shift in credit supply.The final calculation in the paper is to combine the authors' IV estimates with their estimate of the decline in lending from leveraged institutions of $910 billion to estimate the impact on GDP growth. The $910 billion drop in debt against a $30.3 trillion amount of nonfinancial debt outstanding is a 3 percentage point drop in nonfinancial debt growth, which when multiplied by the 0.44 long-run coefficient on debt growth, lead to a slowing of GDP growth of 1.3 percentage points over the following year.Although this number is not implausible, there are reasons to be suspicious of it. On the one hand, even if you accept the IV coefficient estimate, despite the reasons to doubt its accuracy, it might overstate the impact of the decline in leveraged institution lending on the economy; as mentioned earlier, other sources of lending might come online if leveraged institutions stop lending. On the other hand, the estimated impact on the economy could be too low. As I have discussed, the disruption to the financial system is far broader than just to leveraged institutions. To the extent that the meltdown in the mortgage market has revealed even deeper problems in the financial system, the negative impact on economic activity could be even larger.ConclusionI very much enjoyed reading this paper. Many of the calculations in the paper are especially useful and help us get a better handle on how the recent turmoil in credit markets can affect the economy. I agree with the basic story that the authors tell, which is that relatively small losses in one sector of the credit market can have an outsized impact on aggregate economic activity if they cause a disruption to the financial system that leads to an amplified impact on lending. However, as my comments suggest, the authors may not have the full story. It is not just the impact on leveraged financial institutions that matter, but on the overall ability of the financial system to channel funds to those institutions with productive investment opportunities.Footnotes1.I thankAndreas Lehnertfor his excellent assistance and helpful comments. My remarks reflect only my own views and are not intended to reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System.Return to text2.Frederic S. Mishkin (2006),The Next Great Globalization: How Disadvantaged Nations Can Harness Their Financial Systems to Get Rich, Princeton: Princeton University Press.Return to textFigure 1Return to text The authors conclude that these losses have such a large potential impact because they are borne by highly leveraged financial institutions, primarily banks. Their theory is basically as follows: Because banks have so much leverage, they contract their lending by a multiple of their credit losses in order to restore their balance sheets. The resulting contraction in bank lending then leads to a substantial decline in aggregate spending, because bank loans cannot be replaced by credit from other sources. Banks are "special"--that is, they have intermediation capabilities not fully shared by other financial market participants, and those capabilities allow banks to overcome informational barriers between borrowers and lenders and thus make loans that otherwise could not be made. I find the basic story the paper tells to be reasonably plausible and, therefore, find the paper to be valuable. I do, however, want to put the analysis of the paper in a broader perspective and provide some different views on their results.1 The Residential Mortgage Meltdown: A Financial Development PerspectiveThe first part of the paper provides a nice summary of how recent events in the credit markets led to the subprime meltdown. Let me offer my own view on how the recent disruptions to financial markets have many features in common with typical cycles in financial development. Financial markets perform the essential economic function of channeling funds to those who have productive investment opportunities (which can include consumer purchases of goods and houses). As I have argued elsewhere,2this function of financial markets is critical to a well-functioning economy; without it, countries, and their populations, cannot get rich. Enabling financial markets to effectively perform this essential function is by no means easy; financial markets must solve information problems to ensure that funds actually go to those with productive investments, so that they can pay back those who have lent to them. Financial development involves innovations or liberalization of financial markets that improve the flow of information. Unfortunately, however, financial liberalization and innovation, often have flaws and do not solve information problems as well as markets may have hoped they would. When these flaws become evident, financial markets sometimes seize up, often with very negative consequences for the economy. I would argue that we have been experiencing exactly such a cycle in recent years. Advances in information and communications technology have allowed for faster and more disaggregated mortgage underwriting decisions. A mortgage broker with an Internet connection could quickly fill out an online form and price a loan for a customer with the help of credit-scoring technology. The same technological improvements would allow the resulting loan to be cheaply bundled with other mortgages to produce mortgage-backed securities, which could then be sold off to investors. Advances in financial engineering could take the securitization process even further by aggregating slices of mortgage-backed securities into more complicated structured products, such as collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), to tailor the credit risks of various types of assets to risk profiles desired by different kinds of investors. As has been true of many financial innovations in the past, the benefits of this disaggregated originate-to-distribute model may have been obvious, but the problems less so. The originate-to-distribute model, unfortunately, created some severe incentive problems, which are referred to as principal-agent problems, or more simply as agency problems, in which the agent (the originator of the loans) did not have the incentives to act fully in the interest of the principal (the ultimate holder of the loan). Originators had every incentive to maintain origination volume, because that would allow them to earn substantial fees, but they had weak incentives to maintain loan quality. When loans went bad, originators lost money, mainly because of the warranties they provided on loans; however, those warranties often expired as quickly as ninety days after origination. Furthermore, unlike traditional players in mortgage markets, originators often saw little value in their charters, because they often had little capital tied up in their firm. When hit with a wave of early payment defaults and the associated warranty claims, they simply went out of business. While the lending boom lasted, however, originators earned large profits. Many securitizers of mortgage-backed securities and resecuritizers, such as CDO managers, also, in retrospect, appear to have been motivated more by issuance and arrangement fees and less by concern for the longer-run performance of these securities. These agency problems combined to lower underwriting standards, so that borrowers with weaker financial histories had access to larger loans. When the housing market cooled and house prices no longer rose at a rapid pace, these subprime borrowers found themselves unable to either repay their loans or refinance out of them. Investors apparently failed to realize the importance of these agency problems and, it seems, did not insist on practices to align the incentives of originators, securitizers, and resecuritizers with the underlying risks. When these problems came to light with the end of the house-price boom, investors--including leveraged financial institutions--took large losses as mortgage-related assets were marked down in anticipation of high defaults. The market for newly issued subprime and alt-A mortgage-backed securities virtually closed. In addition, investors realized that they were sadly mistaken regarding their assumption that structured credit products with high credit ratings embodied very little risk. The unprecedented losses on, and downgrades of, those products suggested that they were far more opaque than investors had suspected, and that investors had had too much confidence in the ability of the credit rating agencies to assess the true risk of these securities. The result was that the originate-to-distribute business model, as well as structured credit products more broadly, have come into question. In turn, this situation has had a chilling effect on securities markets and has put pressure on the balance sheets of leveraged financial institutions. Although the perspective I have outlined here is consistent with the story told in the paper, it does emphasize that there are two parts of the recent disruption in the credit market: credit losses at banks and the near-collapse of broad classes of securities markets. This perspective raises the issue, which I will return to later, of whether the negative consequences of the decline in intermediation required both of these elements to be present. Estimating Mortgage-Credit LossesThe paper performs a very useful function by providing estimates of the credit losses likely to be realized on the current stock of outstanding loans. Not only is this calculation crucial for their analysis, it is a useful survey of three different methodologies for arriving at loss estimates. The authors first use a standard vintage curve analysis on outstanding mortgage-backed securities. Although this method makes the strong assumption that future loss curves will follow the same shape as previous loss curves, albeit at much higher levels, it provides a reasonable rough guess of the magnitudes of the losses. The second method the authors use is ABX pricing of subprime mortgages plus standard loss estimates on prime and near-prime mortgages to come up with loss estimates. ABX prices, in principle, ought to reflect the up-to-the-minute credit losses expected by market participants as well as changes in the price of liquidity and market risk. Indeed, I was worried that ABX pricing might overestimate credit losses because it carries premiums for these other risks, and trading may be light. For example, the AAA-rated tranches of recent vintages are trading for around sixty-six cents on the dollar, which seems to build in either extreme credit-loss estimates or compensation for other risks. However, the authors weight the various vintages and tranches of the ABX by outstanding dollar amounts and get reasonable estimates, which suggests that this approach to estimating mortgage-credit losses may have some value. The authors' third method is quite clever and uses state-level foreclosure models to estimate how declines in house prices would increase foreclosure starts and thus lead to losses.Figure 1displays a reasonably tight relationship between the rate of foreclosures started in the third quarter of 2007 and the previous four-quarter change in house prices in the fifty states and the District of Columbia. This figure provides some backing for their approach, which, in effect, uses the historical relationship between house price declines and foreclosure starts in states that have had significant house price declines to estimate the likely effect of current projected house price declines on foreclosure starts. However, their method requires the assumption that future foreclosures will respond to house prices as they have in the past. In addition, past experience was with prime mortgages, because there was little subprime lending. Will foreclosures in the subprime market in the current episode have a similar pattern of behavior to that which has occurred for prime mortgages? Although each method of calculating mortgage credit losses has problems, the beauty of the authors' approach is that they go at the problem in very different ways. It is striking that three very different methodologies produce similar estimates of around $400 billion in total credit losses over the next couple of years. The authors then estimate that roughly half of mortgage loans are held by U.S. leveraged financial institutions, which include commercial banks, thrifts, hedge funds, the government-sponsored enterprises, and others, and come up with losses to this sector of around $200 billion. This estimate might not be unreasonable, but it is very rough, because it assumes that institutions do not differ significantly in the kinds of risk they take on and that mortgage-related securities are evenly distributed across these financial institutions. Effect of Credit Losses on Domestic LendingThe authors go on to show that what might appear to be a small amount of losses to financial institutions can lead to an amplified decline in domestic lending. This amplification can then explain how modest losses can lead to a substantial effect on the overall economy. Their calculation is fairly straightforward. They assume that leveraged financial institutions have a target 10-to-1 leverage ratio, so that each dollar of a loss of capital will lead to a contraction of their balance sheet, and hence lending, by $10. Assuming that institutions can make up half of their $200 billion mortgage credit losses by raising new capital, leaving them with a decline of capital of around $100 billion, they come up with a contraction of domestic lending near $1 trillion. Actually, the authors' calculation is a bit more complicated than my simple characterization. They assume that the target leverage of banks and others decreases, as it has in previous lending cycles, but they also net out reduced lending from one leveraged entity to another. On balance, under their baseline scenario, they predict that lending to the unleveraged sector will decline by about $910 billion. These mechanical calculations are useful, but they miss some important subtleties. First, small losses can hit key institutions, such as bond and mortgage insurers, and have large, unpredictable effects. Second, if leveraged financial institutions such as banks were the only ones that had credit losses and, as a result, cut back lending, other institutions or securities issuance could replace some of the lost lending. Put another way, although banks are special because they have advantages in processing information and making loans, a big contraction in their assets would not necessarily choke off all lending. Banks are special, but not that special. As I discussed earlier, a key characteristic of this episode of financial disruption is that it has spread far beyond leveraged financial institutions. It has led to a sharp decline in securities issuance; this decline has to be an important part of the story of why the current financial market turmoil is affecting economic activity. In other words, mortgage credit losses are a problem because they are hitting bank balance sheets at the same time that the securitization market is experiencing difficulties. Effect of Decreased Leveraged Institution Lending on Aggregate SpendingThe paper then examines the well-known correlation between growth in debt and gross domestic product (GDP) to estimate the effect of the $910 billion decline in leveraged institution lending on economic growth. The authors first estimate an ordinary-least-squares (OLS) regression of quarterly GDP growth on four lags of GDP growth and the past four-quarter growth rate of domestic nonfinancial debt growth. They find that if debt growth falls by 1 percentage point and stays below baseline for a year, quarterly GDP growth is predicted to fall by 0.14 percentage point initially and by 0.22 percentage point over time. The authors rightfully recognize, however, that the coefficient on debt growth may be biased upward because of reverse causality--that is, causality might run from higher economic growth to higher debt growth, because when desired purchases increase, households and business finance them by borrowing more. Another way of stating the problem is that the debt-growth coefficient may not only reflect the affects of changes in credit supply but also changes in the demand for credit. To deal with the possible bias in the OLS regression and estimate the effect of credit supply on economic growth, the authors appropriately turn to instrumental variable (IV) estimation by instrumenting debt growth in their regression with two instruments, the Treasury-Eurodollar (TED) spread and the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on the willingness of banks to make installment loans. The IV estimate of the coefficient on debt growth more than doubles, so that a 1 percentage point decline in debt growth predicts a decline of 0.34 percentage point in GDP initially and 0.44 percentage points in the long run. Because a standard reverse causality story from GDP growth to debt growth suggests that the OLS estimate of the debt-growth coefficient is upwardly biased, the finding that the IV estimate is larger than the OLS estimate is indeed quite surprising. This surprising finding raises several questions. It can call into question the validity of the instruments, which, to be valid, need to be correlated with debt growth and yet be unaffected by economic growth. This assumption, however, is unlikely to be correct because poor prospects for economic growth surely raise credit risk, thereby leading to a higher TED spread and less willingness to lend on the part of banks. Thus, a higher TED spread and less willingness to lend may reflect the likelihood of tougher economic times ahead andnotan exogenous shift in credit supply. The final calculation in the paper is to combine the authors' IV estimates with their estimate of the decline in lending from leveraged institutions of $910 billion to estimate the impact on GDP growth. The $910 billion drop in debt against a $30.3 trillion amount of nonfinancial debt outstanding is a 3 percentage point drop in nonfinancial debt growth, which when multiplied by the 0.44 long-run coefficient on debt growth, lead to a slowing of GDP growth of 1.3 percentage points over the following year. Although this number is not implausible, there are reasons to be suspicious of it. On the one hand, even if you accept the IV coefficient estimate, despite the reasons to doubt its accuracy, it might overstate the impact of the decline in leveraged institution lending on the economy; as mentioned earlier, other sources of lending might come online if leveraged institutions stop lending. On the other hand, the estimated impact on the economy could be too low. As I have discussed, the disruption to the financial system is far broader than just to leveraged institutions. To the extent that the meltdown in the mortgage market has revealed even deeper problems in the financial system, the negative impact on economic activity could be even larger. ConclusionI very much enjoyed reading this paper. Many of the calculations in the paper are especially useful and help us get a better handle on how the recent turmoil in credit markets can affect the economy. I agree with the basic story that the authors tell, which is that relatively small losses in one sector of the credit market can have an outsized impact on aggregate economic activity if they cause a disruption to the financial system that leads to an amplified impact on lending. However, as my comments suggest, the authors may not have the full story. It is not just the impact on leveraged financial institutions that matter, but on the overall ability of the financial system to channel funds to those institutions with productive investment opportunities. Footnotes 1.I thankAndreas Lehnertfor his excellent assistance and helpful comments. My remarks reflect only my own views and are not intended to reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2.Frederic S. Mishkin (2006),The Next Great Globalization: How Disadvantaged Nations Can Harness Their Financial Systems to Get Rich, Princeton: Princeton University Press.Return to text Figure 1Return to text
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the American Securitization Forum 2008 Conference, Las Vegas, Nevada Governor Kroszner presented identical remarks at the Women in Housing and Finance Subprime Symposium, Washington, D.C., on February 6, 2008 The mortgage market has long been a source of strength in the U.S. economy, but it is facing significant challenges, especially in the subprime segment that serves consumers who have shorter or weaker credit records. As of November, the most recent month for which data are available, about 20 percent of subprime adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) were ninety or more days delinquent, twice the level one year earlier.1More than 171,000 foreclosures were started on these mortgages in the third quarter, up 36 percent from the previous quarter.2The significance of the problems with subprime loan performance is evident in the unusually high rate of defaults within a few months of loan origination, known as early payment defaults. In November, nearly 7 percent of subprime ARMs originated in the previous six months were already ninety or more days delinquent, twice the rate of the year before and nearly four times the rate two years earlier.3 These problems have many causes, but the role of abusive lending practices is of particular concern. Such practices have led many people into homeownership that they cannot sustain, hurting their families as well as their neighbors and communities. Practices that have hurt consumers have also undermined the confidence of investors and contributed to a virtual shutdown of the subprime market. As a result, it is difficult for many borrowers, especially those with shorter or weaker credit records, to obtain home loans. These events have highlighted the shared interest of mortgage borrowers, their communities, lenders, and investors in protecting borrowers from abusive practices and preserving their choices. Abusive loans that strip their equity or cause them to lose their homes must not be tolerated. Protecting borrowers with responsible underwriting standards also protects the integrity and proper functioning of the mortgage market by increasing investor confidence. In other words, effective consumer protection can reduce uncertainty about the underwriting standards of, and hence, the value of, loans in mortgage-backed securities, thereby helping to revive and strengthen mortgage securities markets. In this way, effective consumer protection produces a complementary benefit for consumers by making more capital available to meet their needs. Similarly, systematic efforts to keep borrowers who may have trouble meeting their loan obligations in their homes on a sustainable basis, by providing more certainty to the market, can have the complementary benefit of ensuring the flow of capital for potential borrowers. With these principles in mind, I will discuss current initiatives to mitigate foreclosures. Then I will spend most of my time discussing the Board's recent initiative in proposing new regulations to prevent abuse, unfairness, and deception in residential mortgage lending. Preventing Unnecessary ForeclosuresAbout one-and-a-half million adjustable-rate subprime mortgages are scheduled to have their interest rates reset this year--significantly more than in 2007--and another one-half million in 2009. While many borrowers facing reset will be able to make the higher payment, many will not. As rates reset, it is important that we take steps to protect homeowners, communities, the mortgage market, and the economy from the adverse consequences of unnecessary defaults and foreclosures. Given the high cost of foreclosures to lenders and investors and the disruption and distress that foreclosure can cause to consumers, their families, and their communities, it is in everyone's interest to avoid foreclosures whenever other viable options exist. With large numbers of borrowers facing potential repayment problems, it is in the interest of borrowers and investors alike for the industry to develop prudent loan modification programs and other assistance to help borrowers on a systematic and sustainable basis. The American Securitization Forum (ASF) and the Hope Now Alliance have recognized this interest and have taken leading roles in streamlining the process for refinancing and modifying subprime adjustable-rate mortgages. I have been an active proponent of such streamlined systematic approaches to reduce transactions costs and to help mitigate foreclosure risk, and I strongly encourage market participants to adopt and to implement these fast-track modification proposals as quickly as possible. The efforts by ASF and Hope Now have helped accelerate loan modifications in the last quarter, according to recently released data. I applaud these efforts but more must be done as the number of households facing resets increases. Challenges remain, for example, with respect to ongoing constraints on servicing capacity to expedite work outs. Servicers must undertake the investment to overcome the capacity challenges and provide transparent and timely measures of the results. A systematic and prudent effort to avoid unnecessary foreclosures has many benefits. Many borrowers with subprime ARMs, for example, have been able to strengthen their credit records by making timely payments so far. It would be very unfortunate if some of these borrowers faced foreclosure when their payments increased merely because servicers lacked the capacity to reach them in time with a sustainable alternative. The solid credit history would be lost and, consequently, financing options would be reduced. Loan-by-loan modifications can help some, but they require substantial time and effort. Where appropriate, an efficient, systematic approach lets servicers reach more of these borrowers and prevent more foreclosures. Furthermore, as noted above, standards for dealing with problem loans may help make more capital available for potential borrowers. By providing more certainty to the mortgage market, clear and consistent standards can help ensure the flow of credit to potential borrowers. While much has been done to prevent avoidable foreclosures, more still needs to be done. For our part, the Federal Reserve has been working with financial institutions and community groups around the country to address the challenges posed by problem loans. For instance, we have been providing community coalitions, counseling agencies, fellow regulators, and others with detailed analyses identifying neighborhoods at high risk of foreclosures. In addition, all twelve of the Federal Reserve Banks have also been working with an array of stakeholders to address these challenges on the local and regional levels. There are also efforts under way on the international level to develop responses to recent financial market turmoil. I represent the Board on the Financial Stability Forum, which has established a working group to diagnose causes of recent events and make recommendations. The Board's ProposalI will now focus on the Board's recent proposal for stricter regulations prohibiting abusive and deceptive practices in the mortgage market under authority of the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA). This proposal is intended to protect consumers and to preserve consumer choice by targeting protections to borrowers who face the most risk. The proposed regulations are designed to protect consumers from excessive layering of risk even as the practices that increase risk may change. We have sought to ensure that these standards are clear for lenders to reduce unintended consequences for consumers. Though clear, the standards are intended to be not overly prescriptive, so as to preserve access to responsible credit while amply protecting consumers. Our proposal is also comprehensive, covering most mortgage loans with certain protections and the entire subprime market with certain more specific regulations. While comprehensive, the proposal would focus protections where the risks are greatest and preserve consumers' access to responsible credit. Our effort to produce robust, clear, and comprehensive rules was based on a rigorous analysis of available qualitative and quantitative data. We have put this proposal out for public comment until April 8 and eagerly seek suggestions to be able to craft the best possible final rule. Comprehensive ScopeLet me say more about the comprehensive scope of this proposal. It would apply stricter regulations to higher-priced mortgage loans, which we have defined broadly. We were particularly interested in ensuring that protections remain strong over time as loan products and lending practices change. Our analysis of the data suggested that the troubles in the mortgage market generally arise not from a single practice in isolation, but instead from the complex ways that risk factors and underwriting practices can affect each other, sometimes called "risk layering." Therefore, we have proposed using a loan's annual percentage rate, or APR, to determine whether the loan is covered by stricter regulations.4Because the APR is closely correlated to risk, the proposed protections would cover loans with higher risks rather than single out particular risk factors or underwriting practices. With the APR thresholds we have proposed, we expect that the new protections would cover the entire subprime mortgage market and the riskier end of the "near prime" market, the latter also known as the "alt-A" market. Covering part of the alt-A market would anticipate possible actions by lenders to avoid restrictions on subprime loans priced near the threshold. It would also address real risks to consumers in the alt-A segment. This segment grew very rapidly, and it layered risks, such as undocumented income, on top of other risks, such as nontraditional loan structures allowing borrowers to defer paying principal and interest. Our public hearings and our analysis identified problems not just in higher-priced loans, however, but in the broader mortgage market. Thus, our proposal addresses unfair or deceptive practices for the vast majority of mortgage loans secured by a consumer's primary home. Areas targeted this broadly include broker steering, appraisal coercion, unwarranted servicing fees, and deceptive advertising. I'll touch on broker steering toward the end of my remarks. Robust Approach to AffordabilityExtending credit that borrowers can afford to repay is a fundamental pillar of responsible lending. Across the whole range of higher-priced mortgage loans, our proposal offers three rules that, working in combination, would help ensure that borrowers can afford their payments. First is a requirement that a lender maintain responsible underwriting practices that genuinely assess borrowers' ability to repay. This general requirement would be complemented by a specific requirement to verify borrowers' income and assets. A third rule would require lenders to escrow property taxes and homeowners insurance to help borrowers meet these obligations. This robust approach to affordability would help ensure that the subprime market promotes sustainable homeownership. Just as important, it would also help protect consumers from abuse. When the law requires that monthly payments be affordable, then consumers are less vulnerable to abusive refinancings that strip equity. When the law imposes a responsible underwriting standard on all lenders, then irresponsible actors who would strip borrowers' equity are easier to keep out of the market. Clear lending standards have the further advantages of increasing investor confidence in the mortgage market and helping to revive the flow of credit to consumers with shorter or weaker credit records. Assessment of Repayment AbilityNow I want to discuss the major elements of our proposed regulations for higher-priced loans in a little more depth, starting with the requirement to assess repayment ability. The regulations would prohibit a lender from engaging in a pattern or practice of making higher-priced loans based on the value of the borrower's house rather than on the borrower's ability to repay from income, or from assets other than the house. This prohibition is intentionally broad to capture all risks to loan performance and the different ways that these risks can be layered. Moreover, the proposal avoids prescribing quantitative underwriting requirements. For example, the proposal would prohibit a pattern or practice of disregarding the ratio of applicants' income to their debt, but it does not prescribe a maximum ratio because the appropriate number depends heavily on other risk factors, which vary from loan to loan. At the same time, the proposal does offer specifics. For example, it would create a presumption that a lender had violated the regulations if it engaged in a pattern or practice of failing to underwrite at the fully-indexed rate.5This presumption is derived from the subprime guidance the agencies issued last year. It bears emphasis, however, that our proposed regulations would be more robust and comprehensive than the guidance. The regulations would apply to all mortgage lenders, including independent mortgage companies. Guidance, in contrast, does not ensure uniformity of coverage. Moreover, the regulations would be legally enforceable by supervisory and enforcement agencies. Just as important, the regulations, unlike the guidance, would be legally enforceable by consumers. Borrowers who brought timely actions could recover statutory damages for violations, above and beyond any actual damages they suffered. The proposed requirement to assess repayment ability is intended to protect consumers from abusive practices while maintaining their access to responsible credit. We recognize that satisfying both objectives at the same time is a challenge. The proposed rule's potential for consumer actions, coupled with its careful avoidance of prescribing quantitative underwriting thresholds, could raise compliance and litigation risk. In turn, this could raise the cost of credit for higher-risk borrowers or limit the availability of responsible credit. That is why we have proposed prohibiting a "pattern or practice" of disregarding repayment ability rather than attaching a risk of legal liability to every individual loan that does not perform. This approach is meant to preserve choices for borrowers with shorter or weaker credit records while protecting them from lenders who have a practice of disregarding repayment ability or are found to exhibit a pattern of unaffordable loans. We anticipate vigorous comment on our proposed approach and have specifically solicited suggestions for its implementation. Income VerificationWhen we looked closely at why so many borrowers had mortgages that they struggled to repay so soon after taking out the loan, the prevalence of "stated-income" lending was a clear culprit. Substantial anecdotal evidence indicates that failing to verify income invited fraud. Moreover, when we looked at the loan-level data we saw a clear correlation between "low-doc" or "no-doc" lending and performance problems, particularly early payment defaults. That is why we have proposed to complement a broad requirement to assess repayment ability with a specific requirement to verify the income or assets a lender relies on to make a credit decision. We recognize that stated-income lending may have a proper place when not layered on top of too many other risks. Indeed, stated income lending and "no/low-doc" lending are defining features of the alt-A market, which has long served borrowers with good credit scores who seek some underwriting flexibility. We would target the verification requirement to higher-priced loans, including the higher-priced end of the alt-A market, where the risks of stated-income lending could be layered on top of too many other risks. This targeting is intended to maintain consumer access to responsible credit. The proposal identifies standard documents that would be acceptable, such as W-2 forms. It also allows, however, any third party documents that provide reasonably reliable evidence of income. This rule is meant to preserve consumer choice by allowing the market to identify credible nontraditional documentation of consumer income--for example, check-cashing receipts. In that regard, the proposal responds to input we gathered through the HOEPA hearing I chaired last June. Several panelists spoke of the fact that some consumers may have access to only nonstandard documents and others, such as self-employed entrepreneurs, may have some difficulty documenting their income. To help ensure that the proposal preserves access to credit for the full range of consumers, we have sought public comment on this issue. Escrows for Taxes and InsuranceAnother part of our proposal for higher-priced loans--a requirement to escrow taxes and insurance--would also help ensure that borrowers can afford their payments. Escrowing has become standard practice in the prime market, and the case for making it standard in the subprime market, too, appears compelling. Consumers with shorter or weaker credit histories may be less likely to appreciate the sizable burden that taxes and insurance can add to the cost of homeownership, or more vulnerable to being misled by payment quotes that leave out these amounts. Moreover, when we looked at the data, we saw in the unusually high level of early payment defaults possible evidence that the lack of escrows hurt consumers who did not have experience paying property tax and insurance bills. We have proposed to address the problem with a requirement to escrow taxes and insurance on higher-priced loans, accompanied by a limited allowance for opt-out. We wanted the regulations to prevent irresponsible efforts to encourage borrowers to opt out. So the rule would not permit opt-out at the closing table, but instead would require that twelve months pass before a consumer may opt out. In this respect the proposal is intended to preserve consumer choice while protecting consumers from unaffordable mortgage obligations. Prepayment PenaltiesHaving discussed the rules that would promote affordability, I want to say a word about our proposed rule on prepayment penalties. These penalties can take a toll on consumers who have riskier loans, and many consumers may not even be aware their loans have a penalty. Accordingly, we have proposed a ban on prepayment penalties in circumstances of a high degree of risk to the consumer, and we are also addressing transparency concerns. The proposed rule would ban prepayment penalties where they are most likely to prevent a consumer from refinancing a loan that has a particularly burdensome payment. Specifically, a penalty would be prohibited where the borrower's debt-to-income ratio exceeds 50 percent, and a penalty would have to expire before a loan's payment could increase. The rule would also ban prepayment penalties where they are more likely to be part of a "loan flipping" scheme--specifically, where a lender or its affiliate refinances the lender's own loan. An approach tailored to the degree of risk to the consumer appears to us to be in the best interest of consumers overall. Banning penalties altogether could cause all borrowers, including those who do not prepay, to bear the full cost of investors' prepayment risk. That result would raise questions of fairness, and it could reduce consumer choice. We share concerns, however, that consumers often do not knowingly choose loans with penalties. We are tackling those concerns head-on. Through rigorous consumer testing, we are developing a new disclosure for prepayment penalties to improve consumer awareness and understanding. This should empower consumers to make better informed choices and improve competition. SteeringI have so far discussed the elements of our proposal that would seek to ensure that underwriting practices and loan terms on higher-priced loans do not present unwarranted risks to consumers. There is another potential source of risk to consumers that I want to address that is related to "steering"--the risk that when they use the services of a mortgage broker, they do not appreciate the extent to which the broker's interests may diverge from the consumer's interests because of "yield spread premiums."6 The growth of the market for brokerage services has no doubt increased competition in the market for mortgage loans, to the benefit of consumers. Moreover, the yield spread premium, a payment from a lender to a broker based on the loan's interest rate, is sometimes the best way for a consumer to fund the cost of a broker's services. However, when a lender pays a broker for a loan that has a higher rate, that payment can create a conflict of interest between the broker and the consumer. This conflict is problematic if the consumer does not know it exists or assumes, incorrectly, that the broker is obligated to put the consumer's interests first. In such cases, the consumer cannot protect his or her own interests, and competition for loans and for brokerage services does not work effectively. Therefore, we have proposed to prohibit a lender, for both prime and subprime loans, from paying a broker any more than the consumer had expressly agreed that the broker would receive. This agreement must be executed up-front, before the consumer has submitted an application and become invested in closing the deal. The combination of stricter regulation and better disclosure that we are proposing should help reduce a broker's incentive to steer a consumer to a higher rate, empower consumers to shop and negotiate among brokers, and preserve consumers' option to use the services of a broker. Better and Earlier Information for ConsumersLastly, to protect consumers and promote competition, our proposed regulation would prohibit misleading mortgage advertising and require that consumers receive loan-specific disclosures early in the application process, when they can use the information to shop more effectively. We recognize, however, that we face a challenge in ensuring that disclosures for mortgage loans remain effective. We have begun a comprehensive program of rigorous consumer testing of potential improvements to current disclosures. ConclusionThere are more elements of our comprehensive proposal that I do not have time today to discuss, such as a prohibition against coercing appraisers and restrictions on unwarranted servicing fees. We anticipate vigorous public comment on this proposal, and once we have carefully considered all the input we receive, we will move expeditiously to a final rule. As I noted at the outset, effective consumer protection can help to restore confidence in the mortgage markets and help to preserve the flow of capital to consumers who wish to purchase a home. It is not too early to emphasize that the effectiveness of the final rule will depend critically on effective enforcement. The Federal Reserve will do its part to ensure compliance among the institutions it supervises. We also have been instrumental in launching a pilot project with other federal and state agencies to conduct consumer compliance reviews of non-depository lenders and other industry participants. I am sure we will be aided in these efforts by a new system for registering and tracking mortgage brokers recently launched by the Conference of State Bank Supervisors. While we work to build effective consumer protections and enforcement regimes for future consumers, we will also continue our efforts, and encourage the initiatives many others are undertaking, to limit unnecessary foreclosures for consumers who are hurting now. Footnotes 1.Board staff calculation based on data from First American LoanPerformance.Return to text 2.Board staff calculation based on data from the Mortgage Bankers Association.Return to text 3.Board staff calculation based on data from First American LoanPerformance.Return to text 4.Under the proposal, a “higher-priced mortgage loan” would have an APR that exceeds the yield on comparable Treasury securities by three or more percentage points for first-lien loans, or five or more percentage points for subordinate-lien loans.Return to text 5.On an adjustable-rate mortgage, the fully-indexed rate is the sum of the value of the applicable index as of loan origination and the margin specified in the loan agreement. For example, a typical 2/28 mortgage issued in 2006 might have a fully-indexed rate of 11.37. This assumes that the mortgage was linked to the six-month LIBOR, that LIBOR was at its 2006 average value of 5.37 percent, and that the mortgage had a margin of six percentage points.Return to text 6.A “yield spread premium” is the present dollar value of the difference between the lowest interest rate the wholesale lender would have accepted on a particular transaction and the interest rate the broker actually obtained for the lender. This dollar amount is usually paid to the mortgage broker. It may also be applied to other loan-related costs, but the Board’s proposal concerns only the amount paid to the broker.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday requested public comment on a proposed change to the daylight overdraft posting rules under its Payments System Risk (PSR) policy to align the posting times for ACH credit and debit transfers in the payments system. Under the current posting rules, commercial and government automated clearinghouse (ACH) credit transfers processed by the Federal Reserve Banks' FedACH service are posted at 8:30 a.m. eastern time (ET), while commercial and government ACH debit transfers are posted at 11:00 a.m. ET. The Board proposes to change the posting time for commercial and government ACH debit transfers that are processed by the Reserve Banks' FedACH service to 8:30 a.m. ET to coincide with the posting time for commercial and government ACH credit transfers. In line with this change, the Board also intends, in consultation with the U.S. Treasury, to move the posting time for Treasury Tax and Loan investments associated with Electronic Federal Tax Payment System ACH debit transfers to 8:30 a.m. ET to maintain the simultaneous posting of ACH transactions and related Treasury transactions. Comments are requested by June 4, 2008. The Board's notice is attached. The Board also requested comments today on proposed changes to its PSR policy that are intended to loosen intraday liquidity constraints and reduce operational risk in financial markets and the payments system. Federal Register Notice77 KB PDF|TEXT Submit commentView comments
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday requested public comment on proposed changes to its Payments System Risk (PSR) policy that are intended to loosen intraday liquidity constraints and reduce operational risks in financial markets and the payments system. The Board is proposing a new strategy for providing intraday credit to depository institutions and would encourage these institutions to collateralize their daylight overdrafts. The Board has spent several years reviewing long-term developments in intraday liquidity, operational risk, and risk management in financial markets and the payments system, including the increased use of daylight overdrafts at the Federal Reserve Banks and increased Fedwire funds transfers late in the day. The Board published a consultation paper on these issues in 2006 and received public comments. As a result of this review and the comments, the Board is proposing changes tothe Federal Reserve's current strategy for providing intraday credit to the banking industry to help ease intraday liquidity constraints and reduce operational risk. Specifically, the Board proposes to adopt a policy of supplying intraday balances to healthy depository institutions predominantly throughexplicitlycollateralized daylight overdrafts. To avoid significantly disrupting the operation of the payments system and increasing the cost burden on a large number of institutions that incur small amounts of daylight overdrafts, the Board would allow depository institutions to pledge collateralvoluntarilyto secure daylight overdrafts. The proposed policy would encourage the voluntary pledging of collateral to cover daylight overdrafts by providing collateralized daylight overdrafts at a zero fee and by raising the fee for uncollateralized daylight overdrafts to 50 basis points (annual rate) from the current 36 basis points. In developing this proposal, the Board has sought to minimize the effect of the proposed policy changes on institutions that use small amounts of daylight overdrafts by increasing substantially the biweekly fee waiver to $150 from $25. The proposed policy would also involve changes to other policy provisions, including adjusting net debit caps, streamlining procedures for the expansion of daylight overdraft capacity for certain foreign banking organizations, eliminating the current deductible for daylight overdraft fees, and increasing the penalty daylight overdraft fee for ineligible institutions to 150 basis points (annual rate) from the current 136 basis points. The Board expects that a revised PSR policy could be implemented approximately two years from the adoption of a final rule. To assist depository institutions in assessing the impact of the proposed changes on their institution, the Board has developed a simple fee calculator that will allow institutions to estimate their daylight overdraft fees under the proposed policy. The fee calculator is located on the Board’s website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/apps/RPFCalc/. Comments are requested by June 4, 2008. The Board's notice is attached. The Board also requested public comment today on a proposed change to the daylight overdraft posting rules under its PSR policy. Federal Register Notice411 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday requested public comment on proposed changes to Regulation D (Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions) and Regulation I (Issue and Cancellation of Federal Reserve Bank Stock) to incorporate provisions of the Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2006. The proposed amendments would remove certain restrictions on the way depository institutions maintain required reserves and clarify and update other provisions of the regulations. The Federal Reserve Act imposes reserve requirements on certain deposits and other liabilities (primarily checking accounts) of depository institutions, such as banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions. Depository institutions must maintain required reserves in the form of cash in their vaults or as a balance in an account at a Federal Reserve Bank. Depository institutions may maintain a balance directly with a Federal Reserve Bank or with a correspondent institution that, in turn, holds reserve balances for respondents in a Federal Reserve account on a "pass-through" basis. The Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2006 amended the Federal Reserve Act to permit both banks that are Federal Reserve System members as well as nonmember banks to enter into pass-through correspondent arrangements. (Member banks include all national banks and any state-chartered banks that apply for membership and are accepted.) Previously, the Federal Reserve Act permitted only nonmember banks to enter into such arrangements. The proposal would implement the revisions to the pass-through rules as well as make other changes to clarify and modernize the regulations. These changes include simplifying the restrictions on certain types of transfers and withdrawals that may be made from savings deposits, clarifying the definitions of "time deposit" and "vault cash" to incorporate the substance of previously issued written staff guidance, reorganizing the provisions relating to deposit reporting and to the calculation and maintenance of required reserves, and making other minor editorial changes for clarity, including technical changes to Regulation D and Regulation I relating to the location of a depository institution for purposes of Federal Reserve Bank accounts and stock. The public comment period ends forty‑five days after publication of the proposed amendments in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. The Board’s notice is attached. Federal Register Notice94 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday approved amendments to Appendix A of Regulation CC that reflect the restructuring of the Federal Reserve's check processing operations in the Tenth and Eleventh Districts. Appendix A provides a routing number guide that helps depository institutions determine the maximum permissible hold periods for most deposited checks. As of April 19, 2008, the head office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City no longer will process checks, and banks currently served by that office will be reassigned to the head office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. To ensure that the information in Appendix A accurately describes the structure of check processing operations within the Federal Reserve System, the final rule deletes the reference in Appendix A to the head office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and reassigns the routing numbers listed thereunder to the head office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. To coincide with the effective date of the underlying check processing changes, the amendments are effective April 19, 2008. As a result of these changes, some checks deposited in the affected regions that currently are nonlocal checks will become local checks that are subject to shorter permissible hold periods. The Board’s notice is attached. Federal Register Notice50 KB PDF|TEXT
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Bernanke presented identical testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on February 28, 2008 Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the Federal Reserve'sMonetary Policy Report to the Congress. In my testimony this morning I will briefly review the economic situation and outlook, beginning with developments in real activity and inflation, then turn to monetary policy. I will conclude with a quick update on the Federal Reserve's recent actions to help protect consumers in their financial dealings. The economic situation has become distinctly less favorable since the time of our July report. Strains in financial markets, which first became evident late last summer, have persisted; and pressures on bank capital and the continued poor functioning of markets for securitized credit have led to tighter credit conditions for many households and businesses. The growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) held up well through the third quarter despite the financial turmoil, but it has since slowed sharply. Labor market conditions have similarly softened, as job creation has slowed and the unemployment rate--at 4.9 percent in January--has moved up somewhat. Many of the challenges now facing our economy stem from the continuing contraction of the U.S. housing market. In 2006, after a multiyear boom in residential construction and house prices, the housing market reversed course. Housing starts and sales of new homes are now less than half of their respective peaks, and house prices have flattened or declined in most areas. Changes in the availability of mortgage credit amplified the swings in the housing market. During the housing sector's expansion phase, increasingly lax lending standards, particularly in the subprime market, raised the effective demand for housing, pushing up prices and stimulating construction activity. As the housing market began to turn down, however, the slump in subprime mortgage originations, together with a more general tightening of credit conditions, has served to increase the severity of the downturn. Weaker house prices in turn have contributed to the deterioration in the performance of mortgage-related securities and reduced the availability of mortgage credit. The housing market is expected to continue to weigh on economic activity in coming quarters. Homebuilders, still faced with abnormally high inventories of unsold homes, are likely to cut the pace of their building activity further, which will subtract from overall growth and reduce employment in residential construction and closely related industries. Consumer spending continued to increase at a solid pace through much of the second half of 2007, despite the problems in the housing market, but it appears to have slowed significantly toward the end of the year. The jump in the price of imported energy, which eroded real incomes and wages, likely contributed to the slowdown in spending, as did the declines in household wealth associated with the weakness in house prices and equity prices. Slowing job creation is yet another potential drag on household spending, as gains in payroll employment averaged little more than 40,000 per month during the three months ending in January, compared with an average increase of almost 100,000 per month over the previous three months. However, the recently enacted fiscal stimulus package should provide some support for household spending during the second half of this year and into next year. The business sector has also displayed signs of being affected by the difficulties in the housing and credit markets. Reflecting a downshift in the growth of final demand and tighter credit conditions for some firms, available indicators suggest that investment in equipment and software will be subdued during the first half of 2008. Likewise, after growing robustly through much of 2007, nonresidential construction is likely to decelerate sharply in coming quarters as business activity slows and funding becomes harder to obtain, especially for more speculative projects. On a more encouraging note, we see few signs of any serious imbalances in business inventories aside from the overhang of unsold homes. And, as a whole, the nonfinancial business sector remains in good financial condition, with strong profits, liquid balance sheets, and corporate leverage near historical lows. In addition, the vigor of the global economy has offset some of the weakening of domestic demand. U.S. real exports of goods and services increased at an annual rate of about 11 percent in the second half of last year, boosted by continuing economic growth abroad and the lower foreign exchange value of the dollar. Strengthening exports, together with moderating imports, have in turn led to some improvement in the U.S. current account deficit, which likely narrowed in 2007 (on an annual basis) for the first time since 2001. Although recent indicators point to some slowing of foreign economic growth, U.S. exports should continue to expand at a healthy pace in coming quarters, providing some impetus to domestic economic activity and employment. As I have mentioned, financial markets continue to be under considerable stress. Heightened investor concerns about the credit quality of mortgages, especially subprime mortgages with adjustable interest rates, triggered the financial turmoil. However, other factors, including a broader retrenchment in the willingness of investors to bear risk, difficulties in valuing complex or illiquid financial products, uncertainties about the exposures of major financial institutions to credit losses, and concerns about the weaker outlook for economic growth, have also roiled the financial markets in recent months. To help relieve the pressures in the market for interbank lending, the Federal Reserve--among other actions--recently introduced a term auction facility (TAF), through which prespecified amounts of discount window credit are auctioned to eligible borrowers, and we have been working with other central banks to address market strains that could hamper the achievement of our broader economic objectives. These efforts appear to have contributed to some improvement in short-term funding markets. We will continue to monitor financial developments closely. As part of its ongoing commitment to improving the accountability and public understanding of monetary policy making, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) recently increased the frequency and expanded the content of the economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents and released to the public. The latest economic projections, which were submitted in conjunction with the FOMC meeting at the end of January and which are based on each participant's assessment of appropriate monetary policy, show that real GDP was expected to grow only sluggishly in the next few quarters and that the unemployment rate was seen as likely to increase somewhat. In particular, the central tendency of the projections was for real GDP to grow between 1.3 percent and 2.0 percent in 2008, down from 2-1/2 percent to 2-3/4 percent projected in our report last July. FOMC participants' projections for the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2008 have a central tendency of 5.2 percent to 5.3 percent, up from the level of about 4-3/4 percent projected last July for the same period. The downgrade in our projections for economic activity in 2008 since our report last July reflects the effects of the financial turmoil on real activity and a housing contraction that has been more severe than previously expected. By 2010, our most recent projections show output growth picking up to rates close to or a little above its longer-term trend and the unemployment rate edging lower; the improvement reflects the effects of policy stimulus and an anticipated moderation of the contraction in housing and the strains in financial and credit markets. The incoming information since our January meeting continues to suggest sluggish economic activity in the near term. The risks to this outlook remain to the downside. The risks include the possibilities that the housing market or labor market may deteriorate more than is currently anticipated and that credit conditions may tighten substantially further. Consumer price inflation has increased since our previous report, in substantial part because of the steep run-up in the price of oil. Last year, food prices also increased significantly, and the dollar depreciated. Reflecting these influences, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased 3.4 percent over the four quarters of 2007, up from 1.9 percent in 2006. Core price inflation--that is, inflation excluding food and energy prices--also firmed toward the end of the year. The higher recent readings likely reflected some pass-through of energy costs to the prices of core consumer goods and services as well as the effect of the depreciation of the dollar on import prices. Moreover, core inflation in the first half of 2007 was damped by a number of transitory factors--notably, unusually soft prices for apparel and for financial services--which subsequently reversed. For the year as a whole, however, core PCE prices increased 2.1 percent, down slightly from 2006. The projections recently submitted by FOMC participants indicate that overall PCE inflation was expected to moderate significantly in 2008, to between 2.1 percent and 2.4 percent (the central tendency of the projections). A key assumption underlying those projections was that energy and food prices would begin to flatten out, as was implied by quotes on futures markets. In addition, diminishing pressure on resources is also consistent with the projected slowing in inflation. The central tendency of the projections for core PCE inflation in 2008, at 2.0 percent to 2.2 percent, was a bit higher than in our July report, largely because of some higher-than-expected recent readings on prices. Beyond 2008, both overall and core inflation were projected to edge lower, as participants expected inflation expectations to remain reasonably well-anchored and pressures on resource utilization to be muted. The inflation projections submitted by FOMC participants for 2010--which ranged from 1.5 percent to 2.0 percent for overall PCE inflation--were importantly influenced by participants' judgments about the measured rates of inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate and about the time frame over which policy should aim to attain those rates. The rate of inflation that is actually realized will of course depend on a variety of factors. Inflation could be lower than we anticipate if slower-than-expected global growth moderates the pressure on the prices of energy and other commodities or if rates of domestic resource utilization fall more than we currently expect. Upside risks to the inflation projection are also present, however, including the possibilities that energy and food prices do not flatten out or that the pass-through to core prices from higher commodity prices and from the weaker dollar may be greater than we anticipate. Indeed, the further increases in the prices of energy and other commodities in recent weeks, together with the latest data on consumer prices, suggest slightly greater upside risks to the projections of both overall and core inflation than we saw last month. Should high rates of overall inflation persist, the possibility also exists that inflation expectations could become less well anchored. Any tendency of inflation expectations to become unmoored or for the Fed's inflation-fighting credibility to be eroded could greatly complicate the task of sustaining price stability and could reduce the flexibility of the FOMC to counter shortfalls in growth in the future. Accordingly, in the months ahead, the Federal Reserve will continue to monitor closely inflation and inflation expectations. Let me turn now to the implications of these developments for monetary policy. The FOMC has responded aggressively to the weaker outlook for economic activity, having reduced its target for the federal funds rate by 225 basis points since last summer. As the Committee noted in its most recent post-meeting statement, the intent of those actions has been to help promote moderate growth over time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity. A critical task for the Federal Reserve over the course of this year will be to assess whether the stance of monetary policy is properly calibrated to foster our mandated objectives of maximum employment and price stability in an environment of downside risks to growth, stressed financial conditions, and inflation pressures. In particular, the FOMC will need to judge whether the policy actions taken thus far are having their intended effects. Monetary policy works with a lag. Therefore, our policy stance must be determined in light of the medium-term forecast for real activity and inflation as well as the risks to that forecast. Although the FOMC participants' economic projections envision an improving economic picture, it is important to recognize that downside risks to growth remain. The FOMC will be carefully evaluating incoming information bearing on the economic outlook and will act in a timely manner as needed to support growth and to provide adequate insurance against downside risks. Finally, I would like to say a few words about the Federal Reserve's recent actions to protect consumers in their financial transactions. In December, following up on a commitment I made at the time of our report last July, the Board issued for public comment a comprehensive set of new regulations to prohibit unfair or deceptive practices in the mortgage market, under the authority granted us by the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act of 1994. The proposed rules would apply to all mortgage lenders and would establish lending standards to help ensure that consumers who seek mortgage credit receive loans whose terms are clearly disclosed and that can reasonably be expected to be repaid. Accordingly, the rules would prohibit lenders from engaging in a pattern or practice of making higher-priced mortgage loans without due regard to consumers' ability to make the scheduled payments. In each case, a lender making a higher-priced loan would have to use third-party documents to verify the income relied on to make the credit decision. For higher-priced loans, the proposed rules would require the lender to establish an escrow account for the payment of property taxes and homeowners' insurance and would prevent the use of prepayment penalties in circumstances where they might trap borrowers in unaffordable loans. In addition, for all mortgage loans, our proposal addresses misleading and deceptive advertising practices, requires borrowers and brokers to agree in advance on the maximum fee that the broker may receive, bans certain practices by servicers that harm borrowers, and prohibits coercion of appraisers by lenders. We expect substantial public comment on our proposal, and we will carefully consider all information and viewpoints while moving expeditiously to adopt final rules. The effectiveness of the new regulations, however, will depend critically on strong enforcement. To that end, in conjunction with other federal and state agencies, we are conducting compliance reviews of a range of mortgage lenders, including nondepository lenders. The agencies will collaborate in determining the lessons learned and in seeking ways to better cooperate in ensuring effective and consistent examinations of, and improved enforcement for, all categories of mortgage lenders. The Federal Reserve continues to work with financial institutions, public officials, and community groups around the country to help homeowners avoid foreclosures. We have called on mortgage lenders and servicers to pursue prudent loan workouts and have supported the development of streamlined, systematic approaches to expedite the loan modification process. We also have been providing community groups, counseling agencies, regulators, and others with detailed analyses to help identify neighborhoods at high risk from foreclosures so that local outreach efforts to help troubled borrowers can be as focused and effective as possible. We are actively pursuing other ways to leverage the Federal Reserve's analytical resources, regional presence, and community connections to address this critical issue. In addition to our consumer protection efforts in the mortgage area, we are working toward finalizing rules under the Truth in Lending Act that will require new, more informative, and consumer-tested disclosures by credit card issuers. Separately, we are actively reviewing potentially unfair and deceptive practices by issuers of credit cards. Using the Board's authority under the Federal Trade Commission Act, we expect to issue proposed rules regarding these practices this spring. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and members of the Committee, I want to thank you for this opportunity to discuss the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). Enacted in 1977, the CRA states that federally insured banks and thrifts have an obligation to help meet the credit needs of the communities in which they are chartered, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, consistent with safe and sound operations. The act also directs the federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies, including the Federal Reserve, to implement the CRA through regulations, and to examine banks and thrifts to determine whether they meet their CRA obligations. I serve as Director of the Federal Reserve Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs. The division administers the Board's responsibilities for rulewriting and examinations for federal laws involving consumer protection in financial services, including the CRA. We oversee and provide policy direction for consumer compliance and CRA examinations of state member banks conducted by Federal Reserve examiners. Through our national Community Affairs Program, we share knowledge about successful approaches to community development with bankers and other CRA stakeholders. We also analyze and report to the Board on CRA issues that arise in connection with certain applications by financial entities to expand their businesses. In my remarks today, I will provide some historical context about the CRA, discuss the Federal Reserve's CRA examination program, describe how CRA is considered when evaluating applications, and outline some key challenges we face in ensuring that the CRA remains effective and relevant.Historical Context of the CRAConcerns about the deteriorating condition of America's cities, particularly lower-income neighborhoods, led to the enactment of the Community Reinvestment Act in 1977. Many advocates for the passage of this new law believed that this deterioration was fueled by, among other things, limited credit availability. Some blamed the lack of credit availability on mainstream depository institutions, and charged that they were willing to accept insured deposits from households and small businesses in lower-income neighborhoods but unwilling to lend or invest in those same neighborhoods despite the presence of creditworthy consumers. A number of factors, including an undeveloped secondary mortgage market, the lack of a comprehensive national credit reporting system, more costly credit evaluation methods, and unlawful redlining were all put forward to explain why credit to lower-income neighborhoods was limited at the time of the CRA's passage. At the time, state and federal rules prohibited interstate branching and acquisitions, and even intrastate branching in some cases. These factors reduced competition and the ability of lenders to diversify geographic risk and, taken together, contributed to the concern that banking institutions were not adequately serving the credit needs of some residents of their communities. In passing the CRA, Congress reaffirmed the long-standing principle that insured depository institutions must serve "the convenience and needs" of the communities in which they are chartered to do business, which included meeting their credit needs. The Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 already required the Federal Reserve Board, when reaching decisions on proposed acquisitions by banks or bank holding companies, to evaluate how well the institutions involved were meeting community needs, consistent with the requirements of safety and soundness. Some argued that this CRA obligation was aquid pro quofor privileges such as the protection afforded by federal deposit insurance and access to the Federal Reserve's discount window. The CRA is actually one of several laws intended to reduce credit-related discrimination, expand access to credit, and shed light on lending activity. The CRA itself focuses on the provision of credit to low- and moderate-income communities. On the other hand, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (1974) and the Fair Housing Act (1968) explicitly prohibit discrimination on the bases of race, sex, or other personal characteristics. The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (1975), which requires the disclosure of mortgage lending and application data, was enacted to increase transparency and to support public and private investment activity. The debate surrounding the passage of the CRA was contentious, with critics charging that the law would distort credit markets, create unnecessary regulatory burden, lead to unsound lending, and cause the governmental agencies charged with implementing the law to allocate credit. Partly in response to these concerns, the act adopted by Congress included little prescriptive detail. Instead, the CRA simply requires the Federal Reserve and the other federal financial supervisory agencies: The law gives the agencies considerable discretion and flexibility to fashion programs and procedures to carry out the purposes of the law, to issue implementing regulations that include measures of performance, and to modify those regulations in response to changing markets. This flexibility has contributed to CRA's relevance and adaptability through times of rapid economic and financial change, and widely differing economic circumstances among neighborhoods. CRA Regulations and ExaminationsCRA examinations have been at the core of our efforts to encourage state member banks to help meet the credit needs of their communities since the first set of CRA regulations was adopted in 1978. We have adjusted the CRA examination process over the years on our own initiative and in response to statutory changes, some of which have been significant. The 1978 CRA regulations focused CRA examinations on factors related to the process used by institutions to determine the credit needs of their community and to their responses to those needs. The evaluation of an institution's performance was based on the application of twelve assessment factors, including the ascertainment of community credit needs, marketing and the types of credit offered, the geographic distribution of loans, the record of opening and closing branches and providing services, participation in local community development projects, and the financial and legal capability of the institution. To avoid allocating credit, and to allow for creativity by institutions in meeting the varying credit needs of their localities, these regulations did not require specific products to be offered or attempt to prescribe any particular required level of lending. Further, all covered institutions were subject to the same set of rules and assessment factors, without differentiating based on size or location. Until the passage of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act (FIRREA) in 1989, CRA examinations culminated in a confidential examination report and rating that was provided only to the bank or thrift. FIRREA amended the CRA to require the agencies to publicly issue CRA ratings and written performance evaluations describing institutions' CRA performance using facts and data to support the agencies' conclusions. This requirement makes CRA examinations unique among other supervisory activities, which are confidential matters. In the absense of any statutory authority for the agencies to address poor CRA performance through enforcement actions, public disclosure of CRA ratings and evaluations may well serve to motivate an institution to improve a weak CRA record, or encourage an institution to maintain an otherwise favorable record. Also in FIRREA, Congress amended the CRA to require the current four-tiered CRA examination rating system with descriptive performance levels of Outstanding, Satisfactory, Needs to Improve, or Substantial Noncompliance in place of the five-tiered system in use by the agencies at the time. In response to these statutory changes, the agencies amended the CRA regulations and examination procedures accordingly to prescribe the method for assigning an institution's rating, and preparing and issuing public evaluations. Each rating encompasses a wide range of potential performance outcomes. For state member banks evaluated by the Federal Reserve over the past six years, 15.8 percent received an Outstanding rating, 83.7 percent earned a Satisfactory rating, and .5 percent were assigned either Needs to Improve or Substantial Noncompliance CRA ratings. The CRA regulations were substantially revised again in 1995, in response to a directive to the agencies from President Clinton to review and revise the CRA regulations to make them more performance-based, and to make examinations more consistent, clarify performance standards, and reduce cost and compliance burden. This directive addressed criticisms that the regulations, and the agencies' implementation of them through the examination process, were too process-oriented, burdensome, and not sufficiently focused on actual results. The agencies also changed the CRA examination process to incorporate these revisions. Examination ApproachesSince 1995, the agencies' CRA regulations have tailored the examination approach to the institution's size or its business operations. Currently, for depository institutions with assets greater than $1.061 billion1CRA performance is evaluated based on a lending test, an investment test, and a service test. Under the lending test, an institution's lending performance is evaluated on both quantitative and qualitative factors, and the outcome is generally weighted to count for 50 percent of the institution's overall CRA rating. An institution with a Needs to Improve or Substantial Noncompliance rating on the lending test cannot be assigned an overall passing grade for CRA. Under the investment and service tests, investments benefiting low- and moderate-income individuals and neighborhoods, or distressed or underserved rural areas are assessed, and services to the entire community, including low- and moderate-income individuals and neighborhoods, are reviewed. An institution's performance in making investments and providing services each accounts for 25 percent of the institution's overall rating. Examiners also weigh the innovativeness of the institution's community development lending, investment, and service programs and activities. Institutions with assets between $265 million and $1.061 billion are designated as "intermediate small institutions" and are evaluated on their record of lending in low- and moderate-income areas and to lower-income people in the institutions' assessment areas. A community development test is also included in the review of these institutions. This test encourages institutions to engage in a range of community development lending, investment, and services but provides them flexibility to target their resources where they will produce the most community benefit. The designation of "intermediate small institutions" was the product of a regulatory change that followed from a 2002 interagency review of the effectiveness of the 1995 regulatory changes. Currently, institutions with assets less than $265 million are evaluated primarily on their lending performance in their communities, including low- and moderate-income areas and populations. Given their more limited capacity and resources, small institutions are not expected to engage in more complex community development activities. The regulations also provide a different evaluation method for institutions designated as "wholesale" or "limited purpose." This examination method focuses on evaluating an institution's community development lending, services, and investments. In addition, any institution can opt to develop a CRA "strategic plan" and be evaluated under that plan, if it is approved. During the CRA examination, examiners assess an institution's performance within the context of all relevant factors, such as its business strategy, capacity and constraints, the overall economic conditions and credit needs in its assessment area2, and the availability of community development activities appropriate to the institution. This performance context recognizes that while insured depository institutions have an affirmative obligation to meet the credit needs of the communities in which they are chartered, they must engage only in activities that are safe and sound. Public InvolvementTo ensure a broad and balanced CRA assessment, examiners routinely conduct interviews with local business people, government officials, housing and consumer advocates, realtors, trade association representatives, and many others. The purpose of these interviews is to obtain information about, among other things, general credit needs of the community, the availability or the lack of availability of credit, and how different institutions respond to those credit needs. The comments of these individuals are factored into the examiners' CRA rating. The community also has other opportunities to participate in the CRA evaluation process. The public can offer comments on an institution's CRA performance and those comments are publicly available. Examiners review the institution's public comment file and take comments into account when evaluating an institution's overall CRA performance. To assist the public, and to encourage public comments, the agencies inform the public every calendar quarter of upcoming CRA examinations. Illegal Lending DiscriminationUnder the CRA regulations, the Federal Reserve's evaluation of a bank's CRA performance takes into account evidence of illegal lending discrimination or other illegal credit practices.3Federal Reserve examiners conduct a fair lending review concurrently with, or close in time to each CRA evaluation, and the findings from that review are factored into the CRA evaluation. The public CRA performance evaluation summarizes a bank's record of complying with the fair lending laws, and states whether violations were found and, if so, whether they negatively affected the bank's overall CRA rating. Pursuant to the CRA regulations, various factors relating to the violations will be considered when determining the bank's assigned CRA rating, including the nature and extent of discriminatory practices, the policies and procedures in place to prevent such practices, and corrective action taken by the bank. A finding of discrimination could result, for example, in a downgrade of the rating otherwise earned to either Needs to Improve or Substantial Noncompliance, or from Outstanding to Satisfactory. However, if the discrimination was isolated, or occurred despite the existence of generally effective internal controls to prevent such practices, the existence of the violation may be reported in the public CRA performance evaluation without actually lowering the bank's CRA rating. This reflects the fact that each CRA rating category encompasses a range of conduct and performance. An inadvertent or isolated violation may not be sufficient to move the bank's overall performance assessment out of that range and into a lower rating category. ImplementationOne of the implementation issues faced by the agencies in the examination process has been addressing questions from examiners and the industry alike about the specific dollar level of lending or investments that an institution needs to qualify for a particular CRA rating. The agencies have not provided that level of specificity for several reasons. First, introducing specific quantitative expectations into the CRA evaluation would constitute credit allocation, which is not a part of the statute. Second, any prior attempts by the agencies to introduce ratios, percentages, or market share comparisons into the CRA evaluation process have been met with strong opposition from the industry and consumer advocates alike about whether to stipulate such a benchmark and, if so, the appropriate figure,4and widely divergent views from covered institutions of different sizes operating in different markets. Third, specifying numerical targets could serve as a strong disincentive by an institution to do more, even when the institution has the capacity. Fourth, numerical targets could be contrary to the safe and sound operation of the institution. Instead, the agencies have historically evaluated each institution's record in the context of its individual circumstances, and the circumstances of the community it serves. The frequency of CRA examinations is determined by, and in some cases limited by, an institution's size and prior CRA rating. The Federal Reserve conducts CRA examinations of state member banks with assets greater than $250 million and favorable ratings on a two-year cycle; a one-year cycle applies if the rating is less than satisfactory. By statute, the examination cycle is significantly longer for banks with assets less than $250 million and ratings of Satisfactory or Outstanding. Under the CRA, the agencies are prohibited from examining these entities for CRA purposes any more frequently than every four or five years if the bank is rated Satisfactory or Outstanding, respectively, for CRA. Congress added this limitation to the statute as part of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act in 1999 as a way to reduce regulatory burden. We may, however, examine these banks on shorter cycles if the rating is below satisfactory, and under other very narrow and limited exceptions. The Federal Reserve has had a dedicated consumer compliance and CRA examination program in place since the late 1970s. The program is staffed with specialized examiners at each Federal Reserve Bank who are responsible for conducting consumer compliance and CRA examinations. These examiners receive special training in CRA at schools administered by the Board, and in regional or Reserve Bank classes, which sets them apart from examiners solely concerned with safety and soundness matters. CRA and the Application ProcessUnder the Bank Merger Act and the Bank Holding Company Act, the Federal Reserve is required to take into account a number of factors when it reviews banking organizations' applications for expansion. These include the competitive effects of the proposal in the relevant markets; the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the bank holding company and its banking subsidiaries; and the convenience and needs of the communities affected. The public is notified when applications are filed and interested parties may comment on any of the statutory factors. Sometimes members of the public, advocacy organizations, and other interested parties comment in order to "protest" applications when they have concerns that an approval might diminish services to communities. In fact, the Federal Reserve sometimes receives numerous comment letters on applications by large banking organizations. Substantive comments are always considered in the evaluation of the proposal. The Board expects an applicant to have a solid program for meeting its CRA responsibilities in place and working well when it files an application. In evaluating a banking application that is the subject of a protest, Federal Reserve staff consider the entire supervisory record of the institutions involved in the proposed transaction. Applications are evaluated on a case-by-case basis, but in every instance the following information is taken into account, as applicable: When information cannot be effectively obtained from written comments, other sources, or supervisory processes, the Federal Reserve holds public meetings to gather input from the community. Transcripts of all public meetings held since 1998 are available on the Federal Reserve Board's website. Since 1988, there have been more than 13,500 applications for the formation, acquisition, or merger of bank holding companies or state-member banks reviewed by the Federal Reserve Board. Over this time, twenty-five applications have been denied, with eight of those failing to obtain Board approval involving unsatisfactory consumer protection or community reinvestment issues. The low incidence of denied applications is attributable to the fact that institutions seeking to expand their operations are typically in sound financial and managerial condition and have good supervisory and CRA records. Management of applicant institutions has generally recognized the benefit that strong community investment programs offer. Further, institutions with poor records that have nonetheless submitted an application have generally withdrawn their application after discussions with Board staff. The supervisory and public scrutiny that the CRA brings has prompted many banks to create specialized CRA business units within their organizations. The cases in which the Board has denied an application on CRA grounds have sent an unmistakable message that it is crucial to have a satisfactory record of CRA performancebeforeapplying to expand. Institutions likely understand that the Board will not allow promises of better future performance to compensate for inadequate current performance. Current CRA ChallengesThe thirty years since the CRA's enactment have been marked by dramatic changes in the financial services markets. The banking industry and, more broadly, the financial services industry have undergone a great deal of structural change, some with important implications for the potential effectiveness of the CRA. Since 1979, consolidations and mergers have decreased the number of banks and thrifts subject to the CRA by nearly 10,470, or 51 percent, with a loss of more than 3,120 institutions since 1995. At the same time, the surviving larger organizations generally experienced an expanded CRA footprint since they became responsible for CRA activities in the geographies previously covered by the institutions that were acquired. Even with all the consolidation, the banking industry remains diverse and robust. Although larger institutions hold a dominant share of the assets of the banking industry, many thousands of small and locally based institutions continue to serve the credit and deposit needs of their communities. Moreover, the banking industry continues to have room for new participants--approximately 1,870 banking institutions have entered the market since 1995. As banks have significantly expanded their role in the broader financial services industry, overall competition in the marketplace has increased, and the lines between banks and nonbanks have blurred. Unlike in 1977, banks and holding companies now engage in interstate banking and nontraditional lines of business and thus provide consumers more choices from which to obtain financial services. Nonbanks offer many traditional banking services, including a full range of credit services, while banks have become sources for securities and insurance products. Further, mortgage banking has evolved into an industry in which a very large number of lenders operate independently from banking organizations and rely on worldwide capital markets for their funding. Simultaneously, advances in technology have redefined nearly every aspect of the industry--from loan underwriting to product delivery--with computers changing these and many other processes in ways unimaginable two decades ago. For example, the Board's August 2007Report to the Congress on Credit Scoring and Its Effects on the Availability and Affordability of Creditdiscusses the revolutionary role played by one such technology, credit scoring. Credit scoring has provided a mechanism for realizing loan-processing and production efficiencies, and engaging in systematic risk-based pricing. Similarly, the Internet has enabled the collection of deposits and the disbursement of loans from and to virtually any location without bricks-and-mortar premises and allowed many consumers to save time and effort in credit shopping. CRA-related activities of covered institutions have benefitted their communities, especially lower-income neighborboods. For example, overall mortgage loans to borrowers in lower-income neighborhoods by CRA covered institutions in their CRA assessment areas has increased from 13.4 percent of their assessment area mortgage loans in 1994 to 16.2 percent in 2006. This change suggests a greater focus on CRA-related lending by covered institutions. Research by Federal Reserve staff has found that such gains in lending appear to have had a tangible beneficial effect on local communities. The research found that the gains in homeownership rates from 1990 to 2000 were higher for neighborhoods deemed to be lower income under the CRA rules than similar neighborhoods that were not.5Further, Federal Reserve research suggests that CRA covered institutions have been able to extend such loans profitably and that the performance of such loans is about the same as that of other mortgage loans.6 But, we still face difficult and complex challenges relating to the CRA's continued relevance. I'd like to talk about a couple of them today. One issue involves the coverage of the law itself. Because of changes in the industry, and the fact that many financial transactions are now being offered by nonbank service providers and other types of financial entities, some have suggested extending the coverage of the CRA beyond insured banks and thrifts. On the one hand, insured banks and thrifts institutions remain the primary conduit for many financial services, including the full range of deposit account services, and continue to provide capital to communities. For example, the Federal Reserve's2004 Survey of Consumer Financesreveals that 77 percent of all households with at least one financial relationship identified a commercial bank or a thrift institution as their primary source for financial services, with 93 percent of those respondents acquiring services from a local bank or thrift--that is, one that is located within thirty miles of where they live. Further, the Federal Reserve's2003 Survey of Small Business Financesindicate that 88 percent of all small businesses identified a commercial bank or thrift as their primary source for financial services, again with 96 percent of those respondents acquiring these services from a local bank or thrift. On the other hand, institutions not covered by the CRA have become more active over time in the financial services market. Federal Reserve-sponsored surveys of small businesses and consumers document the increased use of nondepository institutions for financial services by small businesses and households. Small businesses surveyed between 1993 and 2003 reported a 14 percent increase in the use of nondepository institutions, and the percentage of households surveyed between 1992 and 2004 that used a nondepository institution nearly doubled to more than 60 percent. However, expanding CRA's coverage to nondepository financial institutions would raise several issues. CRA is based on a fundamentalquid pro quo;the insured banks and thrifts covered by the CRA receive special benefits, such as deposit insurance, and as a consequence are expected to help meet the credit needs of their local communities, including the low- and moderate-income areas. Determining which, if any, additional types of entities to cover and why, and what the scope of their responsibilities should be given that there is no area from which they take deposits, would need to be carefully studied and considered. A determination would also need to be made about an appropriate rating and public evaluation scheme for any newly covered entities, and how the law would be administered and by whom. The nexus between deposit-taking in geographic areas and lending in those areas, and thequid pro quodiscussed above, have given the statute a strong conceptual underpinning. It would seem desirable that any expanded coverage have foundations of similar strength. The agencies have grappled with the issue of the CRA and nondepositories when presented with the question of how to consider loans, investments and services offered by affiliates within a bank's corporate structure that are not covered by the CRA. At present, loans, investments, and services provided by a holding company affiliate are considered at the discretion of an affiliated bank as part of its CRA evaluation, even though the affiliate itself has no CRA obligation. The agencies' regulations prevent a bank from "cherry-picking" only the most favorable affiliate loans or investments.7However, the CRA does not provide the agencies with the authority to impose a CRA obligation on entities that are not insured depository institutions. On the other hand, refusing to consider activities done by an affiliate or subsidiary, simply because of the choice of corporate structure, raises its own problems. Another issue concerns whether the traditional notion of community needs to be revisited to ensure we have an appropriate CRA evaluation model for addressing how business is conducted today. The local geographical and deposit-taking rubric of the CRA statute was reflective of, and consistent with, the way financial markets operated in the 1970s. Local institutions with a brick-and-mortar presence did business in relatively confined geographic areas and generally made loans to local residents and businesses. Branching, both intrastate or interstate, was generally restricted, limited, or prohibited altogether. Thus, an institution's assessment area for CRA purposes was relatively easy to identify, and consistent with the community it served. Today, many institutions do business regionally and nationally, and use multiple avenues--brokers, mail, Internet transactions, and loan production offices for instance--to make loans in, and sometimes to solicit deposits from many communities without maintaining traditional, full-service deposit-taking branches that trigger CRA responsibilities there. The implication is that these institutions may have a significant presence in some communities through means other than branches or ATMs but are not required to meet the needs of low- and moderate-income areas in those communities. Expanding the concept of "community" beyond geographies containing deposit-taking offices and ATMs, however, would require reexamining the CRA's original purpose. The agencies have made some adjustments on a case-by-case basis, consistent with their authority, to enable institutions that do a substantial portion of their lending outside their assessment areas through nontraditional channels to have that lending considered for CRA purposes. For example, an institution's loans to low- and moderate-income persons and small business and small farm loans outside of its assessment area(s) will be considered, but only if it has adequately addressed the needs of borrowers within its assessment area(s). Moreover, such loans will not compensate for poor lending performance inside the assessment area(s).8At the present time, the assessment area construct appears adequate to delineate the relevant communities of most institutions. Limitations of the CRA's current local geographic framework may become more acute as the market continues to evolve more toward the use of nontraditional product delivery methods and the contours of what are considered local communities become blurred. ConclusionThe CRA is one of several laws enacted to ensure that consumers and communities have access to financial services and products regardless of location or demographics. Congress sought to achieve that goal not by imposing rigid, prescriptive rules but by charging regulators to use flexible standards that could change, as needed, over time. The agencies look to market developments, learn from data and research as they emerge, and solicit input from financial institutions, consumers, and advocates when assessing how their CRA regulations and examination process should evolve. At the same time, while the agencies have a responsibility to update their CRA regulations and examination procedures as needed, the agencies must respect the boundaries on their authority established by Congress in the language, structure, and purposes of the statute. I appreciate this opportunity to appear before the Committee and welcome any questions you may have. Footnotes 1.As part of regulatory changes made in 2005, the agencies adjust the asset size thresholds for small and large institutions annually on the basis of changes in the Consumer Price Index. The asset sizes in this statement reflect the thresholds in effect for 2008. See 12 CFR 228.12(u).Return to text 2.Under the CRA regulations, a bank must delineate an assessment area or areas that correspond to commonly recognized metropolitan areas or political subdivisions that surround its main office, branches and deposit-taking ATMs in which the bank has originated or purchased a substantial portion of its loans. See 12 CFR 228.41. The assumption underlying this approach is that branches, and certain ATMs, serve as the deposit-taking arm of the institution and, therefore, define its community for reinvestment purposes. The assumption also encompasses one of Congress' findings in passing the CRA--that regulated financial institutions are required by law to demonstrate that their deposit facilities serve the convenience and needs of the communities in which they are chartered to do business. See 12 USC 2901.Return to text 3.In addition to findings involving discrimination in violation of the Equal Credit Opportunity Act and the Fair Housing Act, other violations that affect the evaluation of a bank's CRA performance include: violations of Section 32 of the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA), which addresses "high cost" mortgages; violations involving kickbacks and unearned fees under Section 8 of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA); violations of the Truth in Lending Act's (TILA) provisions regarding a consumer's right of rescission; and unfair or deceptive practices in violation of Section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act.Return to text 4.For example, the agencies' 1993 proposal to revise the CRA regulation introduced a performance test that called for a "reasonable" loan-to-deposit ratio for small institutions with assets below $250 million, and provided a rebuttable presumption that 60 percent would be considered reasonable. The public comments received on that part of the proposal argued for either higher or lower values, or none at all. This led the agencies to ultimately conclude that setting a precise number would not only be daunting but, more importantly, counter-productive. The final regulations contain a loan-to-deposit test for small institutions, but do not specify a numerical proxy for "reasonable."Return to text 5.Robert B. Avery, Paul S. Calem and Glenn B. Canner,"The Effects of the Community Reinvestment Act on Local Communities (88.6 KB PDF),"paper presented at the Federal Reserve System Conference titled "Sustainable Community Development: What Works, What Doesn't and Why," March 2003.Return to text 6.The Performance and Profitability of CRA-Related Lending Report by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (152 KB PDF), submitted to the Congress pursuant to section 713 of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999, July 17, 2000.Return to text 7.Under the CRA regulations, if a bank elects to have the agencies consider loans within a particular lending category made by one or more of the bank's affiliates in a particular assessment area, the bank shall elect to have the Board consider all the loans within that lending category in that particular assessment area made by all of the bank's affiliates. See 12 CFR 228.22(c) and Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment; §___.22(c)(2)(ii) – 1, 66 Federal Register 36634.Return to text 8.See 12 CFR 228.22(c)(2) and Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment; § ___.22(b)(2) and (3) – 4.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Chairman Dodd, Senator Shelby, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here to offer my views on financial conditions, the near-term economic outlook, and related issues. As you know, financial markets in the United States and in a number of other industrialized countries have been under considerable strain since late last summer. Heightened investor concerns about the credit quality of mortgages, especially subprime mortgages with adjustable interest rates, triggered the financial turmoil. However, other factors, including a broader retrenchment in the willingness of investors to bear risk, difficulties in valuing complex or illiquid financial products, uncertainties about the exposures of major financial institutions to credit losses, and concerns about the weaker outlook for the economy, have also roiled the financial markets in recent months. As the concerns of investors increased, money center banks and other large financial institutions have come under significant pressure to take onto their own balance sheets the assets of some of the off-balance-sheet investment vehicles that they had sponsored. Bank balance sheets have swollen further as a consequence of the sharp reduction in investor willingness to buy securitized credits, which has forced banks to retain a substantially higher share of previously committed and new loans in their own portfolios. Banks have also reported large losses, reflecting marked declines in the market prices of mortgages and other assets that they hold. Recently, deterioration in the financial condition of some bond insurers has led some commercial and investment banks to take further markdowns and has added to strains in the financial markets. The banking system has been highly profitable in recent years and entered this episode with strong capital positions. Some institutions have responded to their recent losses by raising additional capital. Notwithstanding these positive factors, the unexpected losses and the increased pressure on their balance sheets have prompted banks to become protective of their liquidity and balance sheet capacity and, thus, to become less willing to provide funding to other market participants, including other banks. Banks have also become more restrictive in their lending to firms and households. For example, in the latest Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey conducted by the Federal Reserve, banks reported having further tightened their lending standards and terms for a broad range of loan types over the past three months. More-expensive and less-available credit seems likely to continue to be a source of restraint on economic growth. In part as the result of the developments in financial markets, the outlook for the economy has worsened in recent months, and the downside risks to growth have increased. To date, the largest economic effects of the financial turmoil appear to have been on the housing market, which, as you know, has deteriorated significantly over the past two years or so. The virtual shutdown of the subprime mortgage market and a widening of spreads on jumbo mortgage loans have further reduced the demand for housing, while foreclosures are adding to the already-elevated inventory of unsold homes. Further cuts in homebuilding and in related activities are likely. Conditions in the labor market have also softened. Payroll employment, after increasing about 95,000 per month on average in the fourth quarter, declined by an estimated 17,000 jobs in January. Employment in the construction and manufacturing sectors has continued to fall, while the pace of job gains in the services industries has slowed. The softer labor market, together with factors including higher energy prices, lower equity prices, and declining home values, seem likely to weigh on consumer spending in the near term. On the other hand, growth in U.S. exports should continue to provide some offset to the softening in domestic demand, and the recently approved fiscal package should help to support household and business spending during the second half of this year and into the first part of next year. On the inflation front, a key development over the past year has been the steep run-up in the price of oil. Last year, food prices also increased exceptionally rapidly by recent standards, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar weakened. All told, over the four quarters of 2007, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased 3.4 percent, up from 1.9 percent during 2006. Excluding the prices of food and energy, PCE price inflation ran at a 2.1 percent rate in 2007, down a bit from 2006. To date, inflation expectations appear to have remained reasonably well anchored, but any tendency of inflation expectations to become unmoored or for the Fed's inflation-fighting credibility to be eroded could greatly complicate the task of sustaining price stability and reduce the central bank's policy flexibility to counter shortfalls in growth in the future. Accordingly, in the months ahead we will be closely monitoring inflation expectations and the inflation situation more generally. To address these developments, the Federal Reserve has moved in two main areas. To help relieve the pressures in the interbank markets, the Federal Reserve--among other actions--recently introduced a term auction facility (TAF), through which prespecified amounts of discount window credit can be auctioned to eligible borrowers, and we have been working closely and cooperatively with other central banks to address market strains that could hamper the achievement of our broader economic objectives. In the area of monetary policy, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has moved aggressively, cutting its target for the federal funds rate by a total of 225 basis points since September, including 125 basis points during January alone. As the FOMC noted in its most recent post-meeting statement, the intent of these actions is to help promote moderate growth over time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity. A critical task for the Federal Reserve over the course of this year will be to assess whether the stance of monetary policy is properly calibrated to foster our mandated objectives of maximum employment and price stability and, in particular, whether the policy actions taken thus far are having their intended effects. Monetary policy works with a lag. Therefore, our policy stance must be determined in light of the medium-term forecast for real activity and inflation, as well as the risks to that forecast. At present, my baseline outlook involves a period of sluggish growth, followed by a somewhat stronger pace of growth starting later this year as the effects of monetary and fiscal stimulus begin to be felt. At the same time, overall consumer price inflation should moderate from its recent rates, and the public's longer-term inflation expectations should remain reasonably well anchored. Although the baseline outlook envisions an improving picture, it is important to recognize that downside risks to growth remain, including the possibilities that the housing market or the labor market may deteriorate to an extent beyond that currently anticipated, or that credit conditions may tighten substantially further. The FOMC will be carefully evaluating incoming information bearing on the economic outlook and will act in a timely manner as needed to support growth and to provide adequate insurance against downside risks.
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the Tuck Global Capital Markets Conference, Tuck School of Business, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire Since the onset of financial market strains late last summer, the Federal Reserve has been acting in a decisive, timely, and flexible manner in fostering the objectives of price stability and maximum employment. In particular, the Federal Reserve's actions have been aimed at supporting market liquidity, mitigating the downside risks to economic activity, and promoting moderate growth over time. In my remarks here, I would like to explain how the Federal Reserve has used four different tools to accomplish these objectives.1I will first examine three tools for supporting market liquidity--namely, open market operations, the discount window, and the newly developed Term Auction Facility. Then I will discuss some important principles for adjusting the target federal funds rate, which is the primary tool for addressing the macroeconomic implications of a financial market disruption. As usual, my remarks reflect only my own views and are not intended to reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System.2 Supporting Market LiquidityAs I pointed out in a speech last October, one of the fundamental reasons that the Federal Reserve was established in 1913 was to ensure the provision of ample liquidity during financial market disruptions (Mishkin, 2007a). In fact, my own academic research has examined the recurring financial crises that occurred prior to the founding of the Fed (Mishkin, 1991). These crises exhibited a consistent pattern of very sharp upward spikes in interest rates, reflecting a surge in demand for liquidity without any corresponding change in supply, and these interest rate fluctuations were associated with significant adverse consequences on the broader economy. In contrast, during more recent episodes of financial market turmoil, as in October 1987 and the fall of 1998, the Federal Reserve has contributed to the stability of short-term funding markets by boosting the supply of liquidity in line with changes in demand. In each case, the Federal Reserve's actions were successful in preventing sharp upward spikes in short-term interest rates and in insulating the macroeconomy from these financial market developments. Moreover, those episodes have highlighted the extent to which the provision of liquidity in an environment of heightened uncertainty can play an important role in allowing financial institutions to make more-accurate judgments about the solvency and creditworthiness of prospective borrowers (Mishkin, 2007a). In that context, I would now like to describe the three tools that the Federal Reserve has used over the past six months in providing liquidity to the financial system. Tool #1: Open market operationsOpen market operations are the most powerful and often-used tool for keeping thefederal funds rate close to the target rate set by the FOMC.3In principle, the Federal Reserve could influence the federal funds rate by purchasing or selling any type of asset, but in practice, most assets are not traded readily enough to serve this purpose. For open market operations to work effectively, the Federal Reserve must be able to engage in these transactions quickly, at its own convenience, in whatever volume may be needed to keep the federal funds rate near the target rate. Moreover, it is appropriate for such operations to be conducted using securities that are traded in a broad and highly active market, thereby ensuring that these transactions do not generate distortions or disruptions in that market. Thus, with the broadest and most active of all U.S. financial markets, Treasury securities are ideal for conducting open market operations. In early August 2007, depository institutions faced the possibility that emerging pressures in financial markets could have significant effects on their balance sheets, and this uncertainty generated a considerable increase in demand for short-term funds. On August 10, the Federal Reserve underscored its commitment to providing ample liquidity to facilitate the orderly functioning of financial markets, stating: "The Federal Reserve will provide reserves as necessary through open market operations to promote trading in the federal funds market at rates close to the Federal Open Market Committee's target rate" (Board of Governors, 2007a). As is clear inchart 1, the Federal Reserve was generally successful in keeping the federal funds rate from spiking above the target rate; indeed, the effective federal funds rate was somewhat below the target rate at times. Nonetheless, the volatility of the federal funds rate in recent months reflects the extent to which daily changes in demand for reserve balances have been unusually difficult to predict.4 Tool #2: Overnight lending through the discount windowThe Federal Reserve's second tool for supplying liquidity during a financial disruption is to provide fully collateralized overnight loans directly to commercial banks and other depository institutions, which I will refer to collectively as banks. The Federal Reserve extends this credit through thediscount window--that is, the lending facility at each of the regional Federal Reserve Banks. (The phrase "discount window" harks back to the good old days when loans were provided by a human being sitting behind a bank window.) The primary credit facility is the main program under which the Federal Reserve extends loans to depository institutions.5Under this program, each loan is extended for very short terms (usually overnight) to a depository institution in sound financial condition, and the interest rate on such loans is referred to as the "discount rate." Since 2003, the discount rate has been set above the usual level of short-term market interest rates, and during normal times this rate has been maintained at 100 basis points (1 percentage point) above the federal funds rate target. As a tool for providing liquidity to the financial system, the discount window is distinct from open market operations in two important respects. First, open market operations influence the supply of short-term funds to the market as a whole, whereas loans through the discount window are made directly to individual institutions with particular needs for liquidity. Second, open market operations are conducted using U.S. Treasury and agency securities, whereas loans through the discount window can be made against a much wider range of collateral. In its August 10 announcement, the Federal Reserve reaffirmed that it stood ready to provide liquidity not only through open market operations but also via discount lending by stating: "As always, the discount window is available as a source of funding" (Board of Governors, 2007a). By August 17, the Federal Reserve had determined that the significant strains in short-term money markets warranted further accommodation in the provision of liquidity through the discount window; thus, the spread between the discount rate and the target federal funds rate was reduced to 50 basis points, rather than the customary 100 basis points, and the lower spread has been maintained since then (Board of Governors, 2007b). In addition, the Federal Reserve adjusted its practices to facilitate the provision of discount window financing at terms of up to thirty days, renewable at the request of the borrower. These changes were aimed at assuring banks of the availability of a backstop source of liquidity. Banks subsequently borrowed only moderate amounts at the discount window but some institutions placed additional amounts of collateral with the Federal Reserve Banks, suggesting that these institutions perceived the discount window as a potentially significant source of liquidity under some contingencies. Nonetheless, the discount window has two notable limitations as a tool for easing strains in money markets. First, a bank may be reluctant to borrow from the discount window, worrying that such borrowing might come to light and lead market participants and other institutions to draw adverse inferences about the bank's financial condition. This so-called stigma problem may largely account for the extent to which discount window borrowing has generally remained at moderate levels in recent months. Second, lending through the discount window can pose challenges for keeping thefederal funds rate close to its target, especially during periods of financial market disruption. The Federal Reserve's open market desk--that is, the staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York who actually conduct open market operations on a daily basis--must take into account the fact that loans made through the discount window add reserves to the banking system, and thus, all else equal, could tend to push the federal funds rate below the target set by the FOMC. In ordinary circumstances, these borrowings are relatively small and predictable, and this influence can be offset using open market operations to drain a corresponding quantity of reserves from the system. But in times of financial market strains, these borrowings can become larger and more difficult to predict. Tool #3: The new Term Auction FacilityDespite the Federal Reserve's provision of liquidity through open market operations and the discount window, strains in term funding markets persisted and became particularly elevated in early December in response to year-end pressures. The magnitude of these strains can be gauged using the spread between Libor--that is, the London interbank offered rate--and the overnight indexed swap (OIS) rate at the same maturity, because the OIS rate reflects the average overnight interbank rate expected over that maturity but is not subject to pressures associated with credit and liquidity risks to the same degree as Libor. As shown inchart 2, the one-month and three-month Libor-OIS spreads were at low levels through the month of July but increased markedly in August and early September at the onset of the financial market turmoil.6The one-month spread declined during the fall but rose sharply again toward the end of the year. In association with these wider spreads, liquidity in term bank funding markets deteriorated substantially. To address these pressures, the Federal Reserve introduced a new policy tool called the Term Auction Facility (TAF).7With this tool, the Federal Reserve auctions a pre-announced quantity of credit to eligible borrowers for a term substantially longer than overnight; thus far, each auction has involved a term of one month. As with primary credit, a depository institution is eligible to participate in a TAF auction if the bank is judged to be in generally sound financial condition, and a wide variety of collateral can be used to secure the loan. The minimum bid rate for each auction is established at the OIS rate corresponding to the maturity of the credit being auctioned. The introduction of the TAF was announced on December 12 in conjunction with related announcements by the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss National Bank (Board of Governors, 2007c).8The first two auctions were held on December 17 and 20, for amounts of $20 billion each, and were very well subscribed: A large number of banks participated in each auction, and the total value of bids was about three times as large as the amount of credit auctioned. The resulting interest rate in both cases was about 50 basis points above the minimum bid rate but well below the one-month Libor rate prevailing in financial markets at that time. In recent weeks, the Federal Reserve has conducted three more auctions (most recently, last Monday) for amounts of $30 billion each. The spread over the minimum bid rate was about 7 basis points for the January 14 auction, 2 basis points for the January 28 auction, and 15 basis points for the February 11 auction; these spreads were much lower than in December, apparently reflecting some subsequent easing in the pressures on banks' access to term funding. The TAF appears to have been quite successful in overcoming the two problems with conventional discount window lending. Thus far, the TAF appears to have been largely free of the stigma associated with borrowing at the discount window, as indicated by the large number of bidders and the total value of bids submitted.9Furthermore, because the Federal Reserve was able to predetermine the amounts to be auctioned, the open market desk has faced minimal uncertainty about the effects of the operation on bank reserves; hence, the TAF has not hampered the Federal Reserve's ability to keep the effective federal funds rate close to its target. Isolating the impact of the TAF on financial markets is not easy, particularly given other recent market developments and the evolution of expectations regarding the federal funds rate. Nonetheless, the interest rates in term markets provide some evidence that the TAF may have had significant beneficial effects on financial markets. As can be seen in chart 2, term funding rates have dropped substantially relative to OIS rates: The one-month spread exceeded 100 basis points in early December but has dropped below 30 basis points in recent weeks--though still above the low level that prevailed before the onset of the financial disruption last August. Monetary Policy Response to Macroeconomic DevelopmentsAlthough the TAF and other liquidity-related actions appear to have had positive effects, such policy responses cannot fully address fundamental concerns about credit quality and valuation or relax the balance sheet pressures on financial institutions. Thus, these measures cannot eliminate the effects of the financial market turmoil that have the potential to lower aggregate spending and cause a contraction in economic activity. Moreover, as I have previously emphasized,macroeconomic riskrefers to the elevated probability that a financial disruption could lead to an adverse feedback loop in which economic activity declines, leading to even greater uncertainty about asset values that worsens the financial disruption and generates a further deterioration in macroeconomic activity (Mishkin, 2007c, 2008). Monetary policy--that is, the management of the target federal funds rate--is the Federal Reserve's best tool for influencing the course of economic activity and mitigating the degree of macroeconomic risk. Tool #4: Changing the federal funds rate target to respond to macroeconomic riskIn the speech on risk management that I gave last month, I outlined a systematic approach for coping with financial market disruptions (Mishkin, 2008). In this approach, policy needs to respond aggressively when a large financial shock becomes evident, and the degree of policy inertia in such circumstances may well be markedly lower than in more-routine circumstances. By cutting the target federal funds rate to offset the negative effects of financial turmoil on aggregate economic activity, monetary policy can reduce the likelihood that a financial disruption might set off an adverse feedback loop. The resulting reduction in uncertainty can then make it easier for the markets to collect the information that facilitates price discovery, thereby hastening the return of normal market functioning. To achieve this result most effectively, monetary policy needs to be timely, decisive, and flexible. First,timely actionis crucial when an episode of financial instability becomes sufficiently severe to threaten the core macroeconomic objectives of the central bank. In such circumstances, waiting too long to ease monetary policy by lowering the federal funds rate could adversely affect the confidence of households and firms and thereby contribute to further deterioration of the macroeconomy; waiting too long might also increase the overall amount of easing that would eventually be needed. Second, policymakers should be prepared to takedecisive actionin response to financial disruptions. In such circumstances, although the most likely outcome--referred to as the modal forecast--for the economy may be fairly benign, there may be a significant risk of more-severe adverse outcomes. In such circumstances, the central bank may prefer to take out insurance by easing the stance of policy further than if the distribution of probable outcomes were perceived as fairly symmetric and more tightly clustered around the modal forecast. Third,policy flexibilityis crucial throughout the evolution of a financial market disruption. During the onset of the episode, this flexibility may be evident from the decisive easing of policy that is intended to forestall the contractionary effects of the disruption and provide insurance against the downside risks to the macroeconomy. However, it is important to recognize that financial markets can also turn around quickly, thereby reducing the drag on the economy as well as the degree of macroeconomic risk. Therefore, the central bank needs to monitor credit spreads and other incoming data for signs of financial market recovery and should be prepared to take back the insurance once the recovery becomes clearly established. Thus, at each stage of the episode, the appropriate monetary policy may exhibit much less gradualism than would be typical in other circumstances. A central bank must always be concerned with inflation as well as growth. As I have emphasized in an earlier speech about inflation dynamics, the behavior of inflation is significantly influenced by the public's expectations about where inflation is likely to head in the long run (Mishkin, 2007a). Therefore, preemptive actions of the sort I have described here would be counterproductive if these actions caused an increase in inflation expectations and in the underlying rate of inflation; in other words, the flexibility to act preemptively against a financial disruption presumes that inflation expectations are firmly anchored and unlikely to rise during a period of temporary monetary easing. Indeed, as I have argued elsewhere, a commitment to a strong nominal anchor is crucial for both aspects of the dual mandate, that is, for achieving maximum employment as well as for keeping inflation low and stable (Mishkin, 2007b). Policymakers therefore need to closely monitor information about underlying inflation and longer-run inflation expectations, and the central bank must be ready to hold steady or even raise the policy rate if the evidence clearly indicates a significant rise in inflation expectations. In my view, the Federal Reserve's recent monetary policy actions--reducing the target federal funds rate by 1 percentage point last fall and by a further 1-1/4 percentage points in January--have been consistent with these principles for coping with macroeconomic risk. First, we have been proceeding in atimelymanner in countering developments that could threaten economic or financial stability. In particular, the stance of monetary policy has been eased promptly in response to the rapid deterioration in financial market conditions, which had worsened the economic outlook and contributed to the emergence of pronounced downside risks to economic growth and employment. Second, I believe that the Federal Reserve has been acting and will continue to actdecisively, in the sense that our lowering of the federal funds rate target has reflected the evolution of the balance of risks to the macroeconomy. The disruption in financial markets poses a substantial downside risk to the outlook for economic growth, and adverse economic or financial news has the potential to cause further strains. In that light, the Federal Reserve's policy strategy is aimed at providing adequate insurance to help mitigate the risk of more-severe macroeconomic outcomes. Third, because we recognize that financial and economic conditions can change quickly, the Federal Reserve is prepared to actflexiblyin adjusting the federal funds rate in response to incoming information. Because longer-run inflation expectations appear to have remained reasonably well anchored, in my view, the easing of the stance of policy in response to deteriorating financial conditions seems unlikely to have an adverse impact on the outlook for inflation. Although I expect that inflation expectations will remain solidly anchored, we cannot be complacent that this will always continue to be the case. Therefore, careful monitoring of the incoming data on inflation and inflation expectations will continue to be necessary, especially given the potential risks to price stability that are associated with the rapid increase in energy prices and the depreciation of the dollar. Similarly, while the current strains in financial markets are likely to persist for some time, there have been instances when financial markets have turned around quickly, and we must be prepared for such a possibility in this instance. ConclusionIn recent months, the Federal Reserve has faced a more difficult policy environment as a result of disruptions to the financial markets. We have attempted to address the resulting challenges by using four tools. First, we have conducted open market operations to increase the supply of reserves and keep demands for increased liquidity from causing sharp increases in interest rates. Second, we have provided liquidity through the discount window by lowering the spread between the discount rate and the federal funds rate. Third, we have developed a new source of liquidity--the Term Auction Facility--to provide a fixed amount of funds for a one-month term at a competitively determined interest rate. Finally, we have lowered the target federal funds rate in a timely, decisive, and flexible manner to help mitigate macroeconomic risk. Although financial disruptions present one of the most difficult challenges that central banks can face, I believe that these measures have been appropriate for achieving our macroeconomic objectives of promoting price stability and maximum sustainable employment.ReferencesBernanke, Ben S. (2008)."Financial Markets, the Economic Outlook, and Monetary Policy,"speech delivered at the Women in Housing and Finance and Exchequer Club Joint Luncheon, Washington, January 10. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2005)."The Implementation of Monetary Policy,"inThe Federal Reserve System: Purposes & Functions. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, pp. 27-50. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007a)."The Federal Reserve is Providing Liquidity to Facilitate the Orderly Functioning of Financial Markets,"press release, August 10. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007b)."Federal Reserve Board Discount Rate Action,"press release, August 17. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007c)."Federal Reserve and Other Central Banks Announce Measures Designed to Address Elevated Pressures in Short-Term Funding Markets,"press release, December 12. Mishkin, Frederic S. (1991). "Asymmetric Information and Financial Crises: A Historical Perspective," in R. Glenn Hubbard, ed.,Financial Markets and Financial Crises.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 69-108. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007a)."Financial Instability and the Federal Reserve as a Liquidity Provider,"speech delivered at the Museum of American Finance Commemoration of the Panic of 1907, New York, October 26. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007b).The Economics of Money, Banking, and Financial Markets,8th ed. Boston: Addison-Wesley. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007c)."Financial Instability and Monetary Policy,"speech delivered at the Risk USA 2007 Conference, New York, November 5. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2008)."Monetary Policy Flexibility, Risk Management, and Financial Disruptions,"speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, January 11. Footnotes 1.Further details about each of the Federal Reserve's policy tools may be found in chapter 3 ofThe Federal Reserve System: Purposes & Functions(Board of Governors, 2005).Return to text 2.I appreciate the comments and assistance ofAndrew LevinandDavid Lopez-Salido.Return to text 3.Specifically, depository institutions hold balances at Federal Reserve Banks, and the federal funds rate is the overnight interest rate at which these balances are traded. See Mishkin (2007b) for further discussion of open market operations and other policy tools for keeping the federal funds rate close to its target.Return to text 4.The daily effective federal funds rate is a volume-weighted average of rates on trades arranged by major brokers.Return to text 5.Depository institutions that are not eligible for primary credit may apply for secondary credit to meet short-term liquidity needs or to resolve severe financial difficulties. Seasonal credit is extended to relatively small depository institutions that have recurring intra-year fluctuations in funding needs, such as banks in agricultural or seasonal resort communities.Return to text 6.Similar patterns are evident in the spread between the term federal funds rate and the OIS rate at these maturities.Return to text 7.The TAF was introduced as a temporary measure, but the Federal Reserve has left open the possibility that this facility could become permanent (Bernanke, 2008).Return to text 8.As part of a coordinated operation, the Bank of England and the Bank of Canada each conducted similar operations in their own currencies, while the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank extended credit in U.S. dollars amounting to $20 billion and $4 billion, respectively. These dollars were obtained from the Federal Reserve through currency swaps, that is, two-way lines of credit in which each central bank agrees to lend the other up to a fixed amount in its own currency.Return to text 9.Given the format of these auctions, no bank could be sure that it would win funds; moreover, the three-day lag between bidding and receipt of funds implied that any particular bank's submission of a bid would not be interpreted as a signal of immediate distress.Return to text
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin At the Third National Summit on Economic and Financial Literacy, Washington, D.C. There can hardly be a better time to make the case for economic and financial literacy than right now. Others have doubtless stood before an audience like you in years past and made the same case, but now we face a downturn in our housing industry fueled, at least in part, by unwise mortgage borrowing and, at times, abusive lending practices. Improving consumers' knowledge of the home mortgage process will better equip them to avoid unsuitable mortgages in the future. Our national economy has been strained by this housing slowdown and other forces, causing policymakers and others to debate what response is necessary. Also, during this election season, we are reminded of the importance of economic issues. Just a brief consideration of these three cases shows that a better-educated citizenry can not only contribute to a better functioning economy, but also to a more-effective government. On the first point, many lessons can be drawn from the downward swing in the housing industry, ranging from those that individual consumers can learn at the micro level, to those that financial companies can learn about investment and oversight. In that regard, the Federal Reserve has proposed new rules to strengthen regulatory oversight and to protect consumers in the future, and we continue to assess this episode to determine what more can be done to help homebuyers and homeowners. Of course, one of the most effective ways to help consumers is to empower them with information. And this gets to our first case for economic and financial literacy: Improving consumers' economic decision making will enhance the effectiveness of new rules and regulations. And while we at the Federal Reserve are charged with regulatory duties, we certainly see the value of education and the positive impact it can have on the broader economy. While the current troubles in the housing industry stem from a number of causes, a better-informed citizenry would likely have resulted in more-prudent decision making and, consequently, less harm to the economy. In the matter of the national economy, here the call for economic education is based on the idea that a better-informed citizenry makes for better economic policymaking. This is a subtle argument, but its logic is no less clear. As my friend Alan Blinder, the noted Princeton economist and textbook author, as well as the former vice chairman of the Federal Reserve's Board of Governors, has said, an uneducated citizenry can lead to simplistic policy solutions, and those solutions are usually suboptimal. "The fact that the basic level of economic literacy in the country, indeed in the world, is so low," Alan has said, "is one of the things that leaves the political process so vulnerable to this malady."1Now, even Alan would admit that it's difficult to draw a direct line from economic literacy to economic policymaking, but politicians listen to their constituents at home, just as they are supposed to do. And at a time when our elected officials are confronted with a myriad of options to address a slowing economy, or when they consider the increasing fears about a globalizing economy, it's fair to ask whether they are getting good economic counsel from their constituents. This is not to say that there is only one valid answer for these complicated questions, but it does mean that we get a better answer when we are all better informed. Let me reinforce this point by sharing this quote from Ben Bernanke, Chairman of the Federal Reserve's Board of Governors: Chairman Bernanke made those comments nearly two years ago, but the message is no less relevant today. Let's now consider our third case for economic and financial literacy--the role of citizens as voters. Americans elect a president every four years and we also send representatives and senators to Washington. As is so often the case, the pundits and the opinion polls tell us that the top issues on voters' minds this year are those relating to the economy. What do the candidates have to say about how, if at all, the federal government should address the lagging national economy? How about issues relating to trade? Taxes? Income inequality? Even issues that are not often described as economic--such as health care, education, and the environment--are informed by an understanding of economic principles. All these issues are better understood by an appreciation of tradeoffs, cost-benefit ratios, and opportunity cost, to name just a few core economic tools and principles. Finally, as we are so often told, people vote with their pocketbooks. And not only do they vote with their pocketbooks, they also make a lot of pocketbook decisions every day that have an impact on the health of the economy, such as whether to take on a particular mortgage, how much to save and invest, whether to lease or buy a car, and how to manage credit cards. This brings us back to the importance of financial literacy. The choices we make as individuals--as consumers, investors, and even voters--are linked to the broader economy in ways that we don't always appreciate. However, one thing is certain--we make better decisions if we are better informed, and the whole economy benefits. That's the promise of economic education--to get back to the title of this session--that it not only improves the lives of individual consumers, but that it also makes for more-effective policy and a better economy. Delivering on that promise is the hard part, of course, but that's where the National Council comes in. We at the Federal Reserve are proud of our relationship with the National Council and with other educational organizations around the country, and we look forward to continuing this important work. The task at hand is not easy, as all of you know, but the returns are high. Footnotes 1.Blinder, Alan S, (1994), "Interview with Alan S. Blinder,"The Region, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, December,Return to text 2.Bernanke, Ben (2006), "A Message from Chairman Bernanke," Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, July,Return to text
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the University of North Carolina at Wilmington, Cameron School of Business' Business Week Program, Wilmington, North Carolina When, at the end of July, I accepted Tom Simpson's invitation to speak to you today on the economy and monetary policy, little did I realize the challenges I would face. For one, the economy and financial markets have taken some unexpected twists and turns over the intervening seven months, and we are still in the midst of a rapidly evolving and highly uncertain situation. For another, when we set the date, I had expected that Chairman Bernanke would have already given ourMonetary Policy Report to the Congress, and I could simply develop some of the themes he had laid out. However, that testimony will be tomorrow, and I must emphasize that the views you are about to hear are my own and not necessarily shared by any of my colleagues on the Board or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1 Several major developments are shaping current economic performance, the outlook, and the conduct of monetary policy. The most prominent of these developments is the contraction in the housing market that began in early 2006. Both the prices and pace of construction of new homes rose to unsustainable levels in the preceding few years. For a time, the resulting correction was largely confined to the housing market, but the consequences of that correction have spread to other sectors of the economy. The financial markets are playing a key role in the transmission of the housing downturn to the rest of the economy. In the first half of 2007, investors became concerned about the likely performance of many subprime adjustable-rate mortgages made from late 2005 through early 2007. Lenders turned away from subprime mortgages and some other investments as the magnitude of the losses on those mortgages began to emerge, as uncertainty about the ultimate size of the losses and who would bear them mounted, and as these experiences undermined confidence in a variety of other credit instruments, especially those with complex structures. Those tendencies have intensified as risks of a spillover to the broader economy have risen. The increase in expected losses along with the unwillingness of investors to fund some types of credits has led to pressures on banks and other financial intermediaries as well as on prices and liquidity in securities markets. The result has been a substantial tightening in credit availability for many firms and households. At the same time, continued sizable increases in the prices of food, energy, and other commodities have raised inflation. To some extent, those increases have resulted from strong demand in rapidly growing emerging-market economies, like China and India. But the increases likely also reflect conditions such as adverse weather in some parts of the world, the use of agricultural commodities to produce energy, and geopolitical developments that threaten supplies in some petroleum-producing centers. The higher prices have eroded the purchasing power of household income, adding to restraint on spending. In my remarks today I will trace the effects of these developments in more detail, discuss the response of monetary policy, and talk about the implications for the future path of the economy. Recent Economic and Financial DevelopmentsThe pace of real economic activity stepped down sharply toward the end of last year and has remained sluggish in recent months. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is estimated to have risen only slightly in the fourth quarter. The contraction in the housing market continues to drag down economic growth. Declines in real residential investment subtracted nearly 1 percentage point from the overall increase in real GDP in 2007. Even so, the inventory of unsold new homes remains unusually high, because the demand for housing has fallen about as rapidly as the supply. Problems in the subprime market have virtually cut off financing in this sector. Prime jumbo mortgages are being made, but the lack of a secondary market has caused the spread between rates on these mortgages and on those that have been eligible for purchase by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to widen substantially. Even the standards for conforming mortgages have been tightened of late. Weak demand, in turn, is leading to widespread declines in the actual and expected prices of houses, further discouraging buyers. Starts of new single-family homes continued to fall in January, dropping to fewer than 750,000 units--a level of activity more than 1 million units below the peak in early 2006. Judging from the further decline in permits last month, additional cutbacks in construction are likely. It appears that the correction in the housing market has further to go. For the better part of the past two years, the trouble in the housing market was contained; however, over the past several months, the weakness appears to have spread to other sectors of the economy. Tighter credit, reductions in housing and equity wealth, higher energy prices, and uncertainty about economic prospects seem to be weighing on business and household spending. Labor demand has softened in recent months. Private nonfarm payrolls were little changed in January, and the unemployment rate moved up to 4.9 percent, on average, during December and January, after remaining around 4-1/2 percent from late 2006 through most of 2007. The higher level of weekly claims for unemployment insurance suggests continued softness in employment this month. Apart from the labor market, the hard data on economic activity in the first quarter are limited, but, on the whole, the data suggest economic activity has remained very sluggish. Retail sales were up moderately in nominal terms in January, but after adjusting for the rise in prices of consumer goods, real spending on non-auto goods appears to have been little changed last month. In addition, unit sales of new motor vehicles weakened. Total industrial production rose just 0.1 percent in January for a second consecutive month, and manufacturing output was unchanged. Much of the other information about the current quarter has come in the form of surveys of business and consumers--and most all of it has been downbeat. That said, I can still see a few bright spots. One is that the level of business inventories does not appear worrisome at present. Another is that international trade continued to be a solid source of support for the economy through the end of last year. The worsening financial conditions and slower growth in the United States have had some effect on the rest of the world, but the prospects for foreign growth remain favorable. The most recent news on inflation--the January report on the consumer price index (CPI)--was disappointing. Once again, total or headline CPI was boosted by a jump in energy prices and relatively large increases in food prices; last month's rise left the twelve-month change in the overall CPI at 4.3 percent--twice the pace a year ago. In addition, the January increase of 0.3 percent in the CPI excluding food and energy was slightly higher than the average monthly rate in 2007. Nonetheless, the twelve-month change in this measure of core inflation, at 2-1/2 percent, was still slightly below the rate one year earlier. The recent readings on core inflation suggest that the higher costs of energy, a pickup in prices of imported goods, and, perhaps, the persistent upward price pressures in commodity markets may be passing through a bit to core consumer prices. The Implications of Financial Stress for the Economic OutlookThe recent evolution of U.S. financial markets is a complicated story, and a full consideration of how and why this episode of financial turmoil developed is a topic for another speech. Today, I am going to focus on some key aspects of the situation in which we find ourselves and discuss their implications for the economy and for monetary policy. The pressures from the financial turmoil have been most intense for those financial intermediaries that have been exposed to losses on mortgages and other credits that are repricing, as well as for those institutions now required to bring onto their balance sheets loans that previously would have been sold into securities markets. As those intermediaries take steps to protect themselves from further losses and conserve capital, and as investors more broadly have responded to the evolving risks, spreads on household and business debt in securities markets have widened, the availability of bank credit has decreased, and equity prices have weakened. In addition to the drying up of large portions of mortgage finance that I referred to previously, conditions have firmed on loans for a variety of other purposes. Responses to our Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey in January showed that banks have tightened terms and standards for household and commercial mortgages, commercial and industrial loans, and consumer loans. In corporate bond markets, spreads have been widening on both investment- and speculative-grade issues. Lenders are demanding much higher risk premiums for commercial real estate loans. And equity prices have fallen substantially over the past seven months, reducing household wealth and increasing the cost of raising equity capital for businesses. To be sure, the easing of monetary policy that I will be discussing in a minute has, quite deliberately, been intended to offset the effect of this tightening, resulting in some borrowers seeing lower interest rates. But financing costs have risen, on balance, for riskier credits, and almost all borrowers are dealing with more cautious lenders who have adopted more stringent standards. Those financial market developments are, in many respects, a healthy correction to previous excesses. But, in some cases, they may represent an overreaction, or at least positioning for the small probability of very adverse economic conditions. In any case, they have the potential to adversely affect household and business spending. The recovery in financial markets is likely to be a prolonged process. The length of the recuperation will depend importantly on the course of the economy, particularly on developments in the housing market. If the deterioration in the housing market were greater than expected in coming months, the losses borne by financial institutions would be even greater, and lenders might further reduce credit availability. More widespread macroeconomic weakness could make lenders more cautious and could cause the financial problems to spread further. The recent problems of financial guarantors, with possible implications for municipal bond markets as well as for bank balance sheets, are an indication that the financial sector remains vulnerable. Even in a more favorable economic environment, some time is likely to be required to restore the functioning and liquidity of a number of markets. The collapse of the subprime mortgage market and subsequent problems in other areas of the financial markets have brought to light a number of deficiencies in the practice of financial intermediation that will take some time to correct. Clearly, lending standards in the subprime mortgage market were too lax, particularly for riskier households. Compounding the problem, those involved in moving the loans from originator to investor, including the credit rating agencies, failed to ensure that the quality of the underlying credit was accurately assessed and represented. Moreover, some of the financial instruments developed in recent years were opaque, making it difficult for investors to price them correctly. And many did not fully appreciate and properly manage the risks involved in the maturity, credit, and liquidity transformations that were taking place in several sectors of the financial market. A number of markets will need to make institutional changes before they are likely to function smoothly again, and regulators will need to adapt their oversight to take account of the lessons learned. In the end, we will have a safer system, but one with more bank intermediation, less leverage, and higher financing costs for many borrowers. The Monetary Policy ResponseThe Federal Reserve has responded to the unfolding situation by acting to improve the access of depository institutions to liquidity and by easing the stance of monetary policy substantially. Problems in the subprime mortgage market had been evident by early 2007, but the disruptions took a far more serious turn last August when pressures spread to commercial banks both here and abroad. Among other things, the disruption of markets for structured credits had the effect of bringing a good deal of financial intermediation back onto the balance sheets of banks. Uncertain about the ultimate call on their lending capacity, the financial strength of some of their counterparties, and their own needs for liquidity, banks and other lenders became much more reluctant to extend credit in term funding markets. The Federal Reserve was created in large part to supply liquidity and calm markets in such situations, importantly by assuring banks of a backup source of funding through the discount window. To enhance the utility of the discount window and encourage its use, the Federal Reserve reduced the spread between the discount rate and the federal funds rate last August, and we made lending available explicitly on a term basis, rather than only overnight. However, banks were reluctant to use even this more attractive discount facility because they feared that their counterparties would see it as a sign of weakness, and pressures in term funding markets increased. In December we introduced a new method for banks to borrow from the Federal Reserve against a broad range of collateral--the term auction facility (TAF). The TAF is an auction through which a fixed amount of lending is offered to the banking system, and it seems to have been successful in avoiding the "stigma" problem and in helping funding markets return to more normal functioning. Markets were also aided by coordinated efforts to supply liquidity by several other central banks at the same time. As the deterioration in financial markets increasingly has threatened to hold down spending and employment, the FOMC has eased monetary policy, reducing the federal funds rate target by 2-1/4 percentage points since the turmoil erupted in August. Those actions have been intended to counteract the effects on the overall economy of tighter terms and conditions in credit markets, the drop in equity and housing wealth, and the steep decline in housing activity. Our objective has been to promote sustainable growth and maximum employment over time. But easier monetary policy will not forestall a period of economic weakness in the near term. Experience teaches us that some time is likely to pass between a decline in interest rates and its positive effect on demand. Once financial conditions change, time is required for individuals to recalibrate, and then execute, their spending decisions. Lower interest rates will not stop, only cushion, the correction in housing markets. Easier monetary policy will not--and should not--"bail out" lenders and other investors who made poor choices or failed to protect themselves against the remote, but potentially severe, contingency that house prices would decline or against the much more predictable repricing of credit and liquidity risk. The adjustment in financial markets is part of the process that ultimately will restore credit allocation and market functioning to a sounder, more sustainable basis. What policy can do is attempt to limit the fallout on the economy from this adjustment. Lower interest rates should support aggregate demand over time, even in the face of widespread contraction in the supply of credit. Certainly, interest rates on loans will be lower than if policy had not been eased, and, if policy is eased sufficiently, they can be absolutely lower than before for many borrowers, which could well be necessary in an environment where standards and nonprice terms on access to credit are tighter. Among other things, lower rates should facilitate the refinancing of mortgage loans, and they will hold down the cost of capital to business. To be sure, reductions in interest rates will not help borrowers facing a cutoff of credit from lenders, but, in general, credit is still flowing from banks and other lenders. Easier policy should also support asset prices--or at least cushion declines that otherwise would have occurred. And expected policy easing likely contributed to the drop in the foreign exchange value of the dollar, which is bolstering our exports. The extent of the financial adjustment, as I mentioned previously, is itself highly dependent on how housing and the economy evolve. Part of the rise in risk spreads, reduction in credit availability, and the declines in stock prices in the past few months reflect investor efforts to protect themselves against the potential for very adverse economic outcomes--that is, the exposures and losses that would accompany a persistent steep decline in house prices and a significant recession. Of course, these actions--reducing exposures, tightening credit standards, demanding extra compensation for taking risk--themselves make these "tail risk" scenarios even more likely. In circumstances like these, the decisions of policymakers must take account of not only the most likely course of the economy, but also the possibility of very unfavorable developments. Doing so should reduce the odds on an especially adverse outcome not only by having policy a little easier than otherwise, but also by reassuring lenders and spenders that the central bank recognizes such a possibility in its policy deliberations. Whether the Federal Reserve has done enough in this regard is a question this policymaker will be weighing carefully over coming months. Even as we respond to forces currently weighing on real activity, we must also set policy to resist any tendency for inflation to increase on a sustained basis. Allowing elevated rates of inflation to become entrenched in inflation expectations would be costly to reverse, constrain our ability to cushion further downward shocks to spending, and result over time in lower and less stable economic expansion. Inflation expectations generally have appeared reasonably well anchored, giving the FOMC room to focus on supporting economic growth. Moreover, as I will explain below, for a variety of reasons, I do not expect the recent elevated inflation rates to persist. In my view, the adverse dynamics of the financial markets and the economy have presented the greater threat to economic welfare in the United States. But the recent information on prices underlines the need to continue to monitor the inflation situation very carefully. The Outlook for Economic Activity and InflationHow long the adjustment in financial markets will take and the consequences of that adjustment for economic activity are subject to considerable uncertainty. In my view, the most likely scenario is one in which the economy experiences a period of sluggish growth in demand and production in the near term that is accompanied by some further increase in joblessness. New building activity will continue to decline until the overhang of inventories of unsold homes has been substantially reduced, and the demand side of the market is not likely to revive appreciably until buyers sense that price declines are abating and financing conditions for mortgages are improving. Consumer spending will be damped by the effects on real incomes of a weak labor market and rising energy prices and by the effects of declines in the stock market and home prices on household wealth. Business spending on capital equipment should be held down by slower sales and production and by caution in a very uncertain economic environment. Nonresidential construction is likely to lose some momentum in the wake of both weak growth in overall economic activity and tighter credit. Some modest offset to these areas of weakness should come from export demand, which should be boosted by the lagged effects of recent declines in the dollar and supported by still-solid growth abroad. By midyear, economic activity should begin to benefit from several factors. One is the fiscal stimulus package that the Congress recently enacted. The rebates that households are scheduled to begin to receive in May should provide a temporary boost to consumption. Although the timing and the magnitude of the spending response is uncertain, economic studies of the previous experience suggest that a noticeable proportion of households are quite sensitive to temporary cash flow. The potential effects of the business incentives are perhaps more uncertain. Although economic theory suggests that they should bring forward some capital spending, past experience has been mixed. Second, the decline in residential investment should begin to abate later this year as the overhang of unsold homes is worked off, reducing what has been a significant drag on economic growth over the past two years. Finally, the declines in interest rates that began last summer should be supporting activity over coming quarters, and their effects should show through more clearly to improvements in economic activity as the stress in financial markets dissipates. Although a firming in the growth of economic activity after midyear now appears the most likely scenario, the outlook is subject to a number of important risks. Further substantial declines in house prices could cut more deeply into household wealth and intensify the problems in mortgage markets and for those intermediaries holding mortgage loans. Financial markets could remain quite fragile, delaying the restoration of more normal credit flows. As observed in the minutes of its most recent meeting, the FOMC has expressed a broad concern about the possibility of adverse interactions among weaker economic activity, stress in financial markets, and credit constraints. I expect the run-up in headline inflation to be reversed and core inflation to edge lower over the next few years. This projection assumes that energy and other commodity prices will level out, as suggested by the futures markets. Moreover, greater slack in the economy should reduce pressure on prices and wages. Despite high resource utilization over the past couple of years and periods of elevated headline inflation, labor cost increases have remained quite moderate, and inflation expectations remain reasonably well anchored. Nonetheless, policymakers must remain very attentive to the outlook for inflation. As I mentioned earlier, the recent uptick in core inflation may reflect some spillover of the higher costs of food, energy, and imports into core prices. And the prices of crude oil and other commodities have moved up further in recent weeks. A related concern is that inflation expectations might drift higher if the current rapid rates of headline inflation persist for longer than anticipated or if the recent easing in monetary policy is misinterpreted as reflecting less resolve among Committee members to maintain low and stable inflation over the medium run. Persistent elevated inflation would undermine the performance of the economy over time. ConclusionThese have been difficult times for the U.S. economy. The correction of excesses in sectors of the economy and financial markets has spilled over more broadly. Growth has slowed, and unemployment has increased; both borrowers and lenders are facing problems, and the functioning of the financial markets has been disrupted. At the same time, inflation has risen. I believe we will see a return to stronger growth, lower unemployment, lower inflation and improved flows in financial markets, but it probably will take a little while. And adverse risks to this most likely scenario abound: Uncertainty could trigger an even greater withdrawal from risk-taking by households, businesses, and investors, resulting in more pronounced and prolonged economic weakness; events beyond our borders could continue to put upward pressure on inflation rates. But we should not lose sight of some fundamental strengths of our economy. Our markets have proven to be flexible and resilient, able to absorb shocks, and quick to adapt to changing circumstances. Those markets reward entrepreneurship and risk-taking, and many people are looking for opportunities to buy distressed assets and restructure and strengthen businesses to take advantage of the economic rebound that will occur. Monetary policy has proven itself, under a wide variety of circumstances, very effective in recent decades in damping inflation when needed and in stimulating demand and activity when that has been appropriate. Our job at the Federal Reserve is to put in place those policies that will promote both price stability and growth over time. We have the tools. As Chairman Bernanke often emphasizes: We will do what is needed. Footnotes 1.Stephanie Aaronsonand Joyce Zickler, of the Board’s staff, contributed to the preparation of these remarks.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between ANB Bancshares, Inc., Rogers, Arkansas and the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Salin Bank and Trust Company, Indianapolis, Indiana, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and the Indiana Department of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.