The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the notice of Bank of America Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina, to acquire Countrywide Financial Corporation ("Countrywide"), Calabasas, California, and thereby indirectly acquire Countrywide Bank, FSB, Alexandria, Virginia, and certain other nonbanking subsidiaries of Countrywide.Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the approval of an applicationby KfW IPEX-Bank GmbH, Frankfurt, Germany, to establish a representative office inNew York, New York.Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today issued the host state loan-to-deposit ratios that the banking agencies will use to determine compliance with section 109 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994. These ratios update data released on June 12, 2007. In general, section 109 prohibits a bank from establishing or acquiring a branch or branches outside of its home state primarily for the purpose of deposit production. Section 109 also prohibits branches of banks controlled by out-of-state bank holding companies from operating primarily for the purpose of deposit production. Section 109 provides a process to test compliance with the statutory requirements. The first step in the process involves a loan-to-deposit ratio screen that compares a bank's statewide loan-to-deposit ratio to the host state loan-to-deposit ratio for banks in a particular state. A second step is conducted if a bank's statewide loan-to-deposit ratio is less than one-half of the published ratio for that state or if data are not available at the bank to conduct the first step. The second step requires the appropriate banking agency to determine whether the bank is reasonably helping to meet the credit needs of the communities served by the bank's interstate branches. A bank that fails both steps is in violation of section 109 and is subject to sanctions by the appropriate banking agency. The updated host state loan-to-deposit ratios are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday proposed a rule for public comment that would implement certain of the less-complex approaches for calculating risk-based capital requirements that are included in the international Basel II capital accord. The proposal, known as the standardized framework, would be available for banks, bank holding companies, and savings associations not subject to the advanced approaches of Basel II. Under the advanced approaches rule, which took effect April 1 and is mandatory only for large, internationally active banking organizations, banking organizations are required to develop rigorous risk-measurement and risk-management techniques as part of a new risk-sensitive capital framework. The standardized framework also seeks to more closely align regulatory capital requirements with institutions' risk and should further encourage improvements in their risk-management practices. "The increased risk sensitivity of the standardized framework is aimed at both enhancing safety and soundness for the wide range of institutions that will not be adopting the advanced approaches of Basel II and fostering competitive equity for these institutions," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Randall S. Kroszner. "Recognizing the diversity of banking organizations in the United States, we want to provide these banks the option of using a more updated capital framework without unduly increasing regulatory burden." The proposed standardized framework addresses a number of areas including: The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has voted to issue the interagency notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) on the Basel II standardized framework for public comment. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) also are considering the NPR. The Board authorized the staff to publish the NPR in theFederal Registerfor public comment after the other agencies complete their approval processes. For the OCC and OTS, that includes review by the Office of Management and Budget. Comments will be accepted for 90 days from the date of publication in theFederal Register. The draftFederal Registernotice is attached. Federal Register notice:479 KB PDF|HTML Statement by Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Statement by Governor Randall S. Kroszner Board meeting materials
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday released the minutes of its meetings on March 14 and March 16, 2008. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board announced today that it is seeking nominations for appointments to its Consumer Advisory Council.The Council advises the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under various consumer financial services laws and on other matters. The group meets in Washington, D.C., three times a year.Ten new members will be appointed to serve three-year terms beginning in January 2009.Nominations should include a résumé and the following information about nominees:• Complete name, title, address, telephone number, e-mail address, and fax number;• Organization's name, brief description of organization, address, telephone and fax numbers;• Past and present positions, dates, and descriptions of responsibilities;• Knowledge, interests or experience related to community reinvestment, consumer protection regulations, consumer credit, or other consumer financial services;• Positions held in community and banking associations, councils, and boards. Nominations should also include the complete name, organization name, title, address, telephone number, e-mail address, and fax number of the nominator. Individuals may nominate themselves.Letters of nomination with complete information, including a résumé for each nominee, must be received by August 29, 2008. Nominations not received by August 29 may not be considered.Electronic nominations are preferred. The appropriate form can be accessed at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/secure/forms/cacnominationform.cfm If electronic submission is not feasible, the nominations can be mailed (not sent by facsimile) to Sheila Maith, Advisor, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC 20551.The Board's notice is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board's website now features convenient access to historical documents of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) for the years 1978 through 2002.Greenbooks, Bluebooks, and other documents related to FOMC meetings join the transcripts, minutes, and policy announcements that had previously been available on the Board's site. The Greenbook and the Bluebook are prepared by Board staff and distributed to FOMC meeting attendees the week before each scheduled meeting. The Greenbook, officially entitled "Current Economic and Financial Conditions," provides in-depth analysis of the U.S. and international economies and includes the staff's economic forecast. The Bluebook, entitled "Monetary Policy Alternatives," provides background and context on monetary policy alternatives the FOMC could consider.Historical Greenbooks and Bluebooks have been available to researchers and others, upon request, for some time. Posting them on the Board's website makes them more accessible to the public.The new information is available athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc_historical.htm
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Senate Finance Committee Health Reform Summit, Washington, D.C. Improving the performance of our health-care system is without a doubt one of the most important challenges that our nation faces. In recent decades, improvements in medical knowledge and standards of care have allowed people to live healthier, longer, and more productive lives. New medical technologies and treatments promise more and better to come. From a social point of view, we hope as many people as possible benefit from these advances. But health care is not only a scientific and social issue; it is an economic issue as well. The decisions we make about health-care reform will affect many aspects of our economy, including the pace of economic growth, wages and living standards, and government budgets, to name a few. By any measure, the health-care sector represents a major segment of our economy. Spending on health-care services currently exceeds 15 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP). Indeed, health-care spending is the single largest component of personal consumption--larger than spending on either housing or food. Importantly, health care also has long been, and continues to be, one of the fastest-growing sectors in the economy: Over the past four decades, this sector has grown, on average, at a rate of about 2-1/2 percentage points faster than the GDP. Should this rate of growth continue, health spending would exceed 22 percent of GDP by 2020 and reach almost 30 percent of GDP by 2030.1 Health-related spending is also a large and growing share of government budgets. Last year, health care accounted for about one-quarter of total federal spending. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projects that, under current policies, health spending will account for almost one-half of all federal non-interest outlays by 2050.2 As the public interest in these issues testifies, the stakes associated with health-care reform, both economic and social, are very high. But we must keep in mind that, for all its problems, the U.S. health-care system also has many strengths. We must take care that we do not lose what is good about our system as we try to address the significant concerns that certainly exist. In the remainder of my remarks, I will discuss three key challenges for health-care reform. These challenges are, in short, the issues of access, quality, and cost. Challenges for Health-Care ReformAccessAccess to health care is the first major challenge that health-care reform must address. In 2006, a total of 47 million Americans, or almost 16 percent of the population, lacked health insurance. Although the federal and state governments spent more than $35 billion to finance uncompensated care in 2004, the evidence nonetheless indicates that uninsured persons receive less health care than those who are insured and that their health suffers as a consequence. Per capita expenditures on health care for uninsured individuals are, on average, roughly half those for fully insured individuals.3People who are uninsured are less likely to receive preventive and screening services, less likely to receive appropriate care to manage chronic illnesses, and more likely to die prematurely from cancer--largely because they tend to be diagnosed when the disease is more advanced.4One recent study found that uninsured victims of automobile accidents receive 20 percent less treatment in hospitals and are 37 percent more likely to die of their injuries than those who are insured.5 QualityThe second key challenge is improving the quality of health care. The quality of medical research, training, and technology in the United States is generally very high. However, the quality of health care is determined not only by, say, technological advances in preventing and treating disease but also by our ability to deliver the benefits of those advances to patients. For maximum impact, advances in medical knowledge must be widely disseminated and consistently and efficiently implemented. But evidence suggests a disturbing gap between the quality of health services that can be provided in principle and the quality of health services that actually are provided in practice. For example, in 2000, the Institute of Medicine issued a landmark report that concluded that up to 98,000 Americans died each year in hospitals as a result of medical errors.6Many of the errors identified by the report--for example, errors caused by adverse drug events, improper transfusions, wrong-site surgery, and mistaken patient identity--could have been prevented if hospitals had adopted appropriate safety systems. Although hospitals have implemented a number of new safety practices since the time of that report, the scope for improving patient safety remains large.7 Inconsistent use of best practices by doctors and hospitals is also surprisingly widespread. For example, numerous studies have pointed to the lack of adherence to evidence-based guidelines for the treatment of heart attacks. In particular, it has long been well established that restoring blood flow to the heart and using aspirin, beta blockers, and ACE inhibitors at the appropriate times significantly reduce deaths resulting from heart attacks.8Yet studies show that the dissemination of these treatments occurred only slowly.9More widespread application of evidence-based medicine could help health-care workers make better use of the medical knowledge they already have to improve patients' outcomes. Although some patients do not receive the care they need, others receive more (and more expensive) care than necessary. Research on geographic variation in health-care practices and costs confirms this point. For example, Medicare expenditures per eligible recipient vary widely across regions, yet areas with the highest expenditures do not appear to have better health outcomes than those with the lowest expenditures; indeed, the reverse seems to be true.10 CostThis observation brings me to a third important challenge for health-care reform: controlling costs. The problem here is not only the current level of health-care spending (U.S. spending exceeds that of most other industrial countries) but, to an even greater degree, the continued rapid growth of that spending. Per capita health-care spending in the United States has increased at a faster rate than per capita income for a number of decades. Should that trend continue, as many economists predict it will, the share of income devoted to paying for health care will rise relentlessly. A piece of wisdom attributed to the economist Herbert Stein holds that if something cannot go on forever, it will stop. At some point, health-care spending as a share of GDP will stop rising, but it is difficult to guess when that will be, and there is little sign of it yet. Although the high cost of health care is a frequently heard complaint, it is important to note that a substantial portion of the cost increases that we have seen in recent decades reflects improvements in both the quality and quantity of care delivered rather than higher costs of delivering a given level of care. Notably, new technologies, despite greatly adding to cost in many cases, have also yielded significant benefits in the form of better health. People put great value on their health, and it is not surprising that, as our society becomes wealthier, we would choose to spend more on health-care services. Indeed, although quantifying the economic value of improved health and greater expected longevity is difficult, most researchers who have undertaken an exercise of this type find that, on average, the health benefits of new technologies and other advances have significantly exceeded the economic costs.11 That said, the evidence also suggests that the cost of health care in the United States is greater than necessary to allow us to achieve the levels of health and longevity we now enjoy. I have already mentioned research that finds large regional differences in the cost of treating a given condition, with high-cost areas showing no better results. The slow diffusion of the use of aspirin and beta blockers for treating heart-attack patients shows that cheap, effective treatments are not always used, potentially leading to higher costs and worse outcomes. Moreover, because insurance companies and the government play such prominent roles in financing health care, patients and doctors have far less incentive to consider the extra costs of optional tests or treatments. But, as we all know, although testing and treatment decisions may be undertaken on the presumption that "someone else will pay," the public eventually pays for all these costs, either through higher insurance premiums or higher taxes. The effects of high health-care costs on government budgets deserve special note. In the United States, a large and growing portion of both federal and state expenditures is for subsidized health insurance. In 1975, federal spending on Medicare and Medicaid was about 6 percent of total non-interest federal spending. Today, that share is about 23 percent. Because of rising costs of health care and the aging of the population, the CBO projects that, without reform, Medicare and Medicaid will be about 35 percent of non-interest federal spending in 2025.12This trend implies increasingly difficult tradeoffs for legislators and taxpayers, as higher government spending on health-care spending will, of necessity, require reductions in other government programs, higher taxes, or larger budget deficits. Rapid increases in health spending also portend increasingly difficult access to health services for people with lower incomes.13As health spending continues to outpace income, health insurance and out-of-pocket payments will become increasingly unaffordable.14One way that society has addressed this problem in the past has been to expand government subsidies for health spending. The Medicare Part D program, which assists seniors with the costs of prescription drugs, is an example. However, to continue limiting the effects of rising medical costs on household budgets, the government may have to absorb an increasing proportion of the nation's total bill for health care, putting even greater pressure on government budgets than official projections suggest. Taking on these challenges will be daunting. Because our health-care system is so complex, the challenges so diverse, and our knowledge so incomplete, we should not expect a single set of reforms to address all concerns. Rather, an eclectic approach will probably be needed. In particular, we may need to first address the problems that seem more easily managed rather than waiting for a solution that will address all problems at once. Thinking About SolutionsIn health-care reform, it is certainly easier to pose questions than to provide answers. Moreover, even putting aside the scope and technical complexities of the problems we face, the types of reforms we choose will depend importantly on value judgments and the tradeoffs made among social objectives. Such choices are appropriately left to the public and their elected representatives. Consequently, I will have little to say here regarding specific proposals. However, I will suggest a few questions and considerations that those seeking reform might wish to keep in mind. Regarding access, one important consideration is that people who are uninsured are not all alike. They include people who have low incomes, people who may not be poor but have costly pre-existing health conditions, those whose employers do not offer group health insurance and who cannot afford to buy insurance in the more-expensive nongroup market, and people who are eligible for Medicaid or other programs but for some reason have not enrolled. Some people who can afford health insurance do not purchase it, presumably because they do not anticipate having significant medical expenses. Broadening access to health care may thus require us to consider a mix of policies. The following are some of the questions with which we will have to wrestle. First, should enrollment in a health insurance program be mandated, or at least strongly encouraged, for example, through tax incentives? Supporters argue that mandates lead to better risk pooling and prevent those who could afford insurance but choose not to buy it from "free-riding" on the public safety net. Opponents argue that mandates infringe on what should be an individual choice and may require a substantial government budgetary commitment to help those who cannot afford insurance on their own to meet the mandate. Second, should we continue to rely on employer-provided health insurance as the key element of our system? The employees of large companies in particular typically constitute a good risk-sharing pool, allowing insurance to be provided at a lower overall cost. But the dominance of the insurance market by employer-provided plans means that the market for individual and small-group policies is underdeveloped and that the cost of such coverage is very high. Employer-based systems also reduce the portability of health insurance between jobs, which reduces labor mobility and the efficiency of the labor market as well as creating a burden for those changing jobs. Third, to help people with costly pre-existing conditions, should we impose requirements on insurance companies to accept all applicants and mandate the conditions that must be covered? Doing so would help some people obtain coverage, but the resulting increases in insurance premiums might exclude others. An alternative approach would be to promote bare-bones, high-deductible policies that are affordable and attractive to healthy people while offering government help to those who need coverage for costly conditions. Finally, to what extent are we willing to use public funds to reduce the number of those who are uninsured, for example, by providing subsidies to low-income people not covered by Medicaid or to people, such as the self-employed, who find it difficult to obtain affordable coverage in the non-group market? How would we finance additional spending? For instance, would we consider limiting the employers' tax exemption for the cost of employee health insurance? The issue of access to health care, though difficult politically, is in some sense the technically least complex of the three challenges I have identified; it is mostly about financing, and possibly regulation, rather than about medicine. Of course, access to health care is closely entwined with the other issues, notably the issue of cost. In particular, restraining the growth of health-care costs would increase the number of people who can afford insurance coverage. On the second challenge, improving the quality of health care, a number of private and public initiatives have been undertaken in recent years. These include programs to monitor hospitals' performance in ensuring patient safety and adherence to best practices; greater efforts to identify and disseminate best practices, as determined from clinical trials; and public and private initiatives to increase the use of information technology in health care. Researchers are also examining how the structure of health-care delivery systems affects the quality of care. For example, some evidence suggests that vertically integrated systems like that of the Veterans Administration are quicker to adopt health information technology and have been more successful in applying it. Some instances of initiatives that aim to encourage quality through financial incentives or disincentives--so-called pay-for-performance--have begun to emerge. Examples include accreditation practices that require hospitals to comply with established standards and best practices, and the recent decision that Medicare will not cover costs caused by certain medical errors. Efforts to improve the quality of health care are a vital component of comprehensive reform and are likely to yield high social returns. Additional research and experimentation can help us address difficult questions such as how best to measure quality and cost-effectiveness in health-care delivery and how to give doctors and hospitals incentives to adopt best practices and improved information technologies. The solutions we choose for access and quality will interact in important ways with the third critical issue--the issue of cost. Greater access to health care will improve health outcomes, but it almost certainly will raise financial costs. Increasing the quality of health care, although highly desirable, could also result in higher total health-care spending. For example, increased patient screening may avoid more serious problems and thus be cost-saving, but it could also identify problems that might otherwise have gone untreated--a good outcome, certainly, but one that increases overall spending. These are certainly not arguments against increasing access or improving quality. My point is only that improving access and quality may increase rather than reduce total costs. From the economist's perspective, the question of whether we are spending too much on health care cannot ultimately be answered by looking at total expenditures relative to GDP or the federal budget. Rather, the question, whatever we spend, is whether we are getting our money's worth. In general, good information and appropriate incentives are necessary to allocate resources efficiently. In health care, the necessary information should include not only the clinical effectiveness of certain tests or courses of treatment but also their cost-effectiveness. As the regional comparison of health-care costs illustrates, cost-effective approaches may be at least as useful as more costly approaches in delivering good health outcomes. Knowledge of the costs of alternative approaches is likely to be insufficient by itself. Patients, doctors, and hospitals must also be given incentives for choosing cost-effective approaches. However, the questions of how to structure incentives and monitor performance are hotly debated. For example, advocates of "consumer-driven" health care argue that, given appropriate information and incentives, patients--or in some cases, private insurers acting on their behalf--can effectively impose at least some degree of market discipline on health-care providers. Others see an inevitable role for government in setting standards of care and in measuring performance. Professional associations, hospitals, medical researchers, and other stakeholders may also have a role to play. At the heart of the debate are the fundamental social questions of how we determine when various medical services are worth their cost and how we measure and reward good performance by providers. Rising health spending increases stress on both private and public budgets, and thus stakeholders in both spheres are aiming to reduce costs. Cost-saving reforms in the private sector will inevitably reverberate in the public sector and vice versa. For example, the shift toward managed care in the private sector also resulted in more managed care in the public sector. Similarly, innovations in public insurance programs, such as the introduction of reimbursement by diagnosis-related groups in Medicare, changed the way private insurance payments were structured.15Our health-care system is, de facto, a private-public partnership; as a result, governments should not view health-care costs narrowly as a budgetary issue. Rather, they should consider how the totality of government intervention in the health-care market--including tax policies, insurance regulation, and the structure of Medicare and Medicaid--affect the sector as a whole. The best way to reduce the fiscal burdens of health care is to deliver cost-effective health care throughout the entire system. ConclusionLet me conclude by restating a point I made at the beginning: As we focus on the problems of our health system, it is easy to forget that much is good about it. Our health system has produced innovations in basic science, in the understanding and diagnosing of disease, and in pharmacology and medical technology. These advances have resulted in more-effective treatments and significant reductions in mortality across a wide spectrum of diseases. In devising policies to reform our health-care system, we must take care to maintain the vitality and spirit of innovation that has been its hallmark. References Congressional Budget Office (2007). "The Long-Term Budget Outlook." Washington: Congressional Budget Office, December. Cutler, David M., and Mark McClellan (2001). "Is Technological Change in Medicine Worth It?"Health Affairs, vol. 20 (July), pp. 11-29. Doyle, Joseph J., Jr. (2005). "Health Insurance, Treatment, and Outcomes: Using Auto Accidents as Health Shocks,"Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 87 (May), pp. 256-70. Follette, Glenn, and Louise Sheiner (2007). "A Microeconomic Perspective on the Evolution of Health Spending," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Hadley, Jack, and John Holahan (2004). "The Cost of Care for the Uninsured: What Do We Spend, Who Pays, and What Would Full Coverage Add to Medical Spending?" Issue Update No. 7804. Washington: Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured,May 10, www.kff.org/uninsured/7084.cfm. Institute of Medicine (2000).To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System.Washington: National Academy Press. _________ (2002).Care without Coverage:Too Little, Too Late. Washington: National Academy Press. Joint Commission (2007). "Improving America's Hospitals: The Joint Commission's Annual Report on Quality and Safety 2007." Oakbrook Terrace, Ill.: Joint Commission, November, www.jointcommissionreport.org. Leape, Lucian L., and Donald M. Berwick (2005). "Five Years AfterTo Err Is Human: What Have We Learned?"JAMA, vol. 293 (May 18), pp. 2384-90. Skinner, Jonathan S., Douglas O. Staiger, and Elliott S. Fisher (2006). "Is Technological Change in Medicine Always Worth It? The Case of Acute Myocardial Infarction,"Health Affairs, vol. 25 (March), pp. w34-w47. Footnotes 1.Congressional Budget Office (2007).Return to text 2.Ibid.Return to text 3.Hadley and Holohan (2004).Return to text 4.Institute of Medicine (2002).Return to text 5.Doyle (2005).Return to text 6.Institute of Medicine (2000).Return to text 7.Leape and Berwick (2005).Return to text 8.Beta blockers and ACE inhibitors are drugs that relieve stress on the heart.Return to text 9.Joint Commission (2007).Return to text 10.Skinner, Staiger, and Fischer (2006).Return to text 11.Cutler and McClellan (2001).Return to text 12.CBO (2007).Return to text 13.For the purposes of this speech, "low income" means those in the bottom 20th percentile of the income distribution.Return to text 14.For example, a recent study estimated that, without increases in the share of health spending that is publicly financed, the budget share of health spending for low-income elderly households would increase from about 25 percent of their income today to about 35 percent by 2040 (Follette and Sheiner, 2007).Return to text 15.Diagnosis-related groups are a system for classifying cases into disease-related groups that are likely to require the same hospital resources, on average. In the early 1980s, Medicare began reimbursing hospitals a fixed amount per admission based on the diagnosis-related group rather than reimbursing them for the actual costs incurred for each patient.Return to text
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Within the past year, we have seen a number of banking institutions suffer losses, some quite substantial. These and other institutions have been facing a range of risk management challenges, some of them relatively fundamental in nature and others associated with the increased use of complex and relatively new products. Fortunately, bank managers are acting on lessons learned from recent events and taking steps to rectify identified problems. Supervisors are also taking steps to respond to lessons being learned from recent events and, where appropriate, enhancing supervisory processes. Some of these steps include enhancing our understanding of the adverse implications of greater complexity in financial products and markets, stepping up our continuing efforts to address the challenges associated with supervising large, complex consolidated entities by multiple regulatory agencies, and ensuring that we continue to send strong supervisory messages, in good times and bad. Condition of the Banking SystemAs you know, the Federal Reserve is responsible for supervising bank holding companies, working together with the primary supervisors of the banks and their affiliates. We ourselves are the primary supervisors of state-chartered banks that choose to join the Federal Reserve System. My update on banking conditions will focus on these two groups of banking organizations. As the U.S. housing market has weakened and the economy has slowed over the past year, banking organizations have recognized significant losses stemming both from higher credit charges against residential mortgage-related loans held on their books and sharp asset value write-downs of securitized mortgage-related positions and leveraged loans. Indeed, the 50 largest bank holding companies, which represent more than three-fourths of all bank holding company assets, reported losses of more than $9 billion in the fourth quarter of 2007. Overall, bank holding companies in aggregate generated a loss of more than $8 billion during the difficult fourth quarter of 2007. The largest 50 bank holding companies performed better in the first quarter of 2008, reporting profits of $5.2 billion and reduced trading losses. Consequently, bank holding companies overall reported net income of nearly $10 billion for the quarter, down substantially from the $36.5 billion in income they reported for the first quarter of 2007 but a considerable improvement over the prior quarter's losses. Nonetheless, the headwinds of heavy trading book losses proved difficult to overcome for some firms and seven of the fifty largest bank holding companies still recorded net losses for the quarter. Moreover, as economic conditions have softened, these large companies have reported increasing problems in mortgage loan portfolios, particularly home equity lines of credit, and in loans to residential real estate developers. In some cases, broker-dealer subsidiaries of bank holding companies have suffered valuation losses on their holdings of mortgage-related assets. Reflecting this deterioration in mortgage-related exposures, nonperforming assets more than doubled over the past year from $37 billion to $81 billion and, as of March 31, 2008, nonperforming assets as a share of overall assets reached the highest level since 2002. Loan loss provisions rose sharply during the first quarter to $32 billion, exceeding net charge-offs by more than $14 billion, as the institutions were building their loan loss reserves in advance of expected further deterioration in loan quality. Increased concern over the potential for more losses from traditional lending activities has also been evident in the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, which in recent quarters has shown banks tightening their lending standards and terms. The 50 largest bank holding companies continue to work at improving their liquidity positions in the wake of recent market turmoil. Several of these companies had brought on balance sheet substantial assets that were originally securitized or otherwise held off balance sheet, forcing alterations in funding strategies and increasing pressures in the term funding market. As the Committee is aware, the Federal Reserve has taken a number of steps with its liquidity facilities to address the difficulties in term funding markets. In order to bolster equity positions diminished by recent writedowns, U.S. bank holding companies--some at the urging of supervisors--have raised more than $80 billion in capital so far in 2008. In addition, some have reduced dividends to further shore up their capital base. Reflecting these steps, aggregate tier 1 leverage, tier 1 risk-based, and total risk-based capital ratios for the largest 50 bank holding companies increased over the first quarter, expanding the margins above regulatory minimums. We expect bank holding companies to continue to report weak earnings and further asset valuation writedowns and/or significant credit costs in coming quarters. Indeed, despite higher provisioning during the past several quarters, coverage of nonperforming loans by loan loss reserves has not kept pace with growth in problem assets and bank holding companies may likely face the need to further bolster loan loss reserves. In view of this uncertain outlook, additional capital injections and the consideration of dividend cuts are still warranted for some of these companies and we have strongly encouraged supervised bank holding companies to enhance their capital positions. Stronger capital positions also will allow banking institutions to participate in and support the rebound in lending that will accompany the strengthening of the U.S. economy. Consistent with trends in commercial banks overall, conditions at state member banks have weakened over the past year. Problems in residential mortgage, home equity, and loans to home builders have pushed the nonperforming assets ratio at these banks to 1.57 percent, more than twice the level of one year ago and the highest rate since 1993. Loan loss provisions have also accelerated, rising to a high of 1.14 percent of average loans during the first quarter of 2008 in large part reflecting the deterioration in residential real estate-related loan portfolios. Despite this deterioration, state member banks still reported aggregate net income of $3.7 billion and a return on assets of about one percent for the first quarter of 2008. Moreover, more than 98 percent of these banks reported risk-based capital ratios consistent with a "well-capitalized" designation under prompt corrective action standards. Over the coming months, we expect banking institutions to continue to face deteriorating loan quality. House prices are still declining sharply in many localities and losses related to residential real estate--including loans to builders and developers--are bound to increase further. In addition, weak economic conditions could well extend problems to other segments of lending portfolios including consumer installment or credit card loans, as well as corporate loan portfolios. Moreover, banking organizations must be prepared for the possibility that liquidity conditions become tighter if uncertainties in the capital markets fail to subside or if credit conditions deteriorate significantly. Accordingly, we anticipate that the number of banks with less than satisfactory supervisory ratings will continue to increase from the relatively low levels that have existed in recent years and we are monitoring developments at all supervised institutions closely. Risk Management Lessons for Financial InstitutionsRecent market events point to a number of risk management lessons for financial institutions. I will highlight just a few key points; many of these lessons have been documented more fully by recent public reports and discussed in speeches by Chairman Bernanke, myself, and other Federal Reserve officials.1 The period leading up to the recent market turbulence was an unusually good one for the banking system, characterized by high profits, strong balance sheets, rapid innovation, business growth, and relatively few bank failures. Unfortunately, the extended period of good times in the banking system bred a sense of overconfidence among many bankers and other market participants, causing them to underestimate risks and not fully consider the potential for those good times to end. Most notably, many market participants expected housing prices to continue their upward trend and did not properly consider what might happen if prices leveled off or fell. In order to be good risk managers, bankers need to understand that overconfidence and complacency must be continually battled, especially during an extended period of good times. Another key lesson is that if risks are to be successfully managed, they must first be properly identified, measured and understood. Unfortunately, recent events have revealed significant deficiencies in these areas. Notable examples are the underestimation by many firms of the credit risk of subprime mortgages and certain tranches of structured products, as well as poor understanding of particular market risk characteristics of structured credit products. In a number of cases, bank managers did not exercise proper due diligence in valuing their positions and assessing their risks, relying solely on third-party assessments of risk that turned out to be overly optimistic. Other firms did not fully consider the linkages and correlations between credit risk and market risk, leading to mismeasurement of their overall exposure. Some institutions took an excessively narrow perspective on risk with insufficient appreciation of the need for a range of risk measures, including both quantitative and qualitative metrics. For example, some firms placed too much emphasis on the mechanical application of value-at-risk or similar model-based indicators. Sophisticated quantitative tools and models play an important role in good risk management, and they will continue to do so. But no model, regardless of sophistication, can capture all of the risks that an institution might face. Those institutions faring better during the recent turmoil generally placed relatively more emphasis on validation, independent review, and other controls for models and similar quantitative techniques. They also continually refined their models and applied a healthy dose of skepticism to model output. Stress tests and scenario analysis are tools through which institutions can gain perspective on risks that fall outside those typically captured by statistical models. Another crucial lesson from recent events is that financial institutions must understand their liquidity needs at an enterprise-wide level and be prepared for the possibility that market liquidity may erode quickly and unexpectedly. As is now widely recognized, many contingency funding plans did not adequately prepare for the possibility that certain off-balance-sheet exposures might have to be brought onto the firm's balance sheet. Nor did they adequately account for the possibility of widespread and protracted declines in asset market liquidity. Unexpected balance sheet expansions subsequently added to funding pressures as well as to pressures on capital ratios. Effective oversight of an organization as a whole is one of the most fundamental requirements of prudent risk management. Senior managers at successful firms are actively involved in risk management, which includes determining the firm's overall risk preferences and creating the incentives and controls to induce employees to abide by those preferences. Often those incentives and controls must provide a counterweight to the incentives to seek short-run profits that can be inherent in prevailing compensation practices. Strong oversight requires access to a variety of high-quality information on a timely basis. Successful senior managers also work to ensure that critical information is transmitted horizontally as well as vertically; during recent events, some firms' business lines did not share vital information relevant to risk positions and business tactics, with adverse implications for profitability. The leaders of well-managed institutions of all sizes generally seek to have strong and independent risk functions. Such functions support clear, dispassionate thinking about the entire firm's risk profile. In addition, the institution benefits when senior managers encourage risk managers to dig deep to uncover latent risks and to point out cases in which individual business lines appear to be assuming too much risk. The lessons I just noted emphasize the importance of risk management fundamentals, which means that they apply not only to those institutions suffering substantial losses recently, but also to institutions faring better during recent events. Supervisory Consideration of Lessons LearnedRisk management shortcomings at financial institutions highlighted by recent events also present policy and operational challenges for supervisors. The primary responsibility for risk management appropriately rests with the management of each institution, and our supervisory efforts are not aiming to prevent individual banks from suffering losses, which is part of the banking business. However, we are working to make sure that financial institutions have a better understanding of their potential for loss and that there are not broader breakdowns in risk management that can affect the financial system and the economy. While events continue to unfold, some key lessons for supervisors, in addition to bankers, are coming into focus. I would first like to highlight a few key lessons, and then in the next section will describe corresponding supervisory actions. For one, the increased complexity and linkage within and among increasingly globalized markets presents greater challenges not just for bankers but also for supervisors. Supervisors need to enhance their understanding of the direct and indirect relationships among markets and market participants, and the associated impact on the banking system. Supervisors must also be even more keenly aware of the manner in which those relationships within and among markets and market participants can change over time and how those relationships behave in times of stress--not just at banking institutions, but also at other financial firms that play prominent roles in financial markets and whose actions and condition can have an impact on financial stability. Before the recent market turbulence, the Federal Reserve--in many cases along with the other U.S. banking agencies--acted on a number of fronts to alert financial institutions about emerging risks, for example by issuing supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgages, home equity lending, commercial real estate, and subprime lending. We must continue to be vigilant about emerging risks, not just in these more turbulent times, but also when good times return--and we must be insistent that banking organizations factor these risks into their own risk management practices. It is also clear that supervisors need to enhance their focus on consumer compliance issues at the point of contact between lenders and households and on the linkages between weaknesses in consumer lending practices and safety and soundness, such as occurred with subprime mortgages. The current U.S. regulatory structure, with multiple supervisory agencies, has a number of strengths and benefits, but challenges can arise in assessing risk profiles of large, complex financial institutions operating across financial sectors, particularly given the growth in the use of sophisticated financial products that can generate risks across various legal entities. Congress established a consolidated supervisory framework for bank holding companies in recognition that some risks cross legal entities and are managed on a consolidated basis. Accordingly, monitoring those properly requires a supervisory approach directed at more than one, or even several, of the legal entity subdivisions within the overall organization. Recent events have highlighted the fundamental importance of enterprise-wide risk management; both supervisors and bankers need to understand risks across a consolidated entity and assess the risk management tools being applied across the firm. The implementation of consolidated supervision in the United States generally works well, with strong, cooperative relationships between the Federal Reserve and other relevant bank supervisors and functional regulators. Information sharing among relevant supervisors and regulators is essential to ensure that a banking organization's global activities are effectively supervised on a consolidated basis, and we have worked over the years to develop and enhance interagency coordination and information sharing. But as institutions grow larger and more complex, we need to ensure that our system of consolidated supervision keeps pace. Supervisory Actions Going ForwardWe are acting in response to lessons from recent events to ensure the continuing safety and soundness of the U.S. banking system. Of course, we also continue to study recent and ongoing events to gain additional information and insights. As a first step, supervisors are redoubling their efforts to help organizations improve their risk-management practices, given the challenges some banks are facing today. Accordingly, we have increased supervisory attention to this issue. For instance, supervisors are reinforcing and strengthening their focus on assessments and testing of fundamental risk management processes, requiring vigorous corrective action when weaknesses are identified. We are also ensuring that institutions take a more forward-looking approach to risk management; for example, our examiners are reviewing due diligence around commercial real estate valuations and ensuring that bankers make appropriate adjustments based on market conditions. This approach is consistent with recent lessons we have all learned from residential real estate. Additionally, we are more intensely verifying assertions made by bank management about the robustness of their risk management capabilities. Naturally, we have focused first on the institutions in most need of improvement, but we will continue to remind stronger institutions of the need to remain vigilant against potential weaknesses. Supervisors are also enhancing their understanding of the full spectrum and the scale of the risks inherent in increasingly complex banking activities and the potential for risks to crystallize in times of stress. In particular, we are focusing on the inter-relationships among risk types, not just with respect to those areas that precipitated recent events, but more broadly. These forward-looking risk identification processes include a more comprehensive understanding of institutions' main and emerging business lines and the full range of risks they generate. We are also counseling institutions to improve their own risk identification processes and to emphasize the importance of stress testing and scenario analyses. Better risk management at banking organizations must be accompanied by more robust liquidity and capital cushions. As developments of the past months clearly demonstrate, the difficulty in identifying complexity and linkages--and their potential impact during times of stress--requires institutions to maintain sizable and more reliable liquidity and capital cushions, given the inherent uncertainty in financial markets. This is a key point supervisors are reinforcing strongly. The Federal Reserve is nearing completion of enhancements to its supervisory guidance to clarify our role as consolidated supervisor of bank and financial holding companies--often known as our "umbrella supervisor" role. The updated guidance is primarily intended to provide greater clarification to our own examination staff. For example, it provides for more consistent Federal Reserve supervisory practices and assessments across institutions with similar activities and risks, detailing expectations for understanding and assessing primary governance functions and risk controls, material business lines, nonbank operations, funding and liquidity management, consumer compliance, and other key activities and risks. Again, from a financial stability perspective the Federal Reserve has an interest not just in identifying the risks within an individual organization, but also understanding the broader set of risks affecting all key market participants. The updated consolidated supervision guidance, which will be made publicly available, naturally reiterates the importance of coordination with, and reliance on, the work of other relevant supervisors and functional regulators. The consolidated supervision guidance under development is being updated based on the lessons from recent events noted above. We need to continue to work closely with other supervisors and regulators as we implement the enhanced consolidated supervision guidance, with focus on improving interagency coordination of supervisory activities across all bank holding companies, particularly the largest and most complex organizations. We are also considering new or augmented supervisory guidance on other aspects of risk management, including further emphasis on the need for an enterprise-wide perspective when assessing and managing risk. For example, we are developing supervisory guidance to clarify expectations surrounding compliance risk, focusing particularly on firm-wide compliance risk management for large, complex organizations. Another example is our participation in the development of enhanced guidance on the management of liquidity risks, which is being developed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. As you know, the U.S. federal banking agencies are also in the process of implementing the Basel II framework, which is intended to enhance the quality of risk management by tying regulatory capital more closely to institutions' underlying risks and by requiring strong internal systems for evaluating credit and other risks. We understand that Basel II must be implemented carefully and so have established an extended transition process with multiple safeguards. Indeed, findings from recent supervisory reviews on the use of economic capital have direct application to the evaluations we will make under Pillar 2, where banks are required to have their own robust internal process to ensure that they have adequate capital for their entire risk profile. Importantly, Pillar 2 underscores the current supervisory authority to require institutions to hold additional capital if the agencies are not satisfied with the levels chosen by bank management. We are also working with the Basel Committee to ensure that the Basel II framework appropriately reflects the lessons of recent events, such as by strengthening the capital treatment of off-balance-sheet vehicles and assessing the use of external credit ratings to determine capital charges. ConclusionThe Federal Reserve plays an important role in the strong supervisory structure we have here in the United States. And we are committed to making our supervisory and regulatory processes as strong as possible, improving them when necessary. Going forward, we must continue to send strong supervisory messages to senior management at financial institutions--perhaps with more force and frequency than in the recent past--particularly since during extended periods of good times institutions can lose their focus on the importance of sound risk management fundamentals. We continue to review our supervision practices to identify and act on potential areas for improvement in light of recent events. Footnotes 1.President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)," March 13. Financial Stability Forum (2008), "Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience (399 KB PDF)," April 7. Senior Supervisors Group (2008). "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence (373 KB PDF)" March 6.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri It is my pleasure to be here today to help dedicate this state-of-the-art facility. President Hoenig, I commend you and your staff, as well as the designers and builders, of this impressive structure. It will serve Kansas City and the entire 10th District well. Permit me to start with a bit of history that I hope will underscore the crucial role played by the regional Reserve Banks. When the Federal Reserve was created in 1913, it was the nation's third attempt at a central bank. The First Bank of the United States, chartered in 1791, and the Second Bank of the United States, chartered in 1816, did not last. They both failed to gain the trust of a public fearful of concentrated power. To address this concern, the creators of the Federal Reserve crafted a plan for a central bank with a unique structure: what some have called a decentralized central bank. An independent federal agency in Washington, D.C., the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System oversees 12 regional Banks, which serve as the operating arms of the System and blend public and private elements. Importantly, the presidents of the Reserve Banks participate, along with the Washington-based Board members, in the monetary policy deliberations of the Federal Open Market Committee. The presidents bring a wealth of knowledge acquired from their regional contacts. Thus, in making policy, we are able to view the economy not just from a Washington perspective, or a Wall Street perspective, but also from a Main Street perspective. This system has served the central bank and the nation well for nearly a century. Last night I attended a dinner with the Bank's current directors as well as many former members of the Bank's board. Nationally, 278 private citizens--including business people, bankers, nonprofit executives, and community, agricultural and labor leaders--serve on the boards of our 12 Banks and their Branches. These individuals provide us with extensive and current information about economic conditions from a unique local perspective. Often, they provide an early warning of shifting economic conditions before they show up in official government statistics. I commend them for their service to both the central bank and our nation. Here in Kansas City, and in all of our Districts, the Bank and Branch directors have played an important role since the Federal Reserve's inception. As you might expect, at last night's dinner, we talked to some degree about the Bank's history, our current challenges, and the future. In preparing for this event, I read a little bit about the dedication ceremony for the previous Kansas City Fed headquarters at 925 Grand Boulevard. One of my predecessors as Chairman, William P.G. Harding, spoke at its dedication on November 16, 1921, and I am happy to follow in his footsteps. Considering the Federal Reserve's history, this location is a most appropriate site for a Federal Reserve Bank, with its new neighbor being the National World War I Museum at Liberty Memorial. Those who have an appreciation of U.S. history know that the Federal Reserve played an important role in support of the funding of the First World War and that the war forced the early Federal Reserve to contend with an uncertain global environment with wide-ranging monetary and economic ramifications. The Federal Reserve has faced many such challenges since its founding, and the System has evolved in response. Ours must be a dynamic institution if it is to successfully fulfill its mission in a changing financial and economic landscape. When the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City opened in 1914, it operated out of leased office space before moving to the building it is now vacating. In the more than nine decades since, the world has changed dramatically, especially in the areas of banking and finance; however, the Federal Reserve's purpose, mission, and goals remain unchanged. And while the Bank's former home on Grand Boulevard served it well, today we celebrate the opening of a building that will well serve this country, and this region. Looking at the Federal Reserve more broadly, while we must continue to change, we also must recognize that one of the Federal Reserve's key strengths continues to be the strong regional connections fostered by the Reserve Banks. To quote from the Federal Reserve Board's first annual report, published on January 15, 1915: "It should never be lost to sight that the Reserve Banks are invested with much of the quality of a public trust. They were created because of the existence of certain common needs and interests, and they should be administered for the common welfare--for the good of all." In that spirit, let us use this ceremony to recognize the Federal Reserve's unique structure with roots that are broad and deep in the region. To echo comments Tom Hoenig made at the groundbreaking on this site three years ago, let us dedicate this Bank to the service of our nation, this great city of Kansas City, and the other important cities, towns, and rural regions in the heart of America that define the 10th Federal Reserve District.
The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies announced today the agenda and keynote speaker for the 2008 Interagency Minority Depository Institutions (MDI) National Conference. The theme of this year's conference for federally insured MDIs will be "Know Your Business, Grow Your Business." This year's keynote speaker will be Robert L. Johnson, founder and Chairman, The RLJ Companies. Representatives from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Reserve Board, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision will address a wide range of issues regarding the challenges MDIs face today in ensuring their long-term success and viability. The 2008 Interagency Minority Depository Institutions National Conference will be held at the Westin Michigan Avenue Hotel in Chicago, Illinois, from July 16-18, 2008. Confirmed participants include: FDIC Chairman Sheila BairFRB Governor Randall KrosznerOCC Comptroller John DuganOTS Director John Reich Conference details and registration information are available at:http://www.fdic.gov/regulations/resources/minority/national_conference.html.
The Federal Reserve System today announced the nationwide launch of Partnership for Progress, an innovative outreach and technical assistance program for minority-owned and de novo institutions. The program seeks to help these institutions confront their unique challenges, cultivate safe and sound practices, and compete more effectively in today's marketplace through a combination of one-on-one guidance, workshops, and an extensive interactive web-based resource and information center (http://www.fedpartnership.gov/)."The program's overarching mission is to preserve and promote minority-owned institutions and to enhance their vital role in providing access to credit and financial services in communities that have been historically underserved," said Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. "The Federal Reserve is committed to helping minority-owned and de novo banks achieve long-term success."Partnership for Progress provides insight on key issues in three distinct stages of a bank's life cycle: "Start a Bank," "Manage Transition," and "Grow Shareholder Value." Topics covered include credit and interest rate risk, capital and liquidity, and banking regulations. To ensure broad access to the program, all aspects of the training will be available through workshops, online courses, and the program's interactive website."This cutting-edge program, which draws on insights from economics, accounting, finance, and regulatory compliance, will become a valuable resource for institutions at different stages of their development," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Randall S. Kroszner.In developing the program, Federal Reserve officials met with minority-owned and de novo banks across the country as well as trade groups, bank consultants, and state and federal banking agencies to better understand the challenges these institutions face in raising capital, growing their institutions, and attracting talent. This process provided valuable insight and contributed significantly to the design of the program, which was spearheaded by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Key concepts from the program will be incorporated into the Federal Reserve System's examiner training to provide a deeper understanding of the issues unique to minority-owned institutions.The nationwide launch of Partnership for Progress follows a successful pilot for the program that began last fall. Questions and comments regarding the program should be directed to Marilyn Wimp at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 215-574-4197.
On June 16, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $75 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Stop-out rate:2.360 percentTotal propositions submitted:$89.377 billionTotal propositions accepted:$75.000 billionBid/cover ratio:1.19Number of bidders:76 Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 97.69% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on June 19, 2008, and will mature on July 17, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by noon EDT on June 17, 2008. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on June 17, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On June 2, 2008, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $75 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Stop-out rate:2.26 percentTotal propositions submitted:$95.914 billionTotal propositions accepted:$75.000 billionBid/cover ratio:1.28Number of bidders:73 Bids at the stop-out rate were prorated at 48.47% and resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 (except that all awards below $10,000 are rounded up to $10,000). The awarded loans will settle on June 5, 2008, and will mature on July 3, 2008. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by noon EDT on June 3, 2008. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on June 3, 2008, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On June 16, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $75 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm).Description of Offering and Auction ParametersOffering Amount:$75 billionTerm:28-day loanBid Submission Date:June 16, 2008Opening Time:11 a.m. EDTClosing Time:1 p.m. EDTNotification Date:June 17, 2008Settlement Date:June 19, 2008Maturity Date:July 17, 2008Minimum Bid Amount (per bid):$5 millionBid Increment:$100,000Maximum Bid Amount(per institution):$7.5 billion (10% of Offering Amount)Minimum Bid Rate:2.05 percentIncremental Bid Rate:0.001 percentMinimum Award:$10,000Maximum Award:$7.5 billion (10% of Offering Amount) Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
On June 2, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $75 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm).Description of Offering and Auction ParametersOffering Amount:$75 billionTerm:28-day loanBid Submission Date:June 2, 2008Opening Time:11 a.m. EDTClosing Time:1 p.m. EDTNotification Date:June 3, 2008Settlement Date:June 5, 2008Maturity Date:July 3, 2008Minimum Bid Amount (per bid):$5 millionBid Increment:$100,000Maximum Bid Amount(per institution):$7.5 billion (10% of Offering Amount)Minimum Bid Rate:2.00 percentIncremental Bid Rate:0.001 percentMinimum Award:$10,000Maximum Award:$7.5 billion (10% of Offering Amount) Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
On June 30, 2008, the Federal Reserve will offer $75 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm).Description of Offering and Auction ParametersOffering Amount:$75 billionTerm:28-day loanBid Submission Date:June 30, 2008Opening Time:11 a.m. EDTClosing Time:1 p.m. EDTNotification Date:July 1, 2008Settlement Date:July 3, 2008Maturity Date:July 31, 2008Minimum Bid Amount (per bid):$5 millionBid Increment:$100,000Maximum Bid Amount(per institution):$7.5 billion (10% of Offering Amount)Minimum Bid Rate:2.01 percentIncremental Bid Rate:0.001 percentMinimum Award:$10,000Maximum Award:$7.5 billion (10% of Offering Amount) Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and noon EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 3:00 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the Boston College Carroll School of Management Center for Asset Management, Boston, Massachusetts As all of you well know, turmoil in the mortgage and financial markets emerged just about one year ago. We are learning some important lessons as related events continue to unfold. Today, I will offer some thoughts on financial market developments and credit conditions. I will also discuss the prospects for recovery and repair of the mortgage markets, which I believe will be a gradual process that requires both market and regulatory discipline. There are some key factors that should contribute to the recovery and repair of mortgage markets. Greater transparency and less complexity in credit instruments will help to promote broader scrutiny of credit risk. Investors with more and better information from originators and sponsors of credit products will be able to more easily conduct proper due diligence and verify evaluations of credit risk. Financial institutions that develop and hold these instruments and that have similar or correlated exposures through various business lines should also strengthen risk-management practices. And supervisors of these institutions must insist on effective risk management and take the steps necessary to ensure that changes are implemented where needed. Financial Market Developments and Credit ConditionsThe tenor in the financial markets has generally improved this spring and, on the whole, strains have eased somewhat. Spreads between yields on corporate bonds and yields on Treasury securities are narrower than in March, as are spreads on credit default swaps for firms across a wide range of industries. Meanwhile, companies across the credit-quality spectrum have been able to issue quite a sizable volume of new bonds this spring. For example, last month alone, domestic nonfinancial corporations raised more than $50 billion in the bond market. In addition, in recent weeks, several large financial institutions have tapped long-term bond markets to shore up liquidity in the face of short-term funding markets that have remained under pressure. Financial institutions have also continued to tap the equity market to bolster capital depleted by losses on loans and securities in their portfolios. Large financial institutions, especially in the United States and Europe, have reported credit losses and asset writedowns on the order of $300 billion. Moreover, tightness in credit markets has forced many of these institutions to bring onto their balance sheets a substantial volume of assets that were intended to be sold to investors or funded through off-balance sheet vehicles. As a consequence of these financial pressures and, in some cases, at the urging of supervisors, U.S. bank holding companies have raised more than $80 billion in capital so far this year. Despite the improvement in sentiment this spring, risk premiums in the bond and stock markets have remained wide by historical standards, suggesting that investors continue to be concerned about the economic outlook and the performance of specific industries and firms. Furthermore, credit conditions have remained tight. For example, in the Federal Reserve's most recent Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices conducted in the spring, banks reported having further tightened lending standards and terms on a range of loans to households and businesses. The reduced availability of credit has come as the banking industry has continued to write down the value of security holdings and has seen rising charge-off rates on loans for residential construction and development projects, home equity lines of credit, and consumer auto loans and credit card accounts. Thus, while the recent ability of many financial institutions to raise capital from diverse sources has been encouraging, additional capital raising by financial institutions would support the extension of credit to households and businesses, and thus economic activity. Financial institutions should continue in their efforts to raise capital. Furthermore, larger capital cushions will not only provide a more solid footing for the broader economy, but will place firms in the position to benefit from profit opportunities as conditions in the financial markets and the economy evolve. Strains continue to result in restrictive conditions for home-mortgage borrowers. Securitizations of non-agency mortgage products remain stalled and new originations are being held in lenders' portfolios, pressuring their balance sheets and, for example, leaving the spread between interest rates offered on jumbo and conforming mortgages very high. The difficult conditions in the mortgage securitization markets, of course, put strains on the housing market itself. Recovery in the mortgage markets themselves is also likely to be tied to recovery in the housing markets. As you know, home sales have dropped appreciably and the build up of inventories of unsold homes has been significant. In addition, mortgage foreclosures have risen sharply, and the report released yesterday by the Mortgage Bankers Association indicated that foreclosures climbed further in the first quarter of this year. The most recent data continued to show that the severity of the foreclosure problem has been uneven across the country, with Arizona, California, Florida, Nevada, Michigan, and Ohio, for example, suffering from higher rates than many other parts of the country. The high rates of mortgage foreclosures are an urgent problem, and the Federal Reserve has been working hard to help prevent avoidable foreclosures and to promote responsible mortgage lending. I expect housing markets to recover only gradually as demand rebounds and excess inventories are worked off. The regions of the country with the most severe housing downturns may need more time to recover than others. To sum up, rehabilitation in the mortgage securitizations markets, which have been particularly hard hit during the turmoil of the past year, will be a gradual process that will take time. Structured Financial Products and the Financial Market TurmoilAs you know, the initial shock to financial markets was essentially a rapid deterioration in the performance of subprime and so-called alt-A mortgages in the United States, particularly among those originated after the middle of 2005.1A large share of those mortgages were funded through structures known as mortgage-backed securities (MBSs), and many of those structures were, in turn, funded by other structures called collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), in which subprime and alt-A MBS represented the collateral. These CDOs were ultimately held by a wide range of investors and financial institutions. Much of the issuance of these securities over the past few years occurred in an environment of tightly compressed risk spreads--that is, the difference between the yields on what were perceived as relatively safe and relatively risky assets was much smaller than usual. Indeed, many of the structures seemed to be created to satisfy investors' strong demand for securities that carried investment-grade ratings but that might provide slightly higher yields than other investment-grade securities, such as corporate bonds. In many cases, however, investors seem to have been attracted to these structured securities without a thorough understanding of the underlying risk profiles. Although MBSs and CDOs have been around for many years, the more recent structures were significantly different and more complex than their earlier counterparts. Investors' earlier experience with CDOs, for example, was mainly limited to cases in which primary securities, such as corporate bonds, business loans, or other simple securities, formed the underlying collateral. In contrast, the more recent CDOs frequently were themselves backed by structured securities, resulting in so-called two-layer securitizations in which structured products are used to fund other structured products. These two-layer securitizations are inherently more complex and more exposed to tail risk than their earlier one-layer counterparts. Indeed, in its recent report on credit-risk transfer, the Joint Forum--an international collaboration of financial supervisors--noted a "cliff effect" that is associated with the distribution of returns that can be realized on the more senior tranches of two-layer securitizations.2Simply put, the cliff effect refers to the fact that investors of higher-rated tranches of complex securities can expect to receive a small positive return in most circumstances, but they are vulnerable to extremely large losses in the rare event of widespread financial stress. Despite the greater complexity, it seems that many investors assumed that the evaluations of credit-rating agencies would work well and be sufficient for the new structured securities. Investors ended up relying too heavily on those assessments, rather than requiring ample information about the underlying assets and demanding extra transparency in order to estimate projected risk-return trade-offs. Role of Information and Transparency in the Corporate Bond MarketTo illustrate how important information and transparency will be in the recovery and repair process of the securitization markets going forward, it might be helpful to review a case in which, on the whole, market functioning has held up relatively well. I'm thinking specifically about the market for corporate bonds issued by investment-grade nonfinancial firms. Over the past year, investment-grade nonfinancial companies in the United States have been able to issue a sizable volume of traditional debt instruments rather consistently, even as demand for some other types of securities has been substantially curtailed. In addition, liquidity in the secondary markets for corporate bonds has generally been perceived to be much better than liquidity for non-agency mortgage-backed securities and for more-complex structured securities. Part of the reason that the markets for high-grade nonfinancial bonds have continued to function relatively well is that those securities have not experienced widespread ratings downgrades or defaults. In addition, the extensive amount of data available about nonfinancial corporations and the performance of corporate bonds over time has made it easier and less costly for investors to conduct due diligence--or to put it another way--to "trust but verify" credit-risk evaluations. The same cannot be said of many residential MBSs created over the past couple of years and the many complex structured products that held MBSs as collateral, where the complexity of the payoff structures (including cliff effects) made expected returns and risks more difficult to model. Recovery and Repair Going ForwardAs I have said, recovery in the mortgage market will take time and will require more market and regulatory discipline. I would now like to discuss this process in further detail as it relates to the credit-rating agencies, the originate-to-distribute model for mortgage lending, the important role of the new Basel II framework, and improvements in risk-management practices that financial institutions will need to make in several key areas. Credit-Rating AgenciesAs I mentioned, establishing sound and thorough independent risk evaluations is costly, particularly for complex structured products that have only recently been created. To address problems with risk evaluations, the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG) has recommended, among other things, that the credit-rating agencies themselves should display greater skepticism when they are presented with complex and opaque instruments to rate.3The PWG also suggested that the credit-rating agencies would better serve investors by providing greater transparency about the models, estimation methods, and assumptions used to evaluate credit risk for complex structured securities. In addition, it is important for the rating agencies to clarify that a given rating applied to a complex structured credit product may have a different risk than the same rating applied to a simple security, such as a corporate bond. Originate-to-Distribute Approach to Mortgage LendingThe growth of the originate-to-distribute approach in the mortgage market played an important role in the rapid expansion of mortgage lending in the United States until the onset of the recent market turbulence. That expansion was concentrated in the subprime and alt A segments of the mortgage market, where underwriting deteriorated at the point of origination. To an ever-increasing extent from around the middle of 2005 until about a year ago, originators made loans that layered multiple sources of credit risk, including low documentation of borrower income, very high combined loan-to-value ratios, and loans with nontraditional payment schedules that sometimes allowed principal and interest payments to be deferred. In an environment of compressed risk spreads, investors have more difficulty signaling concerns about credit risk, which may have reduced the incentives for originators to maintain strict underwriting. I would expect the originate-to-distribute model to continue to be an important part of the modern financial market landscape, but, I hope, in a much stronger form. The model works best when the resulting credit instruments are less complex and opaque, as analysts and investors can evaluate the underlying risks with greater certainty. And originate-to-distribute is most effective when the incentives of originators and investors are closely aligned and when market pricing reinforces incentives for originators to perform careful underwriting. Firms surveyed about their risk-management practices, by a group of supervisory agencies from France, Germany, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States known as the Senior Supervisors Group (SSG), have emphasized the importance of understanding the quality of new credits that their businesses originate or purchase from others.4 The process of recovery and repair in non-agency mortgage securitization markets would also be aided by more clarity and consistency in underwriting standards. This would provide more certainty to the mortgage market, thereby helping to revive investor confidence in this market and promote the flow of credit to borrowers. Both to protect consumers and to foster the revival of these markets, the Federal Reserve has proposed stricter underwriting rules for high-cost mortgages under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA), which could also help to increase the transparency and improve the quality of underlying assets in private mortgage pools. The Federal Reserve's proposed rules would better protect consumers from a range of unfair or deceptive mortgage lending and advertising practices. Our proposal includes four key protections for higher-priced mortgage loans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling: (1) creditors would be prohibited from engaging in a pattern or practice of extending credit without considering borrowers' ability to repay the loan; (2) creditors would be required to verify the income and assets they rely upon in making a loan; (3) prepayment penalties would only be permitted if certain conditions are met, including the condition that no penalty will apply for at least 60 days before any possible payment increase; and (4) creditors would have to establish escrow accounts for taxes and insurance. We are working toward issuing final regulations in July. Role ofBaselIIIndividual institutions are responsible for maintaining sound risk-management practices. But supervisors, of course, also have a role to play in both promoting effective risk management and offering incentives for bankers to make improvements to their practices. The new Basel II framework is a substantial supervisory initiative that seeks to improve risk-management practices at banking organizations. The framework more closely aligns regulatory capital requirements with actual risks, which should lead institutions to make better decisions about extending credit, mitigating risks, and determining overall capital needs. For example, unlike under Basel I, the risk weights applied to first-lien residential mortgages will be subject to a much more refined differentiation depending on characteristics such as the credit worthiness of the borrower and the potential for loss on the exposure. Similarly, Basel II attempts to more fully capture risks in securitization transactions held in the banking book. For example, under the securitization approach of Basel II, capital charges are based on explicit assessments of the credit quality of the instrument. In contrast, under Basel I, capital charges had little relationship to underlying risk, being based instead, for example, on an instrument's maturity and whether it was on- or off- balance sheet. This tended to create regulatory arbitrage incentives. Just as lessons learned from recent events can help bankers improve risk- management practices, they can also help supervisors further increase the effectiveness of the Basel II framework. For example, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision plans to strengthen the resiliency of Basel II by revising it to establish higher capital requirements for certain complex structured credit products, such as CDOs of asset-backed securities, among other enhancements.5The Basel Committee is also working with the International Organization of Securities Commissions to address treatement of securitization transactions held in the trading book. Improvements in Risk-Management PracticesStudies of last year's events have concluded that part of the reason that the problems with subprime and alt-A mortgages led to much wider financial market turmoil was weaknesses in the risk-management practices at some large global financial firms that created and held complex credit products. Recent events have highlighted the need for risk-management improvements in four fundamental areas: risk identification and measurement, liquidity risk management, valuation practices, and governance and risk control. The first area relates to risk identification and measurement. As all of you here know, good information is the lifeblood of sound risk management. A good risk-management structure is designed to identify the full spectrum of risks across the entire firm, gathering and processing information on an enterprise-wide basis in real time. In short, you cannot manage your risks if you do not know what they are. Recent events have illustrated that many large, complex institutions had exposures to subprime mortgages that ran across independent business lines, through off-balance-sheet conduits such as structured investment vehicles, and with respect to numerous counterparties such as monoline financial guarantors. But too few institutions fully recognized their aggregate exposure to risks that turned out to be highly correlated. Latent risks from certain complex products and certain risky activities are particularly problematic because they can manifest themselves when market turbulence sets in. Stress testing and scenario analysis are essential because they can reveal potential risk concentrations that may not be apparent when using information gleaned in normal times. A second fundamental area is liquidity risk management. Because of its central role in the business of banking, liquidity risk requires rigorous and effective management. Recent events have shown that during times of systemwide stress, liquidity shocks can become correlated, so that the same factors that can lead to liquidity problems for the bank's assets or off-balance-sheet vehicles can simultaneously put pressure on a bank's own funding liquidity. Because risk concentrations have the potential to manifest themselves during times of stress and at that time adversely affect capital positions, it is particularly important that firms assess how liquidity events could place pressure on capital levels. Valuation practices are a third fundamental area. The SSG comparative survey I mentioned earlier provides evidence that those firms paying close attention to the problems associated with the valuation of financial instruments, particularly instruments for which markets were not deep, fared better than institutions paying less attention. These more successful firms developed in-house expertise to conduct independent valuations and refrained from relying solely on third-party assessments, which again underscores the need for firms to "trust but verify." A final fundamental area, governance and risk control, has been a key factor differentiating performance across financial institutions during the recent turmoil. Firms that operated with the two main ingredients for solid governance and controls--thorough information about potential risks provided to a senior management team that is engaged and willing to act and strong incentives throughout the organization--have come through this tumultuous period in better condition. Incentive structures are most effective when clearly and consistently articulated and when they take into account a longer-horizon view of risks to the organization. Effective risk management remains sturdy and durable only if supported and enforced by strong and independent risk functions that produce unbiased information. Empowering independent risk managers results in clear, dispassionate thinking about the potential for concentration and correlation of risks across the entire firm, with no favoritism toward any business unit regardless of its current profitability. In other words, each institution should have a few people within the institution who--to paraphrase a former Federal Reserve Chairman--know when to take away the punch bowl when the party gets going. Being the party pooper, however, can be very difficult in any organization, and that is why it is crucial for the risk manager to be known as an independent voice who is influential with top management, and for top executives, of large or small firms, to set the appropriate "tone at the top" with respect to the importance of independent and unbiased risk evaluation. ConclusionAs market participants take steps to foster greater transparency and reduce the complexity of structured credit instruments, I believe that recovery and repair in the mortgage markets will take hold over time. Moreover, as financial institutions continue to attract capital and strengthen risk-management practices, and as supervisors ensure that banks take the necessary actions, institutions will become more resilient to shocks, and the overall financial system will be more robust as a result. Footnotes 1.Loans marketed in alt-A mortgage-backed securities are typically higher-balance loans made to borrowers who might have had some past credit problems (but not severe enough to drop them into the subprime category) or who, for some reason (such as a desire not to document income) chose not to obtain a prime mortgage. In addition, many loans with nontraditional amortization schedules, such as interest only or option adjustable rate mortgages, are sold into pools marketed as alt-A.Return to text 2.The Joint Forum (2008),Credit Risk Transfer--Developments from 2005 to 2007(Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements).Return to text 3.President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)" (Washington: Department of the Treasury).Return to text 4.See "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence (373 KB PDF)."Return to text 5.For further discussion of plans to strengthen the resiliency of the framework, refer to Randall S. Kroszner (2008), "Risk Management and Basel II," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston AMA Conference, May 14.Return to text
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 2 percent. Recent information indicates that overall economic activity continues to expand, partly reflecting some firming in household spending. However, labor markets have softened further and financial markets remain under considerable stress. Tight credit conditions, the ongoing housing contraction, and the rise in energy prices are likely to weigh on economic growth over the next few quarters. The Committee expects inflation to moderate later this year and next year. However, in light of the continued increases in the prices of energy and some other commodities and the elevated state of some indicators of inflation expectations, uncertainty about the inflation outlook remains high. The substantial easing of monetary policy to date, combined with ongoing measures to foster market liquidity, should help to promote moderate growth over time. Although downside risks to growth remain, they appear to have diminished somewhat, and the upside risks to inflation and inflation expectations have increased. The Committee will continue to monitor economic and financial developments and will act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Frederic S. Mishkin; Sandra Pianalto; Charles I. Plosser; Gary H. Stern; and Kevin M. Warsh. Voting against was Richard W. Fisher, who preferred an increase in the target for the federal funds rate at this meeting.
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Frankfurt, Germany During the past decade, one of the most prominent themes sounded by policymakers, observers, and analysts of international economic developments has been "globalization." Based on rapid advances in trade, finance, transportation, and communications, the world economy has become increasingly tightly knit. Large numbers of the world's population--including those in China, India, and the former Soviet Union--have emerged from their relative isolation to participate more fully in the global economic system. The impression has been that national borders and regional differences are becoming less and less relevant as businesses increasingly operate in a single global market. In the past year or so, however, especially as the housing sector in the United States slowed sharply and turmoil erupted in many financial markets, a different theme has come to the foreground: "decoupling." This term refers to apparent divergences in economic performance among different regions of the world economy. First, there has been a perception that the business cycles of the United States and other industrial economies are becoming less synchronized, with the U.S. economy weakening more sharply than many other industrial economies over the past several quarters. Second, decoupling is often used to refer to the fact that economic growth in the emerging market economies is holding up, even as growth slows substantially in the United States and, to a lesser extent, elsewhere in the industrial world. Finally, and as a related point, observers point to the fact that even as the financial markets of many industrial countries have been roiled by the turmoil that emerged last August, conditions in the traditionally volatile financial markets of emerging market economies have proved surprisingly resilient. In my talk today, I would like to address two questions: First, is the world economy genuinely experiencing divergences in economic and financial performance being described as "decoupling"? And second, if true, can we reconcile the perception that globalization has made economies increasingly interlinked with the suggestion that the most recent U.S. slowdown has not been matched by slowing elsewhere to the extent that we have seen in recent cycles?1 Global Integration through Trade and FinanceUndoubtedly, economies have become more integrated in recent decades. For example, U.S. imports of goods and services have risen relative to the U.S. gross domestic product (GDP), from 10 percent in the second half of the 1980s to nearly 18 percent today. U.S. trade with other industrialized countries has more than doubled over this same period. Industrialized country trade with emerging market economies has experienced a far more dramatic increase.2 These increases in trade are the natural result of various forces. Transport costs have been a big factor. Air shipping costs have declined over time, although some of this has been eroded recently with greater security costs and the rise in fuel prices. Costs of ocean shipping have come down, due to containerization, bulk shipping, and other efficiencies.3Policy-induced barriers, such as tariffs and other means of restraining international trade, also have declined, with progress especially marked in developing Asia and in Eastern Europe after the breakup of the Soviet Union. Additionally, information about production opportunities in foreign countries has become easier to attain, promoted in part by immigrants and multinational companies facilitating networking and by the enhanced availability of information through the Internet. These developments have led to expanded trade in traditional manufactured goods, but also have led to an expanded breadth of types of traded goods and especially services. As a consequence of these developments, internationally integrated production has risen. From the U.S. perspective, this rise has primarily occurred through growth in the import share of intermediate inputs used across all private industries. In the last decade alone, the imported input share rose from around 8-1/4 percent in 1997 to 10-1/2 percent by 2006. The international movement of workers leads to macroeconomic consequences, particularly for smaller developing countries. In 2007, an estimated $240 billion in remittances went to developing countries, more than double the flow in 2001. These remittances represent a significant source of developing country income and broaden the scope for cyclical spillovers.4 Another area of impressive growth in international linkages has been in financial services. We've seen increased cross-listings of stocks and more cross-border ownership and control of exchanges, banks, and securities settlement systems. Outside of the United States, in 1997, 15 percent of the assets in private equity portfolios were in foreign equities. A decade later, this share has risen to 24 percent. For U.S. investors, the comparable shares grew from 9 percent of total equity portfolios to 19 percent. Bond portfolios have also become more international, especially for foreign investors. While financial integration has occurred globally, this growth has been uneven. Integration among industrialized countries, measured by the ratio of the sum of their foreign assets and liabilities to GDP, has tripled since 1990, while an analogous measure for emerging and developing economies has increased only about 50 percent.5 One result of this financial integration is that the financial channels are growing in importance in the transmission of shocks between economies.6The extent of this integration has become painfully evident to investors and financial institutions during the current episode of financial turmoil, with the collapse of the subprime mortgage market in the United States spreading losses and funding pressures to many corners of the globe. Recent analysis of the size and sources of spillovers between the United States, the euro area, Japan, and other industrial countries finds a central role for international trade. But spillovers also occur through commodity prices and through financial variables such as short- and long-term interest rates and equity prices.7For example, when liquidity conditions tighten in one country, globally active banks may attempt to pull liquidity from overseas affiliates, reducing the liquidity consequences at home but simultaneously transmitting the shock abroad.8What is particularly interesting is that in some cases, financial linkages might now be more important for transmission than the traditional trade linkages. Decoupling During the RecentU.S.SlowdownI turn now to evidence regarding decoupling during the recent U.S. slowdown. Part of the reason the hypothesis of decoupling has gained so much traction is that the economies of the world had appeared particularly "coupled" during the last major downturn in the United States, the high-tech slowdown in 2001 and 2002. Over the two years prior, during 1999 and 2000, quarterly real GDP growth in the United States averaged about 3-1/2 percent at an annual rate; U.S. growth then slowed sharply to about 1 percent during 2001 and 2002 before recovering over the subsequent two years. In other major industrialized countries, average growth slowed similarly, but the recovery was slower.9In the emerging market world, economic growth moved in tandem with U.S. growth, falling from more than 6 percent to about 3-1/2 percent, then recovering to more than 6-1/2 percent.10 What about our more recent experience? During the first three quarters of 2007, the U.S. economy was growing at a solid pace of about 3 percent at an annual rate. Over the next two quarters, U.S. growth slowed to an average of about 3/4 percent, while growth in other industrialized countries stayed much closer to trend rates at about 2-1/2 percent, and growth in the emerging market economies, at 6-1/2 percent, held up quite well. It is important to keep in mind, however, that we are still in the midst of the current episode. Financial markets remain stressed; housing markets in many countries are adjusting after a sharp run-up in prices; and the effects of the turmoil on economic activity in the United States and elsewhere are still working themselves out. Accordingly, it is too early to tell how correlated U.S. and foreign activity will have been in this period. One piece of research on business cycles in G-7 economies, done by staff at the Federal Reserve Board, shows how difficult it is to establish with any confidence that business cycles have become more synchronized in recent decades, despite trade and financial integration having clearly increased.11Other research, which shows a modest convergence of business cycles across a larger group of industrial economies, fails to find an increase in the correlation of industrial country cycles with emerging market economy cycles.12 The other dimension of recent linkages is financial, where the evidence is clearer. First, few question the importance of financial linkages between the United States and other industrial economies, which is an area where decoupling clearly has not occurred during the recent episode. While industrial country markets for stocks and bonds have displayed a high degree of co-movement for years, in the current episode we are seeing notable new correlations across money markets, with disruptions in funding markets showing up in the euro area, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and Canada, as well as in the United States. Some of the effects of the U.S. subprime mortgage crisis on financial markets in these countries occurred as a result of direct or indirect balance sheet exposures by their financial institutions to U.S. securities. Other adverse consequences for foreign financial institutions occurred when entire markets, such as that for asset-backed commercial paper, became impaired. In contrast, some have pointed to the apparent resilience of financial conditions in emerging market economies during the past year as an example of decoupling. In particular, the disruptions in the advanced economies have had only limited impacts on money markets in emerging market economies, and other financial market indicators in emerging market economies appear to have held up relatively well. For example, the spreads of emerging market sovereign bond yields over U.S. Treasury securities have risen since June of last year, but by only about 1/3 of the rise in the average U.S. corporate high-yield spread over U.S. Treasury securities. That rise is roughly half the average in several previous episodes of pressure on U.S. corporate bond prices over the period from 1998 to 2005; these episodes include, among others, the Russian and Long-Term Capital Management crisis of 1998, the 2002 surge in corporate defaults and bankruptcies, and growing concerns about U.S. auto companies in 2005. In addition, while stock prices in some emerging market countries have not performed well, a broad aggregate for these markets shows stock prices up over the past year, while the advanced economy indexes have exhibited double-digit declines, on average.13Certainly, stock prices in the emerging market economies moved downward during acute periods of U.S. financial stress over the past year. However, these movements were similar in scale to those seen in industrial country equity markets, and during the intervening periods when global pressures were less intense, the prices of emerging market equities rebounded more substantially than those of industrial countries. Reconciling Apparent Decoupling with IntegrationHow do we reconcile the obvious expansion of international trade, labor, and financial flows with the evidence, albeit mixed, of decoupling in the recent period? Three different points can help us achieve this reconciliation. The first point is purely conceptual. The conventional wisdom is that greater international trade leads demand shocks to reverberate more intensely across international markets. However, we need to recognize that economic theory does not predict that greater economic and financial integration will necessarily result in increased co-movement of output across nations. One way in which integration might lead to less synchronization is through the tendency of international trade to promote specialization of production. If economies become more specialized, then their economic growth, and even equity markets, may be driven more by developments that are specific to the industries that have taken root in each country.14 The second point in this reconciliation stems from the observation that the correlation of business cycles will be specific to the shocks driving the cycles. In 2001 and 2002, the sharp decline in growth in the foreign countries soon after the U.S. economy slowed reflected the global nature of the bursting of the technology bubble and its worldwide transmission through equity markets and manufacturing. In the current slowdown, the implosion of the housing sector is playing the most prominent role in dragging down U.S. GDP growth. As construction utilizes local inputs and results in an output that is not traded internationally, its spillovers abroad are more limited. To be sure, a portion of the decline in domestic demand in the United States has been absorbed by foreign economies as our imports have fallen and exports have risen. However, these indirect spillovers are small compared with the more direct effects that would result from a shock in the tradable goods sector or from one of more global origin. Although the financial turmoil triggered by problems in the U.S. housing sector has been more international in scope, in particular with respect to other industrialized countries, its effects on the real side of foreign economies appears to have been limited, at least to date. The recent period also has been one of enhanced demand for commodities and sharp run-ups in many commodity prices, including for fuels, metals, and food. The actual increase in demand is benefiting many producers of commodities and is helping to offset the effect of weakening of export markets in industrial countries, thus contributing to the resilience of output in many emerging market economies. The third and final point is that structural changes in emerging market economies have helped these countries during the recent period. One change in particular is the strengthening of the policy environment. With improved economic and financial policies, emerging market economies are more flexible and less subject to internal and external shocks that scare investors and disrupt asset markets. Inflation rates have come down dramatically since 1995, in part as a result of better monetary policy, assisted in many cases by more flexible exchange rate regimes that allowed monetary authorities to focus more intensively on domestic price stability. In addition, structural progress has been made on the fiscal side in emerging markets. Fiscal balances are much improved, and many emerging market economies are running current account surpluses. Improvements in the policy environment have helped reinforce perceptions that emerging market assets, on average, are less risky than in the past and are less likely to be sold off in the event of financial disruptions and generalized retreats from risk, such as we have seen since August. As evidence of this, as I noted earlier, emerging market credit spreads have become less sensitive to movements in industrial country corporate spreads, and this trend has been ongoing even prior to the events of the last year. Inflation and DecouplingUp until now, I have been discussing whether movements in economic activity have or have not decoupled from each other. But whether or not business cycles have diverged, it is clear that the sharp increase in many commodity prices has given rise to highly coincident increases in inflation rates around the world. In industrialized economies, such as the United States, rising inflation has chiefly reflected the surge in energy prices, whereas in developing countries, for which food takes up more of household budgets, rising food costs have been a more important culprit. The reasons for the trajectory and persistence of increases in prices of food and energy this year, as global growth has moderated, are not entirely clear. The upward trend in prices of food and energy over the past several years, however, importantly reflects the pressures posed by rapidly growing demand in developing economies against relatively inelastic global supplies of commodities. For the moment, higher headline rates of inflation have shown only a few tentative signs of embedding themselves in core inflation or in longer-term inflation expectations. However, policymakers around the world must monitor the situation carefully for signs that the increases in relative prices globally do not generate persistently higher inflation. Additionally, in those countries where strong commodity demands are associated with rapid growth in aggregate demand that outstrips potential supply, actions to contain inflation by restraining aggregate demand would contribute to global price stability. ConclusionTo sum up, the evidence sometimes presented as indicative of a divergence in economic performance, referred to as decoupling, is not definitive. It is certainly the case that in recent quarters, the U.S. economy slowed to a greater extent than other industrial economies, and economic activity in the industrial economies, in aggregate, has slowed more than in the emerging market economies. This experience contrasts with that near the start of this decade, when the economic downturn of 2001 through 2002 was felt more uniformly throughout the global economy. In addition, financial conditions in most emerging market economies have remained relatively stable, considering the turmoil that overtook industrial country financial markets over the past year. Even so, neither economic growth nor financial markets in the different regions of the world moved in lockstep in the past, nor are they expected to do so across all business cycles. It is far from clear that the divergences in performance we have seen of late, which are tentative in any event, represent distinct breaks from historical benchmarks. The recent divergences of economic performance reflect a particular set of shocks that have hit the global economy, as well as changes in the way that different economies have responded to those shocks. As our global economy becomes more intertwined and complex, the nature and transmission of business cycles and the associated policy responses will no doubt continue to evolve. Economies benefit from having independent monetary policies that provide room to respond flexibly to alternative configurations of economic and financial shocks. These benefits could be increased if exchange rate flexibility were to become more widespread and monetary policies given greater latitude to respond to shocks wherever they originate. ReferencesBayoumi, Tamim, and Andrew Swiston (2007). "Foreign Entanglements: Estimating the Source and Size of Spillovers Across Industrial Countries (692 KB PDF),"IMF Working Paper 07/182. Washington: International Monetary Fund, July. Catão, Luis, and Allan Timmermann (2004). "Country and Industry Dynamics in Stock Returns,"CEPR Discussion Paper 4368. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, April. Cetorelli, Nicola, and Linda Goldberg (2008). "Banking Globalization, Monetary Transmission and the Lending Channel (250 KB PDF),"NBER Working Paper Series 14101. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. Corrado, Carol, Paul Lengermann, and Larry Slifman (2007). "The Contribution of Multinational Corporations to U.S. Productivity Growth, 1977-2000," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-21. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. Doyle, Brian, and Jon Faust (2005). "Breaks in the Variability and Comovement of G-7 Economic Growth,"Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 87 (November), pp. 721-40. Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (2008).Overviewfrom the conference entitled "Remittances and the Macroeconomy," February 21-22. Imbs, Jean (2004). "Trade, Finance, Specialization, and Synchronization,"Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 86 (August), pp. 723-34. Hummels, David (forthcoming). "Transportation Costs and International Trade in the Second Era of Globalization,"Journal of Economic Perspectives. International Monetary Fund, Statistics Department (1986-2007).Direction of Trade Statistics Yearbook. Washington: International Monetary Fund. International Monetary Fund (2007).World Economic Outlook(April). Kose, M. Ayhan, Christopher Otrok, and Eswar Prasad (forthcoming). "Global Business Cycles: Convergence or Decoupling?" IMF Working Paper. Washington: International Monetary Fund. Kurz, Christopher J. (2006). "Outstanding Outsourcers: A Firm- and Plant-Level Analysis of Production Sharing," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2006-04. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March. Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2007). "The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004,"Journal of International Economics, vol. 73, pp. 223-50. The World Bank (2005).Global Economic Prospects 2006: Economic Implications of Remittances and Migration. Washington: World Bank Publications. Yuskavage, Robert E., Erich H. Strassner, and Gabriel W. Medeiros (2008). "Domestic Outsourcing and Imported Inputs in the U.S. Economy: Insights from Integrated Economic Accounts (172 KB PDF)," paper prepared for the 2008 World Congress on National Accounts and Economic Performance Measures for Nations, U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, May 15. Footnotes 1.The views I express are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Board of Governors.Shaghil Ahmed,Steven Kamin, andMichael Leahy, of the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, andLinda Goldberg, of the staff of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, contributed to these remarks.Return to text 2.Data from 1986 compared with 2007 (International Monetary Fund, 1986-2007).Return to text 3.Hummels (forthcoming).Return to text 4.Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (2008); also see The World Bank (2005).Return to text 5.Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007).Return to text 6.Imbs (2004) shows that financial integration raises business-cycle synchronization among a sample of industrialized countries, even though financial integration leads countries to be more specialized.Return to text 7.Bayoumi and Swiston (2007); International Monetary Fund (2007).Return to text 8.Cetorelli and Goldberg (2008) provide evidence of this transmission by globally active U.S. banks.Return to text 9.The industrialized-country aggregate referred to here is a weighted average of the real GDP growth rates of Canada, Denmark, the euro area, Japan, Norway, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. The weights are proportional to U.S. dollar-denominated GDP computed at market exchange rates. Growth in industrialized countries went from about 3-1/2 percent to 1-1/2 percent, then recovered only to 1-3/4 percent. The recovery in the other industrialized countries took longer than in the United States, with growth picking up further after 2004, but the pattern was broadly similar.Return to text 10.The emerging market economies aggregate is based on the real GDP growth rates of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru, the Philippines, Russia, Singapore, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, and Venezuela with the same weighting scheme as that used for industrial countries.Return to text 11.Doyle and Faust (2005).Return to text 12.Kose, Otrok, and Prasad (2008).Return to text 13.Stock price calculations are based on MSCI indexes for all emerging market economies and on the “World Index” for non-emerging-market economies.Return to text 14.Catao and Timmermann (2004). The authors identify high and low volatility states over the past 30 years. They find that the country factor contribution drops markedly when global equity market volatility rises, and that country-return correlations become tighter when global and industry factors are both in a high-volatility state.Return to text
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's 53rd Annual Economic Conference, Chatham, Massachusetts An economic model of inflation is an indispensable input to monetary policy deliberations. A model in the Phillips curve tradition remains at the core of how most academic researchers and policymakers--including this one--think about fluctuations in inflation; indeed, alternative frameworks seem to lack solid economic foundations and empirical support. But the modern Phillips curve differs substantially from versions in use several decades ago; policymakers and academics alike are now attuned to the importance of expectations, the possibility of structural change, and the uncertainty that surrounds our understanding of the dynamics of wage and price adjustment. Moreover, the link between inflation and resource utilization often emphasized in a Phillips curve framework accounts for only a modest part of inflation fluctuations. My comments today will focus on how the lessons from recent research on the Phillips curve are helping me think about the influence of fluctuations in the prices of commodities, such as oil, on the outlook for inflation and the appropriate policy responses to such developments.1 Policy Objectives and a Framework for Analyzing Inflation FluctuationsThe Federal Reserve has been charged with the pursuit of price stability and maximum employment. Price stability is uniquely in the control of the central bank over long periods, and it is a prerequisite for the economy performing efficiently over time. The welfare costs of inflation result from many factors: the potential costs to households and firms that result from efforts to insure themselves against inflation or from confusion regarding real and nominal prices; distortions to the financial system related to inflation; imperfect indexation of the taxation, especially of capital income, and the related distortions to economic activity; and the costs associated with a slow adjustment of nominal prices and wages. The costs of inflation imply that central banks should aim for low measured inflation. Moreover, many of the costs of inflation--such as those associated with misconceptions regarding inflation, efforts to insure against inflation, and distortions to the financial system--are associated with the rate of change in the entire set of prices of goods and services facing households or firms, suggesting that measured inflation should be gauged by the rate of change in a broad set of prices. Accordingly, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has been emphasizing that it gauges price stability over the long-term by the behavior of the overall personal consumption expenditures price index. The economic framework that helps me think about fluctuations in inflation is based on the substantial body of research on models of price dynamics that has been developed over the past five decades. At its heart, the framework is based on the importance of sluggish adjustment in (some) nominal wages and prices to changing economic conditions. This sluggishness undoubtedly reflects a number of factors, which include the costs of adjusting some nominal prices and wages, imperfect information regarding shifts in economic conditions, and learning by firms and households about the structure of the economy, including the setting of monetary policy. Regardless of its source, the presence of sluggish nominal adjustment brings to the fore three key elements driving wage and price dynamics: inflation expectations, supply shocks, and resource utilization. Because some prices and wages are adjusted only infrequently, both firms and households anticipate the future erosion of real prices and wages by incorporating the expectations they have for inflation into their current price settings and wage demands. As a result, inflation expectations play a critical role in the formation of monetary policy. Moreover, the tendency of some prices to adjust very quickly to changing circumstances in conjunction with sluggish adjustment in other prices and wages implies that large, sharp price movements, such as a change in the price of oil, lead to relative price distortions throughout the economy; these distortions imply that relative price shocks have important implications for the functioning of the economy.2Finally, fluctuations in resource utilization, through their effects on the costs of production and on firms' desired markups over these costs, are a significant determinant of price and wage decisions. The link from resource utilization to inflation provides a major channel through which monetary policy settings influence inflation: Adjustments in the policy interest rate bring about changes in resource utilization, which then influence current and expected inflation. Inflation Forecasting and Commodity Price ShocksThe economic outlook is the prime focus of monetary policy. Because the stance of policy influences economic activity and inflation only with a lag, policymakers must adjust policy to minimize the costs from fluctuations in activity and inflation in the future. The Phillips curve framework is an important input into the forecast for inflation. I will focus specifically on how a shock to the price of oil affects the inflation outlook within this framework. This topic is especially salient of late--commodities prices in general, and perhaps most glaringly the price of oil, have risen sharply over the past year; indeed, oil prices have risen sharply for more than four years. Consider a sharp rise in the price of oil that primarily reflects a shift in the balance between demand and supply in the global market for oil.3In the first instance, higher oil prices lead to an increase in the overall level of consumer prices. When thinking about the outlook for future inflation, it is useful to distinguish between oil and other prices. The most significant factor determining oil prices is the current and prospective balance between demand and supply. The aggregate behavior of most other prices, consisting of a large set of nominal prices and wages that adjust slowly, is driven by the factors that enter the Phillips curve--inflation expectations, resource utilization, and supply shocks (in this case, a shock to the price of oil). In a forecasting context, the Phillips curve framework motivates reduced-form regressions of the rate of inflation for consumer prices excluding food and energy against proxies for each key factor. Lagged values of inflation typically proxy for inflation expectations. The deviation of output from potential or of the unemployment rate from its sustainable rate serves as a proxy for resource utilization. And changes in relative prices for energy, food and imports are traditionally included as measures of supply shocks.4This type of regression is among the most useful tools for forecasting inflation. Nonetheless, its forecast record is far from spotless, and hence I consider the forecasts from such regressions as just one input that helps inform my outlook for inflation. The results of such exercises imply that, over recent history, a sharp jump in oil prices appears to have had only modest effects on the future rate of inflation. This result likely reflects two factors. First, commodities like oil represent only a small share of the overall costs of production, implying that the magnitude of the direct pass-through from changes in such prices to other prices should be modest, all else equal. Second, inflation expectations have been well anchored in recent years, contributing to a muted response of inflation to oil price shocks. But the anchoring of expectations cannot be taken as given; indeed, the type of empirical exercises I have outlined reveal a larger effect of the price of oil on inflation prior to the last two decades, a period in which inflation expectations were not as well anchored as they are today.5 Of course, oil prices have jumped repeatedly in recent years. The (relatively) continuous rise in energy prices since 2003 has been a surprise to me and to most others, as least as best as I can gauge by looking at prices that have been embedded in futures contracts over this period. These contracts currently suggest that the price of oil will flatten out in the period ahead. Nonetheless, repeated increases in energy prices and their effect on overall inflation have contributed to a rise in the year-ahead inflation expectations of households, especially this year. Of greater concern is that some measures of longer-term inflation expectations appear to have edged up since last year. Any tendency for these longer-term inflation expectations to drift higher or even to fail to reverse over time would have troublesome implications for the outlook for inflation. The Structural Phillips Curve, Commodity Price Shocks, and Monetary PolicyThe central role of inflation expectations implies that policymakers must look beyond this type of reduced-form exercise for guidance. After all, the lags of inflation in reduced-form regressions are a very imperfect proxy for inflation expectations. As emphasized in Robert Lucas's critique of reduced-form Phillips curves more than 30 years ago, structuralmodels are needed to have confidence in the effect of any shock on the outlook for inflation and economic activity.6 The importance of structural relationships as inputs to the monetary policy process poses a challenge; for instance, there are many "structural" models of nominal price and wage adjustment, each of these models emphasizes different frictions or imperfections and therefore can have different policy implications, and empirical work has reached different conclusions regarding the merits of alternative models.7As a result, policymakers must look to lessons that are common across alternative specifications and base policy on our current understanding of the most likely important structural factors. Fortunately, I think that many of the models of nominal price and wage adjustment imply similar conclusions regarding the influence of commodity prices on the inflation outlook and the appropriate response of monetary policy. I will again focus on a sharp jump in the price of oil, reflecting supply and demand in the market for oil. Because many nominal prices and wages are costly and slow to adjust, the efficient allocation of resources is impeded during a transition period in which relative price signals are distorted. For example, the prices of energy-intensive goods need to rise relative to those of less-energy-intensive goods, but this adjustment follows a gradual and asynchronous pattern. Similarly, the equilibrium real wage--the relative price of labor--will tend to be depressed by an oil price shock due to the accompanying adverse movements in the terms of trade and reduction in labor productivity, but the needed wage or price adjustments proceed gradually.8An efficient monetary policy should attempt to facilitate the needed economic adjustments so as to minimize distortions to economic efficiency on the path to achieving, over time, its dual objectives of price stability and maximum employment.9 In particular, an appropriate monetary policy following a jump in the price of oil will allow, on a temporary basis, both some increase in unemployment and some increase in price inflation. By pursuing actions that balance the deleterious effects of oil prices on both employment and inflation over the near term, policymakers are, in essence, attempting to find their preferred point on the activity/inflation variance-tradeoff curve introduced by John Taylor 30 years ago.10Such policy actions promote the efficient adjustment of relative prices: Since real wages need to fall and both prices and wages adjust slowly, the efficient adjustment of relative prices will tend to include a bit of additional price inflation and a bit of additional unemployment for a time, leading to increases in real wages that are temporarily below the trend established by productivity gains. I should emphasize that the course of policy I have just described has taken inflation expectations as given. In practice, it is very important to ensure that policy actions anchor inflation expectations. This anchoring is critical: As demonstrated by historical experiences around the world and in the United States during the 1970s and 1980s, efforts to bring inflation and inflation expectations back to desirable levels after they have risen appreciably involve costly and undesirable changes in resource utilization.11As a result, the degree to which any deviations of inflation from long-run objectives are tolerated to allow the efficient relative price adjustments that I have described needs to be tempered so as to ensure that longer-term inflation expectations are not affected to a significant extent. Global Demand, Trending Commodity Prices, and Monetary PolicyMy remarks so far have concentrated on the factors guiding the monetary policy response to a shock in the prices of commodities like oil that stems from a shifting balance of supply and demand in the specific market for these commodities. Some might think that this focus misses the point in the current context, for at least two reasons. First, it has been suggested that the run-up in the prices of a broad range of commodity prices reflects, in part, global excess demand rather than sector-specific forces. And second, some have suggested that important commodity prices, like that of oil, may be on a more significant upward trend than is currently embedded in futures prices. It seems highly likely that, over the period since 2003, the rise in commodity prices has reflected strong global economic growth as well as some sector-specific factors, such as geopolitical tensions and other disruptions to the supply of oil.12In this regard, I share the views expressed by Chairman Bernanke at this conference two days ago in which he discussed a range of factors that have likely influenced relative commodity prices.13 However, the fact that rising relative commodity prices have likely reflected many factors does not, by itself, change the analytical framework that I used to frame policy deliberations. As I highlighted at the beginning of my remarks, the most important drivers of inflation in the model of inflation dynamics I use are relative price shocks, inflation expectations, and the balance between aggregate demand and supply in the United States, as measured by some notion of resource utilization. If a shift in global demand affects both commodity prices and the demand for U.S. goods, the model I have in mind accounts for these influences on inflation through relative price shocks and resource utilization. For example, the rise in the price of oil this year has lowered consumption demand by pinching households' real incomes and likely damped the growth in labor productivity by trimming energy input; both of these factors have probably contributed to a lower equilibrium real wage, as I described earlier. If the impact on demand from these factors was accompanied by stronger global demand that boosted demand for U.S. goods generally, the forecasts of inflation would need to take this into account. In any event, resource utilization has been slackening, judging from the rise in the unemployment rate and the slow pace of economic growth in the United States, on average, over the past six to nine months. Some have suggested that the price of oil is on a more significant upward trend than currently appreciated.14Such an unanticipated shift in trend would not be embedded in the anticipated rate of change in slowly adjusting nominal prices and wages, implying that an adjustment period with distortions to relative prices would follow. Moreover, there would likely be upward pressure on overall inflation during this period, reflecting the slow response of the rate of change in some nominal prices to the new trend in the price of oil. This tendency for higher overall inflation could risk a rise in inflation expectations. An appropriate monetary policy response would share many of the characteristics I discussed earlier. In particular, bringing overall inflation immediately back to the low rate consistent with price stability could be associated with a much higher rate of unemployment for a short time. It may be efficient to allow some adjustment period in which both overall inflation exceeds its desired low level and the unemployment rate is higher than its long-run sustainable level; as before, setting policy in a manner that balances the undesirable effects of a shock to the system on both inflation and employment will tend to be more efficient than setting policy so as to deliver more extreme outcomes in either inflation or unemployment.15 However, two additional considerations are likely important when considering a shift in trend. First, developments in inflation expectations following a significant shift in the relative price trend of a commodity like oil should be monitored carefully, as our understanding of changes in long-run inflation expectations is limited and shifts in trends are infrequent, potentially implying a greater chance of confusion between relative price trends and overall inflation. Second, it is very important to remember that the costs of inflation in excess of the low rate of measured inflation consistent with price stability over any extended period are significant and reflect a broad range of factors. As I emphasized earlier, economic research into the many costs of inflation has suggested that these costs are associated with the rate of change in a broad set of prices. As a result, a trend in any individual relative price should not, in itself, lead to a change in the desirable rate of measured inflation over the long run. SummaryTo reiterate, the Phillips curve framework is one important input to my outlook for inflation and provides a framework in which I can analyze the nature of efficient policy choices. In the case of a shock to the relative price of oil or other commodities, this framework suggests that policymakers should ensure that their actions balance the deleterious economic effects of such a shock in the short run on both unemployment and inflation. Of course, the framework helps to define the short-run goals for policy, but it doesn't tell you what path for interest rates will accomplish these objectives. That's what we wrestle with at the FOMC and is perhaps a subject for a future Federal Reserve Bank of Boston conference. Ball, Laurence M. (1994). "What Determines the Sacrifice Ratio?" in N. Gregory Mankiw, ed.,Monetary Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 155-82. Ball, Laurence, and N. Gregory Mankiw (1995). "Relative-Price Changes as Aggregate Supply Shocks,"Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 110 (February), pp. 161-93. Bernanke, Ben S. (2008). "Outstanding Issues in the Analysis of Inflation," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's 52nd Annual Economic Conference, Chatham, Mass., June 9. Blanchard, Olivier J., and Jordi Gali (2007). "The Macroeconomic Effects of Oil Shocks: Why Are the 2000s So Different from the 1970s?"NBER Working Paper Series 13368. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September. Bodenstein, Martin, Christopher Erceg, and Luca Guerrieri (2007). "Optimal Monetary Policy in a Model with Distinct Core and Headline Inflation Rates," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. _________ (2008). "Oil Shocks and U.S. External Adjustment," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000). "Optimal Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 46 (October), pp. 281-313. Gordon, Robert J. (1998). "Foundations of the Goldilocks Economy: Supply Shocks and the Time-Varying NAIRU,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 1998 (no. 2), pp. 297-333. Hooker, Mark A. (2002). "Are Oil Shocks Inflationary? Asymmetric and Nonlinear Specifications versus Changes in Regime,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 34 (May), pp. 540-61. Kiley, Michael T. (2007). "A Quantitative Comparison of Sticky-Price and Sticky-Information Models of Price Setting,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 39 (February), pp. 101-25. _________ (2008). "Monetary Policy Actions and Long-run Inflation Expectations," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2008-03. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Kilian, Lutz (2007). "Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply Shocks in the Crude Oil Market," unpublished paper, University of Michigan. Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1972). "Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothesis," in Otto Eckstein, ed.,The Econometrics of Price Determination. Washington: Federal Reserve Board. _________ (1976). "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 1, pp. 19-46. Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Ricardo Reis (2003). "What Measure of Inflation Should a Central Bank Target?"Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 1 (September, 25th International Seminar on Macroeconomics), pp. 1058-86. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (2005). "Inflation Scares and Forecast-Based Monetary Policy,"Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 8 (April, Monetary Policy and Learning), pp. 498-527. Rudd, Jeremy, and Karl Whelan (2007). "Modeling Inflation Dynamics: A Critical Review of Recent Research,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 39 (February), pp. 155-70. Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (1999). "Forecasting Inflation,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.44 (October), pp. 293-335. Taylor, John B. (1979). "Estimation and Control of a Macroeconomic Model with Rational Expectations."Econometrica, vol. 47 (September), pp. 1267-86. Wei, Chao (2003). "Energy, the Stock Market, and the Putty-Clay Investment Model,"American Economic Review, vol. 93 (March), pp. 311-23. Woodford, Michael (1994). "Nonstandard Indicators for Monetary Policy: Can Their Usefulness Be Judged From Forecasting Regressions?" in N. Gregory Mankiw, ed.,Monetary Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 95-116. Footnotes 1.Michael Kiley, of the Board's staff, contributed to these remarks. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.Relative price shocks act like supply shocks in the Phillips curve framework for two reasons. First, some prices are sluggish and others are flexible, and the Phillips curve framework focuses on the adjustment of sluggish prices. Second, prices are more likely to adjust to very large shocks, and the skewness on the distribution of relative price disturbances can fluctuate substantially, giving rise to shocks to the Phillips curve. Ball and Mankiw (1995) discuss these issues and argue that the second type of relative price shock is quantitatively very important.Return to text 3.The rise in a broad range of commodity prices, as has occurred from time to time recently, would not affect the basic analysis which rests on the contrasting behavior of flexible and sluggishly adjusting prices. However, the simultaneous rise in many commodity prices might suggest that strong global aggregate demand is playing an important role, which would affect the appropriate setting for monetary policy. See the section below on Global Demand, Trending Commodity Prices and Monetary Policy.Return to text 4.The amount of related literature is large. The article by Robert Gordon (1998) represents a good example and is relevant when considering the notion of supply shocks generally. Stock and Watson (1999) present a broad interpretation of the empirical Phillips curve in which a large number of macroeconomic indicators are used to forecast inflation.Return to text 5.These factors are not the only two that have contributed to a lower effect of oil prices on inflation. For example, the energy intensity of the economy has fallen over time. Research like that in Hooker (2002) and subsequent work has discussed various possibilities in more detail. Blanchard and Gali (2007) suggest that the seemingly muted affect of changes in the price of oil and inflation in recent years has been the result of falling energy intensity, more flexible labor markets, better monetary policy, and good luck.Return to text 6.See Lucas (1976). Robert Lucas had emphasized the importance of structural models of the Phillips curve well before his 1976 article; for example, see his contribution at the conference on wage and price dynamics held at the Federal Reserve in 1970 (Lucas, 1972). Michael Woodford (1994) presented an important critique of some research on commodity prices, inflation, and monetary policy in which the role of the Lucas critique was central: In particular, he re-emphasized that a tendency of commodity prices to forecast inflation may not be structural and could break down under alternative policy regimes--a tendency that seemed to be confirmed by Mark Hooker (2002) in his work documenting a break in the link between oil prices and inflation in recent decades.Return to text 7.For example, Rudd and Whelan (2007) and Kiley (2007) review a number of models and empirical studies as well as conduct their own empirical analyses; these two studies reach quite different conclusions on the merits of alternative specifications.Return to text 8.For example, see the article by Chao Wei (2003) illustrating the effects of a rise in oil prices in a dynamic equilibrium model.Return to text 9.Erceg, Henderson, and Levin (2000) discuss the importance of relative price adjustments in the presence of sluggish nominal prices and wages in a general context; Mankiw and Reis (2003) present related results. Bodenstein, Erceg, and Guerrieri (2007) apply this reasoning to oil price shocks.Return to text 10.See Taylor (1979).Return to text 11.Ball (1994) presents estimates of the costs of disinflation for a variety of countries, including the United States. Kiley (2008) provides evidence on how survey measures of inflation expectations in the United States have responded to economic developments and presents a model that attempts to explain the patterns in the data. Orphanides and Williams (2005) present a model in which perpetual learning leads to fluctuations in inflation expectations at various horizons and provide examples of how alternative monetary policy settings can influence the course of inflation expectations, thereby illustrating the importance of the interaction between expectations formation and efficient monetary policy.Return to text 12.With regard to oil prices, Bodenstein, Erceg, and Guerrieri (2008) discuss the effects on the price of oil and the U.S. economy from shocks to various factors in a theoretical model; Kilian (2007) provides an empirical analysis. More generally, this area remains a fertile field for future research.Return to text 13.See Bernanke (2008).Return to text 14.One might question whether significant price trends can reasonably be anticipated for a storable commodity like oil. The price of such a commodity should reflect expected demand and "anticipated" increases should be limited to approximately the cost of storage, including the nominal interest rate. Still, the following discussion would also apply to a shift in the trend in any important subset of consumer prices.Return to text 15.An example of a change in the trend of other consumer prices could be seen in the relative prices of computers and other high-technology goods and services in the second half of the 1990s, which declined at an unexpectedly rapid rate as productivity accelerated. This shock placed downward pressure on inflation and raised both employment and the equilibrium real wage. In the presence of nominal price and wage rigidities, an efficient policy response would facilitate the rise in the real wage by allowing some downward drift in price inflation and upward drift in employment and wage inflation, which is, in fact, about the result observed over this period.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a Consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Heritage Bank of Commerce, San Jose, California, a state member bank. Heritage Bank of Commerce, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act.The Order requires Heritage Bank of Commerce to pay a civil money penalty of $6,840, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund.A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of a Consent Order of Prohibition and Order of Assessment of Civil Money Penalty in the amount of $15,000 against Susan M. West, a former senior vice president, private banking officer, and institution-affiliated party of Compass Bank, Birmingham, Alabama.Ms. West, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Orders, which were based on her alleged participation in violations of law, unsafe and unsound banking practices, and breaches of fiduciary duty that resulted in substantial losses to the Bank in connection with her activities as a loan officer of the Bank.A copy of the Order is attached.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s 53rd Annual Economic Conference, Chatham, Massachusetts Good evening. I am pleased to be able to participate in the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's 52nd annual economic conference, on the topic of inflation and the Phillips curve. Forecasting and controlling inflation are, of course, central to the process of making monetary policy. In this respect, policymakers are fortunate to be able to build on an intellectual foundation provided by extensive research and practical experience. Nonetheless, much remains to be learned about both inflation forecasting and inflation control. In the spirit of this conference, my remarks this evening will highlight some key areas where additional research could help to provide a still-firmer foundation for monetary policymaking.Before turning to those issues, however, I would like to provide a brief update on the outlook for the economy and policy, beginning with the prospects for growth. Despite the unwelcome rise in the unemployment rate that was reported last week, the recent incoming data, taken as a whole, have affected the outlook for economic activity and employment only modestly. Indeed, although activity during the current quarter is likely to be weak, the risk that the economy has entered a substantial downturn appears to have diminished over the past month or so. Over the remainder of 2008, the effects of monetary and fiscal stimulus, a gradual ebbing of the drag from residential construction, further progress in the repair of financial and credit markets, and still-solid demand from abroad should provide some offset to the headwinds that still face the economy. However, the ongoing contraction in the housing market and continuing increases in energy prices suggest that growth risks remain to the downside.One of the most effective means by which the Federal Reserve can help to restore moderate growth over time and to reduce the associated downside risks is by supporting the return of financial markets to more-normal functioning. We have taken a number of actions to promote financial stability and remain strongly committed to that objective.Inflation has remained high, largely reflecting sharp increases in the prices of globally traded commodities. Thus far, the pass-through of high raw materials costs to the prices of most other products and to domestic labor costs has been limited, in part because of softening domestic demand. However, the continuation of this pattern is not guaranteed and future developments in this regard will bear close attention. Moreover, the latest round of increases in energy prices has added to the upside risks to inflation and inflation expectations. The Federal Open Market Committee will strongly resist an erosion of longer-term inflation expectations, as an unanchoring of those expectations would be destabilizing for growth as well as for inflation.Turning now to the principal topic of my remarks, I will briefly touch on four topics of particular interest for policymakers: commodity prices and inflation, the role of labor costs in the price-setting process, issues arising from the necessity of making policy in real time, and the determinants and effects of changes in inflation expectations. Economists within the Federal Reserve System and at other central banks have made and will continue to make important contributions in these areas. However, researchers in academia and elsewhere have long been essential partners in building the intellectual foundations for the conduct of monetary policy. One of my objectives today is to encourage the continuation of this fruitful collaboration.Commodity Prices and InflationRapidly rising prices for globally traded commodities have been the major source of the relatively high rates of inflation we have experienced in recent years, underscoring the importance for policy of both forecasting commodity price changes and understanding the factors that drive those changes.Policymakers and other analysts have often relied on quotes from commodity futures markets to derive forecasts of the prices of key commodities. However, as you know, futures markets quotes have underpredicted commodity price increases in recent years, leading to corresponding underpredictions of overall inflation. The poor recent record of commodity futures markets in forecasting the course of prices raises the question of whether policymakers should continue to use this source of information and, if so, how.Despite this recent record, I do not think it is reasonable, when forecasting commodity prices, to ignore the substantial amounts of information about supply and demand conditions that are aggregated by futures markets. Indeed, the use of some simple alternatives--such as extrapolating recent commodity price trends--would require us to assume that investors in commodity futures can expect to earn supernormal risk-adjusted returns, inconsistent with principles of financial arbitrage. However, it does seem reasonable--and consistent with the wide distributions of commodity price expectations implied by options prices--to treat the forecasts of commodity prices obtained from futures markets, and consequently the forecasts of aggregate price inflation, as highly uncertain.These considerations raise several questions for researchers: First, is it possible to improve our forecasts of commodity prices, using information from futures markets but possibly other information as well? For example, the markets for longer-dated futures contracts are often quite illiquid, suggesting that the associated futures prices may not effectively aggregate all available information. Second, what are the implications for the conduct of monetary policy of the high degree of uncertainty that attends forecasts of commodity prices? Although theoretical analyses often focus on the case in which policymakers care only about expected economic outcomes and not the uncertainty surrounding those outcomes, in practice policymakers are concerned about the risks to their projections as well as the projections themselves. How should those concerns affect the setting of policy in this context?Whatever the forecasting value of futures market quotes, these and other financial market prices provide limited information about the structural relationships between commodity prices and their determinants. Absent a specification of those structural relationships, one cannot analyze the effects of alternative monetary policies or the implications of other shocks to the economy.Empirical work on inflation, including much of the classic work on Phillips curves, has generally treated changes in commodity prices as an exogenous influence on the inflation process, driven by market-specific factors such as weather conditions or geopolitical developments. By contrast, some analysts emphasize the endogeneity of commodity prices to broad macroeconomic and monetary developments such as expected growth, expected inflation, interest rates, and currency movements. Of course, in reality, commodity prices are influenced by both market-specific and aggregate factors. Market-specific influences are evident in the significant differences in price behavior across individual commodities, which often can be traced to idiosyncratic supply and demand factors. Aggregate influences are suggested by the fact that the prices of several major classes of commodities, including energy, metals, and grains, have all shown broad-based gains in recent years. In particular, it seems clear that commodity prices have been importantly influenced by secular global trends affecting the conditions of demand and supply for raw materials. We have seen rapid growth in the worldwide demand for raw materials, which in turn is largely the result of sustained global growth--particularly resources-intensive growth in emerging market economies.1And factors including inadequate investment, long lags in the development of new capacity, and underlying resource constraints have caused the supplies of a number of important commodity classes, including energy and metals, to lag global demand. These problems have been exacerbated to some extent by a systematic underprediction of demand and overprediction of productive capacity for a number of key commodities, notably oil. Further analysis of the range of aggregate and idiosyncratic determinants of commodity prices would be fruitful.I have only mentioned a few of the issues raised by commodity price behavior for inflation and monetary policy. Here are a few other questions that researchers could usefully address: First, how should monetary policy deal with increases in commodity prices that are not only large but potentially persistent? Second, does the link between global growth and commodity prices imply a role for global slack, along with domestic slack, in the Phillips curve? Finally, what information about the broader economy is contained in commodity prices? For example, what signal should we take from recent changes in commodity prices about the strength of global demand or about expectations of future growth and inflation?The Role of Labor Costs in Price SettingBasic microeconomics tells us that marginal cost should play a central role in firms' pricing decisions. And, notwithstanding the effects of changes in commodity prices on the cost of production, for the economy as a whole, by far the most important cost is the cost of labor.Over the past decade, formal work in the modeling of inflation has treated marginal cost, particularly the marginal cost of labor, as central to the determination of inflation.2However, the empirical evidence for this linkage is less definitive than we would like.3This mixed evidence is one reason that much Phillips curve analysis has centered on price-price equations with no explicit role for wages.4Problems in the measurement of labor costs may help explain the absence of a clearer empirical relationship between labor costs and prices. Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector, a commonly used measure of labor cost, displays substantial volatility from quarter to quarter and year to year, is often revised significantly, and includes compensation that is largely unrelated to marginal costs--for example, exercises (as opposed to grants) of stock options. These and other problems carry through to the published estimates of labor's share in the nonfarm business sector--the proxy for real marginal cost that is typically used in empirical work. A second commonly used measure of aggregate hourly labor compensation, the employment cost index, has its own set of drawbacks as a measure of marginal cost. Indeed, these two compensation measures not infrequently generate conflicting signals of trends in labor costs and thus differing implications for inflation.The interpretation of changes in labor productivity also affects the measurement of marginal cost. As economists have recognized for half a century, labor productivity tends to be procyclical, in contrast to the theoretical prediction that movements along a stable, conventional production function should generate countercyclical productivity behavior. Many explanations for procyclical productivity have been advanced, ranging from labor hoarding in downturns to procyclical technological progress. A better understanding of the observed procyclicality of productivity would help us to interpret cyclical movements in unit labor costs and to better measure marginal cost.The relationship between marginal cost, properly measured, and prices also depends on the markups that firms can impose. One important open question is the degree to which variation over time in average markups may be obscuring the empirical link between prices and labor costs. Considerable work has also been done on the role of time-varying markups in the inflation process, but a consensus on the role of changing markups on the inflation process remains elusive.5More research in this area, particularly with an empirical orientation, would be welcome.Real-Time PolicymakingThe measurement issues I just raised point to another important concern of policymakers, namely, the necessity of making decisions in "real time," under conditions of great uncertainty--including uncertainty about the underlying state of the economy--and without the benefit of hindsight.In the context of Phillips curve analysis, a number of researchers have highlighted the difficulty of assessing the output gap--the difference between actual and potential output--in real time.6An inability to measure the output gap in real time obviously limits the usefulness of the concept in practical policymaking. On the other hand, to argue that output gaps are very difficult to measure in real time is not the same as arguing that economic slack does not influence inflation; indeed, the bulk of the evidence suggests that there is a relationship, albeit one that may be less pronounced than in the past.7These observations suggest two useful directions for research: First, more obviously, there is scope to continue the search for measures or indicators of output gaps that provide useful information in real time. Second, we need to continue to think through the decision procedures that policymakers should use under conditions of substantial uncertainty about the state of the economy and underlying economic relationships. For example, even if the output gap is poorly measured, by taking appropriate account of measurement uncertainties and combining information about the output gap with information from other sources, we may be able to achieve better policy outcomes than would be possible if we simply ignored noisy output gap measures. Of course, similar considerations apply to other types of real-time economic information.Inflation itself can pose real-time measurement challenges. We have multiple measures of inflation, each of which reflects different coverage, methods of construction, and seasonality, and each of which is subject to statistical noise arising from sampling, imputation of certain prices, and temporary or special factors affecting certain markets. From these measures and other information, policymakers attempt to infer the "true" underlying rate of inflation. In other words, policymakers must read the incoming data in real time to judge which changes in inflation are likely to be transitory and which may prove more persistent. Getting this distinction right has first-order implications for monetary policy: Because monetary policy works with a lag, policy should be calibrated based on forecasts of medium-term inflation, which may differ from the current inflation rate. The need to distinguish changes in the inflation trend from temporary movements around that trend has motivated attention to various measures of "core," or underlying, inflation, including measures that exclude certain prices (such as those of food and energy), "trimmed mean" measures, and others, but other approaches are certainly worth consideration.8Further work on the problem of filtering the incoming data so as to obtain better measures of the underlying inflation trend could be of great value to policymakers.The necessity of making policy in real time highlights the importance of maintaining and improving the economic data infrastructure and, in particular, working to make economic data timelier and more accurate. I noted earlier the problems in interpreting existing measures of labor compensation. Significant scope exists to improve the quality of price data as well--for example, by using the wealth of information available from checkout scanners or finding better ways to adjust for quality change. I encourage researchers to become more familiar with the strengths and shortcomings of the data that they routinely use. Besides leading to better analysis, attention to data quality issues by researchers often leads to better data in the longer term, both because of the insights generated by research and because researchers are important and influential clients of data collection agencies.Inflation ExpectationsFinally, I will say a few words on inflation expectations, which most economists see as central to inflation dynamics. But there is much we do not understand about inflation expectations, their determination, and their implications. I will divide my list of questions into three categories.First, we need to understand better the factors that determine the public's inflation expectations. As I discussed in some detail in a talk at the National Bureau of Economic Research last summer, much evidence suggests that expectations have become better anchored than they were a few decades ago, but that they nonetheless remain imperfectly anchored.9It would be quite useful for policymakers to know more about how inflation expectations are influenced by monetary policy actions, monetary policy communication, and other economic developments such as oil price shocks.The growing literature on learning in macroeconomic models appears to be a useful vehicle to address many of these issues.10In a traditional model with rational expectations, a fixed economic structure, and stable policy objectives, there is no role for learning by the public. In such a model, there is generally a unique long-run equilibrium inflation rate which is fully anticipated; in particular, the public makes no inferences based on central bankers' words or deeds. But in fact, the public has only incomplete information about both the economy and policymakers' objectives, which themselves may change over time. Allowing for the possibility of learning by the public is more realistic and tends to generate more reasonable conclusions about how inflation expectations change and, in particular, about how they can be influenced by monetary policy actions and communications.The second category of questions involves the channels through which inflation expectations affect actual inflation. Is the primary linkage from inflation expectations to wage bargains, or are other channels important? One somewhat puzzling finding comes from a survey of business pricing decisions conducted by Blinder, Canetti, Lebow, and Rudd, in which only a small share of respondents claimed that expected aggregate inflation affected their pricing at all.11How do we reconcile this result with our strong presumption that expectations are of central importance for explaining inflation? Perhaps expectations affect actual inflation through some channel that is relatively indirect. The growing literature on disaggregated price setting may be able to shed some light on this question.12Finally, a large set of questions revolve around how the central bank can best monitor the public's inflation expectations. Many measures of expected inflation exist, including expectations taken from surveys of households, forecasts by professional economists, and information extracted from markets for inflation-indexed securities. Unfortunately, only very limited information is available on expectations of price-setters themselves, namely businesses. Which of these agents' expectations are most important for inflation dynamics, and how can central bankers best extract the relevant information from the various available measures?ConclusionThis evening I have touched on only a few of the questions that confront policymakers as we deal with the challenges we face. The contributions of economic researchers in helping us to address these and other important questions have been and will continue to be invaluable. I will conclude by offering my best wishes for an interesting and productive conference.ReferencesAtkeson, Andrew, and Lee E. Ohanian (2001). "Are Phillips Curves Useful for Forecasting Inflation?" Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,Quarterly Review,vol. 25 (Winter), pp. 2-11.Bernanke, Ben S. (2007). "Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting," speech delivered at the Monetary Economics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 10.Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow (2004). "Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 112 (October), pp. 947-85.Blinder, Alan S., Elie R. D. Canetti, David E. Lebow, and Jeremy B. Rudd (1998).Asking about Prices: A New Approach to Understanding Price Stickiness.New York: Russell Sage Foundation.Gali, Jordi, and Mark Gertler (1999). "Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 44 (October), pp. 195-222.Gordon, Robert J. (1988). "The Role of Wages in the Inflation Process,"American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, vol. 78 (May), pp. 276-83.Kiley, Michael T. (2007). "A Quantitative Comparison of Sticky-Price and Sticky-Information Models of Price Setting,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 39 (February), pp. 101-25.Kiley, Michael T. (2008). "Monetary Policy Actions and Long-Run Inflation Expectations," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2008-03. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February.Orphanides, Athanasios (2002). "Monetary-Policy Rules and the Great Inflation,"American Economic Review, vol. 92 (May), pp. 115-20.Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (2007). "Robust Monetary Policy with Imperfect Knowledge,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 54 (July), pp. 1406-35.Pain, Nigel, Isabell Koske, and Marte Sollie (2006). "Globalisation and Inflation in the OECD Economies," OECD Economics Department Working Paper Series 524. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, November.Rich, Robert W., and Charles Steindel (2007), "A Comparison of Measures of Core Inflation," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Economic Policy Review, vol. 13 (December).Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford (1999). "The Cyclical Behavior of Prices and Costs," in John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1B. New York: Elsevier Science, North-Holland.Rudd, Jeremy, and Karl Whelan (2007). "Modeling Inflation Dynamics: A Critical Review of Recent Research,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 39 (February), pp. 155-70.Footnotes1.According to one study, if the share of world trade and world gross domestic product for non-industrial countries had remained at its 2000 levels, then by 2005, real oil prices would have been 40 percent lower, and real metals prices 10 percent lower, than they actually were (Pain, Koske, and Sollie, 2006). Since 2005, continued strong growth in the demands for resources of emerging market economies have likely put further considerable upward pressure on commodity prices. For contrast, the demand for oil by members of the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD) has been essentially flat since 2004.Return to text2.Gali and Gertler (1999).Return to text3.Rudd and Whelan (2007), Kiley (2007).Return to text4.Gordon (1988).Return to text5.Rotemberg and Woodford (1999).Return to text6.Orphanides (2002).Return to text7.For a counterargument, however, see Atkeson and Ohanian (2001).Return to text8.Rich and Steindel (2007) provide a recent analysis of alternative measures of core inflation.Return to text9.Bernanke (2007).Return to text10.Orphanides and Williams (2007) and Kiley (2008) are good examples, but there are many others.Return to text11.Blinder and others (1998).Return to text12.For example, see Bils and Klenow (2004).Return to text Good evening. I am pleased to be able to participate in the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's 52nd annual economic conference, on the topic of inflation and the Phillips curve. Forecasting and controlling inflation are, of course, central to the process of making monetary policy. In this respect, policymakers are fortunate to be able to build on an intellectual foundation provided by extensive research and practical experience. Nonetheless, much remains to be learned about both inflation forecasting and inflation control. In the spirit of this conference, my remarks this evening will highlight some key areas where additional research could help to provide a still-firmer foundation for monetary policymaking. Before turning to those issues, however, I would like to provide a brief update on the outlook for the economy and policy, beginning with the prospects for growth. Despite the unwelcome rise in the unemployment rate that was reported last week, the recent incoming data, taken as a whole, have affected the outlook for economic activity and employment only modestly. Indeed, although activity during the current quarter is likely to be weak, the risk that the economy has entered a substantial downturn appears to have diminished over the past month or so. Over the remainder of 2008, the effects of monetary and fiscal stimulus, a gradual ebbing of the drag from residential construction, further progress in the repair of financial and credit markets, and still-solid demand from abroad should provide some offset to the headwinds that still face the economy. However, the ongoing contraction in the housing market and continuing increases in energy prices suggest that growth risks remain to the downside. One of the most effective means by which the Federal Reserve can help to restore moderate growth over time and to reduce the associated downside risks is by supporting the return of financial markets to more-normal functioning. We have taken a number of actions to promote financial stability and remain strongly committed to that objective. Inflation has remained high, largely reflecting sharp increases in the prices of globally traded commodities. Thus far, the pass-through of high raw materials costs to the prices of most other products and to domestic labor costs has been limited, in part because of softening domestic demand. However, the continuation of this pattern is not guaranteed and future developments in this regard will bear close attention. Moreover, the latest round of increases in energy prices has added to the upside risks to inflation and inflation expectations. The Federal Open Market Committee will strongly resist an erosion of longer-term inflation expectations, as an unanchoring of those expectations would be destabilizing for growth as well as for inflation. Turning now to the principal topic of my remarks, I will briefly touch on four topics of particular interest for policymakers: commodity prices and inflation, the role of labor costs in the price-setting process, issues arising from the necessity of making policy in real time, and the determinants and effects of changes in inflation expectations. Economists within the Federal Reserve System and at other central banks have made and will continue to make important contributions in these areas. However, researchers in academia and elsewhere have long been essential partners in building the intellectual foundations for the conduct of monetary policy. One of my objectives today is to encourage the continuation of this fruitful collaboration. Commodity Prices and InflationRapidly rising prices for globally traded commodities have been the major source of the relatively high rates of inflation we have experienced in recent years, underscoring the importance for policy of both forecasting commodity price changes and understanding the factors that drive those changes. Policymakers and other analysts have often relied on quotes from commodity futures markets to derive forecasts of the prices of key commodities. However, as you know, futures markets quotes have underpredicted commodity price increases in recent years, leading to corresponding underpredictions of overall inflation. The poor recent record of commodity futures markets in forecasting the course of prices raises the question of whether policymakers should continue to use this source of information and, if so, how. Despite this recent record, I do not think it is reasonable, when forecasting commodity prices, to ignore the substantial amounts of information about supply and demand conditions that are aggregated by futures markets. Indeed, the use of some simple alternatives--such as extrapolating recent commodity price trends--would require us to assume that investors in commodity futures can expect to earn supernormal risk-adjusted returns, inconsistent with principles of financial arbitrage. However, it does seem reasonable--and consistent with the wide distributions of commodity price expectations implied by options prices--to treat the forecasts of commodity prices obtained from futures markets, and consequently the forecasts of aggregate price inflation, as highly uncertain. These considerations raise several questions for researchers: First, is it possible to improve our forecasts of commodity prices, using information from futures markets but possibly other information as well? For example, the markets for longer-dated futures contracts are often quite illiquid, suggesting that the associated futures prices may not effectively aggregate all available information. Second, what are the implications for the conduct of monetary policy of the high degree of uncertainty that attends forecasts of commodity prices? Although theoretical analyses often focus on the case in which policymakers care only about expected economic outcomes and not the uncertainty surrounding those outcomes, in practice policymakers are concerned about the risks to their projections as well as the projections themselves. How should those concerns affect the setting of policy in this context? Whatever the forecasting value of futures market quotes, these and other financial market prices provide limited information about the structural relationships between commodity prices and their determinants. Absent a specification of those structural relationships, one cannot analyze the effects of alternative monetary policies or the implications of other shocks to the economy. Empirical work on inflation, including much of the classic work on Phillips curves, has generally treated changes in commodity prices as an exogenous influence on the inflation process, driven by market-specific factors such as weather conditions or geopolitical developments. By contrast, some analysts emphasize the endogeneity of commodity prices to broad macroeconomic and monetary developments such as expected growth, expected inflation, interest rates, and currency movements. Of course, in reality, commodity prices are influenced by both market-specific and aggregate factors. Market-specific influences are evident in the significant differences in price behavior across individual commodities, which often can be traced to idiosyncratic supply and demand factors. Aggregate influences are suggested by the fact that the prices of several major classes of commodities, including energy, metals, and grains, have all shown broad-based gains in recent years. In particular, it seems clear that commodity prices have been importantly influenced by secular global trends affecting the conditions of demand and supply for raw materials. We have seen rapid growth in the worldwide demand for raw materials, which in turn is largely the result of sustained global growth--particularly resources-intensive growth in emerging market economies.1And factors including inadequate investment, long lags in the development of new capacity, and underlying resource constraints have caused the supplies of a number of important commodity classes, including energy and metals, to lag global demand. These problems have been exacerbated to some extent by a systematic underprediction of demand and overprediction of productive capacity for a number of key commodities, notably oil. Further analysis of the range of aggregate and idiosyncratic determinants of commodity prices would be fruitful. I have only mentioned a few of the issues raised by commodity price behavior for inflation and monetary policy. Here are a few other questions that researchers could usefully address: First, how should monetary policy deal with increases in commodity prices that are not only large but potentially persistent? Second, does the link between global growth and commodity prices imply a role for global slack, along with domestic slack, in the Phillips curve? Finally, what information about the broader economy is contained in commodity prices? For example, what signal should we take from recent changes in commodity prices about the strength of global demand or about expectations of future growth and inflation? The Role of Labor Costs in Price SettingBasic microeconomics tells us that marginal cost should play a central role in firms' pricing decisions. And, notwithstanding the effects of changes in commodity prices on the cost of production, for the economy as a whole, by far the most important cost is the cost of labor. Over the past decade, formal work in the modeling of inflation has treated marginal cost, particularly the marginal cost of labor, as central to the determination of inflation.2However, the empirical evidence for this linkage is less definitive than we would like.3This mixed evidence is one reason that much Phillips curve analysis has centered on price-price equations with no explicit role for wages.4 Problems in the measurement of labor costs may help explain the absence of a clearer empirical relationship between labor costs and prices. Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector, a commonly used measure of labor cost, displays substantial volatility from quarter to quarter and year to year, is often revised significantly, and includes compensation that is largely unrelated to marginal costs--for example, exercises (as opposed to grants) of stock options. These and other problems carry through to the published estimates of labor's share in the nonfarm business sector--the proxy for real marginal cost that is typically used in empirical work. A second commonly used measure of aggregate hourly labor compensation, the employment cost index, has its own set of drawbacks as a measure of marginal cost. Indeed, these two compensation measures not infrequently generate conflicting signals of trends in labor costs and thus differing implications for inflation. The interpretation of changes in labor productivity also affects the measurement of marginal cost. As economists have recognized for half a century, labor productivity tends to be procyclical, in contrast to the theoretical prediction that movements along a stable, conventional production function should generate countercyclical productivity behavior. Many explanations for procyclical productivity have been advanced, ranging from labor hoarding in downturns to procyclical technological progress. A better understanding of the observed procyclicality of productivity would help us to interpret cyclical movements in unit labor costs and to better measure marginal cost. The relationship between marginal cost, properly measured, and prices also depends on the markups that firms can impose. One important open question is the degree to which variation over time in average markups may be obscuring the empirical link between prices and labor costs. Considerable work has also been done on the role of time-varying markups in the inflation process, but a consensus on the role of changing markups on the inflation process remains elusive.5More research in this area, particularly with an empirical orientation, would be welcome. Real-Time PolicymakingThe measurement issues I just raised point to another important concern of policymakers, namely, the necessity of making decisions in "real time," under conditions of great uncertainty--including uncertainty about the underlying state of the economy--and without the benefit of hindsight. In the context of Phillips curve analysis, a number of researchers have highlighted the difficulty of assessing the output gap--the difference between actual and potential output--in real time.6An inability to measure the output gap in real time obviously limits the usefulness of the concept in practical policymaking. On the other hand, to argue that output gaps are very difficult to measure in real time is not the same as arguing that economic slack does not influence inflation; indeed, the bulk of the evidence suggests that there is a relationship, albeit one that may be less pronounced than in the past.7These observations suggest two useful directions for research: First, more obviously, there is scope to continue the search for measures or indicators of output gaps that provide useful information in real time. Second, we need to continue to think through the decision procedures that policymakers should use under conditions of substantial uncertainty about the state of the economy and underlying economic relationships. For example, even if the output gap is poorly measured, by taking appropriate account of measurement uncertainties and combining information about the output gap with information from other sources, we may be able to achieve better policy outcomes than would be possible if we simply ignored noisy output gap measures. Of course, similar considerations apply to other types of real-time economic information. Inflation itself can pose real-time measurement challenges. We have multiple measures of inflation, each of which reflects different coverage, methods of construction, and seasonality, and each of which is subject to statistical noise arising from sampling, imputation of certain prices, and temporary or special factors affecting certain markets. From these measures and other information, policymakers attempt to infer the "true" underlying rate of inflation. In other words, policymakers must read the incoming data in real time to judge which changes in inflation are likely to be transitory and which may prove more persistent. Getting this distinction right has first-order implications for monetary policy: Because monetary policy works with a lag, policy should be calibrated based on forecasts of medium-term inflation, which may differ from the current inflation rate. The need to distinguish changes in the inflation trend from temporary movements around that trend has motivated attention to various measures of "core," or underlying, inflation, including measures that exclude certain prices (such as those of food and energy), "trimmed mean" measures, and others, but other approaches are certainly worth consideration.8Further work on the problem of filtering the incoming data so as to obtain better measures of the underlying inflation trend could be of great value to policymakers. The necessity of making policy in real time highlights the importance of maintaining and improving the economic data infrastructure and, in particular, working to make economic data timelier and more accurate. I noted earlier the problems in interpreting existing measures of labor compensation. Significant scope exists to improve the quality of price data as well--for example, by using the wealth of information available from checkout scanners or finding better ways to adjust for quality change. I encourage researchers to become more familiar with the strengths and shortcomings of the data that they routinely use. Besides leading to better analysis, attention to data quality issues by researchers often leads to better data in the longer term, both because of the insights generated by research and because researchers are important and influential clients of data collection agencies. Inflation ExpectationsFinally, I will say a few words on inflation expectations, which most economists see as central to inflation dynamics. But there is much we do not understand about inflation expectations, their determination, and their implications. I will divide my list of questions into three categories. First, we need to understand better the factors that determine the public's inflation expectations. As I discussed in some detail in a talk at the National Bureau of Economic Research last summer, much evidence suggests that expectations have become better anchored than they were a few decades ago, but that they nonetheless remain imperfectly anchored.9It would be quite useful for policymakers to know more about how inflation expectations are influenced by monetary policy actions, monetary policy communication, and other economic developments such as oil price shocks. The growing literature on learning in macroeconomic models appears to be a useful vehicle to address many of these issues.10In a traditional model with rational expectations, a fixed economic structure, and stable policy objectives, there is no role for learning by the public. In such a model, there is generally a unique long-run equilibrium inflation rate which is fully anticipated; in particular, the public makes no inferences based on central bankers' words or deeds. But in fact, the public has only incomplete information about both the economy and policymakers' objectives, which themselves may change over time. Allowing for the possibility of learning by the public is more realistic and tends to generate more reasonable conclusions about how inflation expectations change and, in particular, about how they can be influenced by monetary policy actions and communications. The second category of questions involves the channels through which inflation expectations affect actual inflation. Is the primary linkage from inflation expectations to wage bargains, or are other channels important? One somewhat puzzling finding comes from a survey of business pricing decisions conducted by Blinder, Canetti, Lebow, and Rudd, in which only a small share of respondents claimed that expected aggregate inflation affected their pricing at all.11How do we reconcile this result with our strong presumption that expectations are of central importance for explaining inflation? Perhaps expectations affect actual inflation through some channel that is relatively indirect. The growing literature on disaggregated price setting may be able to shed some light on this question.12 Finally, a large set of questions revolve around how the central bank can best monitor the public's inflation expectations. Many measures of expected inflation exist, including expectations taken from surveys of households, forecasts by professional economists, and information extracted from markets for inflation-indexed securities. Unfortunately, only very limited information is available on expectations of price-setters themselves, namely businesses. Which of these agents' expectations are most important for inflation dynamics, and how can central bankers best extract the relevant information from the various available measures? ConclusionThis evening I have touched on only a few of the questions that confront policymakers as we deal with the challenges we face. The contributions of economic researchers in helping us to address these and other important questions have been and will continue to be invaluable. I will conclude by offering my best wishes for an interesting and productive conference. ReferencesAtkeson, Andrew, and Lee E. Ohanian (2001). "Are Phillips Curves Useful for Forecasting Inflation?" Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,Quarterly Review,vol. 25 (Winter), pp. 2-11. Bernanke, Ben S. (2007). "Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting," speech delivered at the Monetary Economics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 10. Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow (2004). "Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 112 (October), pp. 947-85. Blinder, Alan S., Elie R. D. Canetti, David E. Lebow, and Jeremy B. Rudd (1998).Asking about Prices: A New Approach to Understanding Price Stickiness.New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Gali, Jordi, and Mark Gertler (1999). "Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 44 (October), pp. 195-222. Gordon, Robert J. (1988). "The Role of Wages in the Inflation Process,"American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, vol. 78 (May), pp. 276-83. Kiley, Michael T. (2007). "A Quantitative Comparison of Sticky-Price and Sticky-Information Models of Price Setting,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 39 (February), pp. 101-25. Kiley, Michael T. (2008). "Monetary Policy Actions and Long-Run Inflation Expectations," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2008-03. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Orphanides, Athanasios (2002). "Monetary-Policy Rules and the Great Inflation,"American Economic Review, vol. 92 (May), pp. 115-20. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (2007). "Robust Monetary Policy with Imperfect Knowledge,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 54 (July), pp. 1406-35. Pain, Nigel, Isabell Koske, and Marte Sollie (2006). "Globalisation and Inflation in the OECD Economies," OECD Economics Department Working Paper Series 524. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, November. Rich, Robert W., and Charles Steindel (2007), "A Comparison of Measures of Core Inflation," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Economic Policy Review, vol. 13 (December). Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford (1999). "The Cyclical Behavior of Prices and Costs," in John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1B. New York: Elsevier Science, North-Holland. Rudd, Jeremy, and Karl Whelan (2007). "Modeling Inflation Dynamics: A Critical Review of Recent Research,"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 39 (February), pp. 155-70. Footnotes 1.According to one study, if the share of world trade and world gross domestic product for non-industrial countries had remained at its 2000 levels, then by 2005, real oil prices would have been 40 percent lower, and real metals prices 10 percent lower, than they actually were (Pain, Koske, and Sollie, 2006). Since 2005, continued strong growth in the demands for resources of emerging market economies have likely put further considerable upward pressure on commodity prices. For contrast, the demand for oil by members of the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD) has been essentially flat since 2004.Return to text 2.Gali and Gertler (1999).Return to text 3.Rudd and Whelan (2007), Kiley (2007).Return to text 4.Gordon (1988).Return to text 5.Rotemberg and Woodford (1999).Return to text 6.Orphanides (2002).Return to text 7.For a counterargument, however, see Atkeson and Ohanian (2001).Return to text 8.Rich and Steindel (2007) provide a recent analysis of alternative measures of core inflation.Return to text 9.Bernanke (2007).Return to text 10.Orphanides and Williams (2007) and Kiley (2008) are good examples, but there are many others.Return to text 11.Blinder and others (1998).Return to text 12.For example, see Bils and Klenow (2004).Return to text
Governor Randall S. Kroszner At the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Community Development Policy Summit, Cleveland, Ohio I am delighted to be here today to help open this important conference. I thank my hosts, President Pianalto and her staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, for the invitation. This year's conference explores a confluence of consumer-related finance issues in the context of the current difficulties in the mortgage markets. In my remarks today, I would like to discuss the key role of consumer credit in our economy and describe how information disclosure and protecting consumers can work to facilitate and promote the efficient functioning of markets for such credit.1 Good information is essential to achieving well-functioning markets. Consumers, equipped with the right information at the right time, can make the choices most appropriate to their individual circumstances and desires. For consumers to make the most meaningful use of the relevant information, such information should be accessible and understandable. In turn, businesses rely on consumers through their choices to signal their desires and preferences in order to produce the products that consumers want. If consumers are not well informed, it is difficult for them to be effective in conveying to businesses what they most want and in rewarding those businesses that do produce such products. Good information in a marketplace thus not only empowers consumers to make better choices but also helps competition work more effectively to provide the products consumers most desire. There are challenges in ensuring that the appropriate information is provided to help markets function efficiently. Product suppliers may not always provide needed information or present it in a format that enables meaningful comparison across competing products. Consumers must also have the financial skills to evaluate the information effectively. However, even in the presence of good information, practices can emerge that offer little benefit to consumers and, in some cases, may cause harm. In such cases, improved disclosure alone may be insufficient to address these issues. Rules can establish standards that promote increased certainty and restrain abusive practices. At the same time, such rules need to be implemented in a careful and informed manner so that the potential benefits of such rules are not offset by unintended consequences or the imposition of unnecessary costs. The challenge to policymakers is to strike the right balance--that is, to find ways to empower and protect consumers without diminishing access to credit and hindering future innovation. With these principles in mind, I will briefly describe some of the key steps that the Federal Reserve is undertaking to strike this balance in the area of consumer regulation to protect consumers and provide them with the information they need, and when they need it, to make sound decisions. Credit and the EconomyCredit is the lifeblood of the American economy. Whether it is to finance an education, purchase an automobile or home, or simply bridge short-term differences in the timing between our income and expenses, virtually all of us rely on credit at various points in our lives. Accordingly, choosing the right type of credit with the most appropriate terms and conditions is important to each of us. The Federal Reserve has an important role to play in this regard, as it has been given a mandate by the Congress to help ensure that the costs and terms of credit use are both transparent and understandable and to protect consumers from unfair and deceptive lending acts and practices. In our role as a supervisor of banking institutions, the Federal Reserve also seeks to ensure that lending is undertaken in a safe and sound manner. Credit is not only important to each of us as individuals; it also plays a central role in the working of our economy. Today's economy relies on consumer spending as an engine of growth--it accounts for about 70 percent of the gross domestic product. Credit is an important underpinning to such spending. Overall, evidence from the Federal Reserve's Survey of Consumer Finances shows that about three-quarters of all households carry some debt.2About three-quarters of automobile purchases are currently either financed or leased, and about 95 percent of home purchases involve a mortgage. The use of revolving credit is similarly widespread; about 75 percent of consumers hold credit cards. The annual transaction volume on general-purpose credit card accounts reached nearly $1.8 trillion in 2006, and our latest information suggests that consumers owed nearly $1 trillion on revolving credit accounts of all types. Because consumer credit plays a central role in the economy, the Federal Reserve has a macroeconomic interest in facilitating the efficient functioning of consumer credit markets. The Role of CreditThe prudent use of credit by households provides a number of important economic benefits. First, for many families, credit allows for easier and timelier purchase of assets and goods, such as homes, educations, and automobiles and other consumer durables that can generate savings in cost and time and improve employment and income-generating opportunities.3By facilitating such investment-oriented spending, credit enables consumers to save and consume at times that meet their needs. For example, the purchase of an automobile, which many are only able to do using credit, can expand employment opportunities, which, in turn, can lead to higher incomes. Access to consumer credit also enables many entrepreneurs to finance the start-up or expansion of small businesses, a large source of employment in the United States. Second, a robust consumer credit market facilitates the growth of consumer durables industries (e.g., computers, autos, and appliances) in which new technologies, mass production, and economies of scale have historically created employment growth and new wealth. It is simply hard to imagine the pace of development in the automobile and appliance industries in the twentieth century without the availability of credit to purchase their output. Indeed, the lack of well-developed credit markets has been found to be an impediment to economic growth and prosperity.4Even in a well-developed economy such as ours, innovation in credit markets over the past two decades or so has expanded credit availability to lower-income households and increased options for middle-income consumers as well.5 Third, from an economy-wide perspective, credit provides an important outlet for the savings of consumers through the financial intermediation process. Ultimately, the source of funds for consumers who borrow is other consumers who have savings they hold in deposit accounts, life insurance and pension reserves, or portfolios of securities that include bonds, stocks, and mutual fund shares. Efficient markets for household credit are part of a well-functioning system of financial intermediation that allocates savings to the most productive uses. The developments in credit markets have generally benefited consumers. However, some of these developments have increased the complexity of our choices and made mistakes potentially more costly.6A key challenge is to find ways to improve consumers' ability to identify products that are suitable to their needs without diminishing the benefits market innovations can provide and without reducing future access to credit. One important way this challenge can be met is by improving the information available to consumers. The Central Role of InformationInformation is critical to the efficient functioning of markets.7A central tenant of economics is that markets are more competitive, and therefore more efficient, when accurate and complete information is available to both consumers and product suppliers. Accurate and complete information about credit terms and prices is essential for households to make sound judgments about the use of credit. Information disclosure improves consumers' ability to compare products and to choose those products that will help them meet their personal goals. To be effective, disclosures must give consumers information about credit pricing and important terms at a time when it is relevant, and in language consumers can easily understand. The information must also be presented in a format that allows consumers to pick out and use the information that is most important to them. Effective disclosures give consumers information they notice, understand, and can use. Better credit-term disclosures permit better-informed credit decisions and lead to more-intense competition among creditors. In a nutshell, effective disclosure empowers consumers to choose wisely and enhances competition. In some circumstances, the disclosure rules can facilitate efficient market outcomes by establishing guidelines to improve information flows and establishing uniform standards for how information is provided. For example, since enactment of the Truth in Lending Act of 1968, which requires uniform disclosure of the cost of credit and other key lending terms, consumer awareness of and sensitivity to interest rates in credit decisions has increased.8Evidence also suggests that these disclosures have improved competition and helped consumers.9The prohibition of the provision of misleading or erroneous information can also help to improve competitive outcomes. To evaluate the effectiveness of disclosures, we must know what consumers understand, what information they use, and how they use the information in making decisions. In designing rules, we need to take consumers' actual behavior and understanding into consideration. As a result, the Federal Reserve has been using consumer testing to address the considerable challenge of making disclosures effective. As mentioned, consumers increasingly face more-diverse and more-complex financial products, including nontraditional mortgages and credit cards with multiple and complex features. Given this complexity, we are mindful of the challenges of information overload and seek to design disclosures that are not only accurate, but also clear and concise, so that they are meaningful and useful to consumers. Numerous pages of fine print may provide the comprehensive descriptions that lawyers may prefer, but they can also be confusing, or provide limited value, to consumers. We increasingly rely on feedback from surveys and testing from actual consumers to determine the information they need to make informed choices. In this regard, we recently completed several rounds of consumer testing for credit card disclosures. That testing has been essential to our effort to redesign and improve them. We have also begun using consumer testing of mortgage disclosures to help develop more-effective disclosures around product features and other terms that consumers need to know. Limitations of Disclosure ProtectionsWhen consumers are fully aware of and understand product terms and features, they are better positioned to make the right choices and achieve the outcomes most appropriate to their given circumstances, as well as give the signals and rewards to businesses that produce the products and services consumers most value. However, some product features and contract terms may be so complex that they are not readily understood. In some instances, even small misunderstandings, misjudgments, or the challenge of focusing on the most essential features of a product can lead to serious problems down the road. This is one reason why financial education and literacy efforts are essential to enabling consumers to navigate our complex consumer financial marketplace. Problems can arise if competition does not ensure that relevant information on some terms or product features is provided in a timely and comprehensible way.10Moreover, product terms or features can sometimes emerge that offer little or no benefit to the vast majority of consumers. Double-cycle billing, for example, is a practice in the credit card industry that is so complex that few consumers can fully understand the implications of this practice, even in the presence of full disclosure. Generally speaking, institutions using this practice assess interest not only on the balance for the current billing cycle, but also on the balance for the preceding billing cycle. The Board has conducted extensive consumer testing of various ways to describe this balance computation method and found that disclosures are not successful in helping consumers understand it. In such cases, improving information disclosure alone may not adequately address the issue. Consequently, the goal of consumer protection may be most effectively realized, weighing the potential costs and benefits, if certain product features are modified by rule or prohibited outright rather than disclosed. Current Challenges and the Federal Reserve's Regulatory ProposalsIn today's vast and complex consumer finance marketplace, we face the challenge of ensuring that disclosures for consumer credit remain effective in light of the growing complexity of consumer credit products and terms. We also face the challenge of identifying when restrictions and prohibitions are appropriate to ensure meaningful consumer protection and do not involve unintended consequences that could ultimately reduce consumer welfare. With the increased complexity of mortgage loans and credit cards in recent years, for example, there has been great concern about the need for more-effective disclosure and increased consumer protection in these transactions. The Federal Reserve has undertaken extensive efforts to gain insight into industry practices and consumer experiences to understand how to improve disclosures when possible and to enhance consumer protections where needed. With respect to mortgage lending, we have been working to finalize the rules under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act that we proposed in December. In developing this proposal, we gained valuable insight through public hearings, discussions with industry and consumer groups, input from our Consumer Advisory Council, and other sources. The amendments we have proposed would better protect consumers from a range of unfair or deceptive mortgage lending and advertising practices that have been the source of considerable concern and criticism. Our proposal includes key protections for higher-priced mortgage loans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling. Specifically, the proposal addresses concerns about underwriting and lenders' consideration of the borrower's ability to make the scheduled payments, including verifying the income and assets that lenders rely upon in making the loan. The proposal also addresses concerns about prepayment penalties and the impact on consumers when lenders fail to establish escrow accounts for taxes and insurance. We are working toward issuing final regulations in July. For credit cards, the Federal Reserve has employed a two-step strategy toward improving consumer protection. Our first step was the Board's proposal to substantially revise and improve credit card disclosures under the Truth in Lending Act. We have done extensive consumer testing to determine the type of information and its format that consumers find most useful in shopping for and choosing a credit card. We issued this proposal last year, and we are still carefully considering the public comment letters received on that proposal, many of which contain suggestions for how we might further improve the disclosures. We believe that this proposal will result in credit card disclosures that are significantly more effective for today's complex products. Testing disclosure forms and formats with credit card users is crucial to ensuring that the disclosures are understandable and useful to consumers. Effective disclosures can help to empower consumers and enhance the competition because consumers find it easier to comparison shop. We are continuing to use consumer testing as we work toward issuing final rules by year-end. This extensive consumer testing--and the thousands of public comments generated by our 2007 credit card proposal--suggested that disclosures might not provide sufficient consumer protection with regard to certain practices. Therefore, in May we took the next step in our ongoing effort to enhance protections for consumers who use credit cards by proposing rules under the Federal Trade Commission Act to prevent financial harm to consumers from specific practices. We proposed rules that go beyond disclosure and could require financial institutions to make changes to their business models and to alter some practices. The Board has worked jointly with the Office of Thrift Supervision and the National Credit Union Administration in drafting and issuing a proposal intended to prevent financial harm to consumers from specific practices that the agencies find to be potentially abusive. Among other things, the proposed rules would address the following: The rules also prohibit a practice associated with the issuance of some subprime credit cards, in which most of the credit limit is used for security deposits and high fees imposed at account opening before the consumer actually receives the card. In addition to rules for credit cards, our proposal also addresses potentially abusive practices in connection with banks' payment of overdrafts to ensure that consumers have a choice of obtaining overdraft protection and receive information related to its service and costs. ConclusionA robust, innovative, and competitive consumer finance market is crucial to a healthy economy and, as I described earlier, can provide significant benefits to consumers. Such a market works most effectively and brings the greatest benefits when consumers are well-informed and are not subject to abusive practices. The Federal Reserve is working diligently to best use its authorities to provide both creditors and consumers with rules that strike the right balance between ensuring that consumers receive useful information at an appropriate time and restricting certain practices, while at the same time minimizing the risk of unintended consequences and the imposition of unnecessary costs that could reduce the benefits of a vital consumer finance marketplace. Footnotes 1.Defined here, consumer credit includes both mortgage loans and other types of loans extended to consumers.Return to text 2.Brian K. Bucks, Arthur B. Kennickell, and Kevin B Moore (2005), "Recent Changes in Family Finances: Evidence from the 2001 and 2004 Survey of Consumers Finances (444 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 91, pp. A1-A38.Return to text 3.Refer to, for example, F. Thomas Juster and Robert P. Shay (1964), "Consumer Sensitivity to Finance Rates: An Empirical and Analytical Investigation,"Occasional Paper 88 (New York: National Bureau of Economic Research).Return to text 4.Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine (2004), "Finance, Inequality, and Poverty: Cross-Country Evidence,"Working Paper Series 10979 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, December).Return to text 5.Joseph Nocera (1994),A Piece of the Action(New York: Simon and Schuster).Return to text 6.For example, Woodward finds that complicated loan arrangements raise the costs to homebuyers engaging in mortgage transactions; Susan E. Woodward (2008),A Study of Closing Costs for FHA Mortgages(Washington: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development).Return to text 7.Refer to, for example, George J. Stigler (1961), "The Economics of Information,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 69 (June), pp. 213-25.Return to text 8.Thomas A. Durkin (2006), "Credit Card Disclosures, Solicitations, and Privacy Notices: Survey Results of Consumer Knowledge and Behavior (104 KB PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 92, pp. A109-A121; Thomas A. Durkin and Gregory Elliehausen (forthcoming),Financial Economics of Information Disclosure: Applications to Truth-in-Lending(New York: Oxford University Press).Return to text 9.Durkin and Elliehausen (forthcoming),Financial Economics of Information Disclosure.Return to text 10.Xavier Gabaix and David Laibson (2006), "Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information Suppression in Competitive Markets,"The Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 121 (May), pp. 505-40.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts It seems to me, paradoxically, that both long ago and only yesterday I attended my own Class Day in 1975. I am pleased and honored to be invited back by the students of Harvard. Our speaker in 1975 was Dick Gregory, the social critic and comedian, who was inclined toward the sharp-edged and satiric. Central bankers don't do satire as a rule, so I am going to have to strive for "kind of interesting." When I attended Class Day as a graduating senior, Gerald Ford was President, and an up-and-coming fellow named Alan Greenspan was his chief economic adviser. Just weeks earlier, the last Americans remaining in Saigon had been evacuated by helicopters. On a happier note, the Red Sox were on their way to winning the American League pennant. I skipped classes to attend a World Series game against the Cincinnati Reds. As was their wont in those days, the Sox came agonizingly close to a championship but ended up snatching defeat from the jaws of victory. On that score, as on others--disco music and Pet Rocks come to mind--many things are better today than they were then. In fact, that will be a theme of my remarks today. Although 1975 was a pretty good year for the Red Sox, it was not a good one for the U.S. economy. Then as now, we were experiencing a serious oil price shock, sharply rising prices for food and other commodities, and subpar economic growth. But I see the differences between the economy of 1975 and the economy of 2008 as more telling than the similarities. Today's situation differs from that of 33 years ago in large part because our economy and society have become much more flexible and able to adapt to difficult situations and new challenges. Economic policymaking has improved as well, I believe, partly because we have learned well some of the hard lessons of the past. Of course, I do not want to minimize the challenges we currently face, and I will come back to a few of these. But I do think that our demonstrated ability to respond constructively and effectively to past economic problems provides a basis for optimism about the future. I will focus my remarks today on two economic issues that challenged us in the 1970s and that still do so today--energy and productivity. These, obviously, are not the kind of topics chosen by many recent Class Day speakers--Will Farrell, Ali G, or Seth MacFarlane, to name a few. But, then, the Class Marshals presumably knew what they were getting when they invited an economist. Because the members of today's graduating class--and some of your professors--were not yet born in 1975, let me begin by briefly surveying the economic landscape in the mid-1970s. The economy had just gone through a severe recession, during which output, income, and employment fell sharply and the unemployment rate rose to 9 percent. Meanwhile, consumer price inflation, which had been around 3 percent to 4 percent earlier in the decade, soared to more than 10 percent during my senior year.1 The oil price shock of the 1970s began in October 1973 when, in response to the Yom Kippur War, Arab oil producers imposed an embargo on exports. Before the embargo, in 1972, the price of imported oil was about $3.20 per barrel; by 1975, the average price was nearly $14 per barrel, more than four times greater. President Nixon had imposed economy-wide controls on wages and prices in 1971, including prices of petroleum products; in November 1973, in the wake of the embargo, the President placed additional controls on petroleum prices.2 As basic economics predicts, when a scarce resource cannot be allocated by market-determined prices, it will be allocated some other way--in this case, in what was to become an iconic symbol of the times, by long lines at gasoline stations. In 1974, in an attempt to overcome the unintended consequences of price controls, drivers in many places were permitted to buy gasoline only on odd or even days of the month, depending on the last digit of their license plate number. Moreover, with the controlled price of U.S. crude oil well below world prices, growth in domestic exploration slowed and production was curtailed--which, of course, only made things worse. In addition to creating long lines at gasoline stations, the oil price shock exacerbated what was already an intensifying buildup of inflation and inflation expectations. In another echo of today, the inflationary situation was further worsened by rapidly rising prices of agricultural products and other commodities. Economists generally agree that monetary policy performed poorly during this period. In part, this was because policymakers, in choosing what they believed to be the appropriate setting for monetary policy, overestimated the productive capacity of the economy. I'll have more to say about this shortly. Federal Reserve policymakers also underestimated both their own contributions to the inflationary problems of the time and their ability to curb that inflation. For example, on occasion they blamed inflation on so-called cost-push factors such as union wage pressures and price increases by large, market-dominating firms; however, the abilities of unions and firms to push through inflationary wage and price increases were symptoms of the problem, not the underlying cause. Several years passed before the Federal Reserve gained a new leadership that better understood the central bank's role in the inflation process and that sustained anti-inflationary monetary policies would actually work. Beginning in 1979, such policies were implemented successfully--although not without significant cost in terms of lost output and employment--under Fed Chairman Paul Volcker. For the Federal Reserve, two crucial lessons from this experience were, first, that high inflation can seriously destabilize the economy and, second, that the central bank must take responsibility for achieving price stability over the medium term. Fast-forward now to 2003. In that year, crude oil cost a little more than $30 per barrel.3Since then, crude oil prices have increased more than fourfold, proportionally about as much as in the 1970s. Now, as in 1975, adjusting to such high prices for crude oil has been painful. Gas prices around $4 a gallon are a huge burden for many households, as well as for truckers, manufacturers, farmers, and others. But, in many other ways, the economic consequences have been quite different from those of the 1970s. One obvious difference is what you don't see: drivers lining up on odd or even days to buy gasoline because of price controls or signs at gas stations that say "No gas." And until the recent slowdown--which is more the result of conditions in the residential housing market and in financial markets than of higher oil prices--economic growth was solid and unemployment remained low, unlike what we saw following oil price increases in the '70s. For a central banker, a particularly critical difference between then and now is what has happened to inflation and inflation expectations. The overall inflation rate has averaged about 3-1/2 percent over the past four quarters, significantly higher than we would like but much less than the double-digit rates that inflation reached in the mid-1970s and then again in 1980. Moreover, the increase in inflation has been milder this time--on the order of 1 percentage point over the past year as compared with the 6 percentage point jump that followed the 1973 oil price shock.4From the perspective of monetary policy, just as important as the behavior of actual inflation is what households and businessesexpectto happen to inflation in the future, particularly over the longer term. If people expect an increase in inflation to be temporary and do not build it into their longer-term plans for setting wages and prices, then the inflation created by a shock to oil prices will tend to fade relatively quickly. Some indicators of longer-term inflation expectations have risen in recent months, which is a significant concern for the Federal Reserve. We will need to monitor that situation closely. However, changes in long-term inflation expectations have been measured in tenths of a percentage point this time around rather than in whole percentage points, as appeared to be the case in the mid-1970s. Importantly, we see little indication today of the beginnings of a 1970s-style wage-price spiral, in which wages and prices chased each other ever upward. A good deal of economic research has looked at the question of why the inflation response to the oil shock has been relatively muted in the current instance.5One factor, which illustrates my point about the adaptability and flexibility of the U.S. economy, is the pronounced decline in the energy intensity of the economy since the 1970s. Since 1975, the energy required to produce a given amount of output in the United States has fallen by about half.6This great improvement in energy efficiency was less the result of government programs than of steps taken by households and businesses in response to higher energy prices, including substantial investments in more energy-efficient equipment and means of transportation. This improvement in energy efficiency is one of the reasons why a given increase in crude oil prices does less damage to the U.S. economy today than it did in the 1970s. Another reason is the performance of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve and other central banks have learned the lessons of the 1970s. Because monetary policy works with a lag, the short-term inflationary effects of a sharp increase in oil prices can generally not be fully offset. However, since Paul Volcker's time, the Federal Reserve has been firmly committed to maintaining a low and stable rate of inflation over the longer term. And we recognize that keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored is essential to achieving the goal of low and stable inflation. Maintaining confidence in the Fed's commitment to price stability remains a top priority as the central bank navigates the current complex situation. Although our economy has thus far dealt with the current oil price shock comparatively well, the United States and the rest of the world still face significant challenges in dealing with the rising global demand for energy, especially if continued demand growth and constrained supplies maintain intense pressure on prices. The silver lining of high energy prices is that they provide a powerful incentive for action--for conservation, including investment in energy-saving technologies; for the investment needed to bring new oil supplies to market; and for the development of alternative conventional and nonconventional energy sources. The government, in addition to the market, can usefully address energy concerns, for example, by supporting basic research and adopting well-designed regulatory policies to promote important social objectives such as protecting the environment. As we saw after the oil price shock of the 1970s, given some time, the economy can become much more energy-efficient even as it continues to grow and living standards improve. Let me turn now to the other economic challenge that I want to highlight today--the productivity performance of our economy. At this point you may be saying to yourself, "Is it too late to book Ali G?" However, anyone who stayed awake through EC 10 understands why this issue is so important.7As Adam Smith pointed out in 1776, in the long run, more than any other factor, the productivity of the workforce determines a nation's standard of living. The decades following the end of World War II were remarkable for their industrial innovation and creativity. From 1948 to 1973, output per hour of work grew by nearly 3 percent per year, on average.8But then, for the next 20 years or so, productivity growth averaged only about 1-1/2 percent per year, barely half its previous rate. Predictably, the rate of increase in the standard of living slowed as well, and to about the same extent. The difference between 3 percent and 1-1/2 percent may sound small. But at 3 percent per year, the standard of living would double about every 23 years, or once every generation; by contrast, at 1-1/2 percent, a doubling would occur only roughly every 47 years, or once every other generation. Among the many consequences of the productivity slowdown was a further complication for the monetary policy makers of the 1970s. Detecting shifts in economic trends is difficult in real time, and most economists and policymakers did not fully appreciate the extent of the productivity slowdown until the late 1970s. This further influenced the policymakers of the time toward running a monetary policy that was too accommodative. The resulting overheating of the economy probably exacerbated the inflation problem of that decade.9 Productivity growth revived in the mid-1990s, as I mentioned, illustrating once again the resilience of the American economy.10Since 1995, productivity has increased at about a 2-1/2 percent annual rate. A great deal of intellectual effort has been expended in trying to explain the recent performance and to forecast the future evolution of productivity. Much very good work has been conducted here at Harvard by Dale Jorgenson (my senior thesis adviser in 1975, by the way) and his colleagues, and other important research in the area has been done at the Federal Reserve Board.11One key finding of that research is that, to have an economic impact, technological innovations must be translated into successful commercial applications. This country's competitive, market-based system, its flexible capital and labor markets, its tradition of entrepreneurship, and its technological strengths--to which Harvard and other universities make a critical contribution--help ensure that that happens on an ongoing basis. While private-sector initiative was the key ingredient in generating the pickup in productivity growth, government policy was constructive, in part through support of basic research but also to a substantial degree by promoting economic competition. Beginning in the late 1970s, the federal government deregulated a number of key industries, including air travel, trucking, telecommunications, and energy. The resulting increase in competition promoted cost reductions and innovation, leading in turn to new products and industries. It is difficult to imagine that we would have online retailing today if the transportation and telecommunications industries had not been deregulated. In addition, the lowering of trade barriers promoted productivity gains by increasing competition, expanding markets, and increasing the pace of technology transfer.12 Finally, as a central banker, I would be remiss if I failed to mention the contribution of monetary policy to the improved productivity performance. By damping business cycles and by keeping inflation under control, a sound monetary policy improves the ability of households and firms to plan and increases their willingness to undertake the investments in skills, research, and physical capital needed to support continuing gains in productivity. Just as the productivity slowdown was associated with a slower growth of real per capita income, the productivity resurgence since the mid-1990s has been accompanied by a pickup in real income growth. One measure of average living standards, real consumption per capita, is nearly 35 percent higher today than in 1995. In addition, the flood of innovation that helped spur the productivity resurgence has created many new job opportunities, and more than a few fortunes. But changing technology has also reduced job opportunities for some others--bank tellers and assembly-line workers, for example. And that is the crux of a whole new set of challenges. Even thoughaverageeconomic well-being has increased considerably over time, the degree ofinequalityin economic outcomes over the past three decades has increased as well. Economists continue to grapple with the reasons for this trend. But as best we can tell, the increase in inequality probably is due to a number of factors, notably including technological change that seems to have favored higher-skilled workers more than lower-skilled ones. In addition, some economists point to increased international trade and the declining role of labor unions as other, probably lesser contributing factors. What should we do about rising economic inequality? Answering this question inevitably involves difficult value judgments and tradeoffs. But approaches that inhibit the dynamism of our economy would clearly be a step in the wrong direction. To be sure, new technologies and increased international trade can lead to painful dislocations as some workers lose their jobs or see the demand for their particular skills decline. However, hindering the adoption of new technologies or inhibiting trade flows would do far more harm than good over the longer haul. In the short term, the better approach is to adopt policies that help those who are displaced by economic change. By doing so, we not only provide assistance to those who need it but help to secure public support for the economic flexibility that is essential for prosperity. In the long term, however, the best way by far to improve economic opportunity and to reduce inequality is to increase the educational attainment and skills of American workers. The productivity surge in the decades after World War II corresponded to a period in which educational attainment was increasing rapidly; in recent decades, progress on that front has been far slower. Moreover, inequalities in education and in access to education remain high. As we think about improving education and skills, we should also look beyond the traditional K-12 and 4-year-college system--as important as it is--to recognize that education should be lifelong and can come in many forms. Early childhood education, community colleges, vocational schools, on-the-job training, online courses, adult education--all of these are vehicles of demonstrated value in increasing skills and lifetime earning power. The use of a wide range of methods to address the pressing problems of inadequate skills and economic inequality would be entirely consistent with the themes of economic adaptability and flexibility that I have emphasized in my remarks. I will close by shifting from the topic of education in general to your education specifically. Through effort, talent, and doubtless some luck, you have succeeded in acquiring an excellent education. Your education--more precisely, your ability to think critically and creatively--is your greatest asset. And unlike many assets, the more you draw on it, the faster it grows. Put it to good use. The poor forecasting record of economists is legendary, but I will make a forecast in which I am very confident: Whatever you expect your life and work to be like 10, 20, or 30 years from now, the reality will be quite different. In looking over the 30th anniversary report on my own class, I was struck by the great diversity of vocations and avocations that have engaged my classmates. To be sure, the volume was full of attorneys and physicians and professors as well as architects, engineers, editors, bankers, and even a few economists. Many listed the title "vice president," and, not a few, "president." But the class of 1975 also includes those who listed their occupations as composer, environmental advocate, musician, playwright, rabbi, conflict resolution coach, painter, community organizer, and essayist. And even for those of us with the more conventional job descriptions, the nature of our daily work and its relationship to the economy and society is, I am sure, very different from what we might have guessed in 1975. My point is only that you cannot predict your path. You can only try to be as prepared as possible for the opportunities, as well as the disappointments, that will come your way. For people, as for economies, adaptability and flexibility count for a great deal. Wherever your path leads, I hope you use your considerable talents and energy in endeavors that engage and excite you and benefit not only yourselves, but also in some measure your country and your world. Today, I wish you and your families a day of joyous celebration. Congratulations. ReferencesBlanchard, Olivier J., and Jordi Gali (2007). "The Macroeconomic Effects of Oil Shocks: Why Are the 2000s So Different from the 1970s?" NBER Working Paper 13368. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September. Corrado, Carol, and Lawrence Slifman (1999). "Decomposition of Productivity and Unit Costs,"American Economic Review, vol. 89 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 328-32. Corrado, Carol, Paul Lengermann, J. Joseph Beaulieu, and Eric J. Bartelsman (2007). "Sectoral Productivity in the United States: Recent Developments and the Role of IT,"German Economic Review, vol. 8 (May), pp. 188-210. Corrado, Carol, Paul Lengermann, and Larry Slifman (2007). "The Contribution of Multinational Corporations to U.S. Productivity Growth, 1977-2000," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-21. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. Doms, Mark E., and J. Bradford Jensen (1998). "Productivity, Skill, and Wage Effects of Multinational Corporations in the United States," in D. Woodward and D. Nigh, eds.,Foreign Ownership and the Consequences of Direct Investment in theUnited States: Beyond Us and Them. Westport, Conn.: Quorum Books, pp. 49-68. Energy Information Administration (2002). "Petroleum Chronology of Events 1970-2000." _________ (2008a). "Cushing, OK WTI Spot Price FOB," (accessed May 27, 2008). _________ (2008b). "Table 1.7: Energy Consumption per Real Dollar of Gross Domestic Product,"Monthly Energy Review(May). Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun S. Ho, and Kevin J. Stiroh (2007). "A Retrospective Look at the U.S. Productivity Growth Resurgence," Staff Report 277. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, February. Kurz, Christopher J. (2006). "Outstanding Outsourcers: A Firm- and Plant-Level Analysis of Production Sharing," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2006-04. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March. Oliner, Stephen D., Daniel E. Sichel, and Kevin J. Stiroh (2007). "Explaining a Productive Decade,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2007 (no. 1), pp. 81-152. Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). "The Quest for Prosperity Without Inflation,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (April), pp. 633-63. Footnotes 1.Inflation is calculated as the percent change from four quarters earlier in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), published by the U.S. Department of Commerce.Return to text 2.See Energy Information Administration (2002).Return to text 3.See Energy Information Administration (2008a).Return to text 4.Total PCE inflation (four-quarter change) went from 5 percent in 1973:Q2 to 11.4 percent in 1974:Q4, an increase of 6.4 percentage points. If we take 1972:Q4, in which inflation was 3.4 percent, as the starting point, the increase in inflation to the 1974 peak was 8 percentage points.Return to text 5.See, for example, Blanchard and Gali (2007) and the references therein.Return to text 6.In 1975, roughly 17,000 Btu of energy were required, on average, to produce a dollar's worth of output, with output being measured in chained (2000) dollars. In 2007 the corresponding figure was 8,800 Btu (see Table 1.7, "Energy Consumption per Real Dollar of Gross Domestic Product," in Energy Information Administration, 2008b).Return to text 7.EC 10 is Harvard's introductory course in principles of economics.Return to text 8.Output per hour worked reflects data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics for the private nonfarm business sector.Return to text 9.See Orphanides (2003).Return to text 10.One of the earlier papers that was used by many observers to suggest the possibility of a mid-1990s inflection point in productivity growth was Corrado and Slifman (1999). The initial version of thispaperwas posted on the Federal Reserve's web site on November 18, 1996.Return to text 11.Some of the important papers include Oliner, Sichel, and Stiroh (2007), Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2007), and Corrado and others (2007).Return to text 12.For example, see Doms and Jensen (1998), Corrado, Lengermann, and Slifman (2007), and Kurz (2006).Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the International Monetary Conference, Barcelona, Spain (via satellite) As you know, financial markets in the United States and in a number of other industrialized countries have been under considerable strain since late last summer. Financial market conditions have in turn affected economic prospects, most notably by affecting the cost and availability of new credit. Much discussion of the turmoil has focused on problems that have arisen with respect to specific financial markets and financial instruments. Understanding these institutional details is, of course, essential to the task of restoring more normal functioning to the financial system. Stepping back, however, one can see--at least in retrospect--that the turmoil has been some time in the making and reflects the combined influence of several powerful, longer-term developments. Today, I will briefly discuss some longer-term factors that underlie recent developments; trace how these factors, individually and in combination, have affected both the financial markets and the economy; and describe how the Federal Reserve has responded to the challenges we face. The Sources of the Financial Turmoil: A Longer-Term PerspectiveAlthough the severity of the financial stresses became apparent only in August, several longer-term developments served as prologue for the recent turmoil and helped bring us to the current situation. The first of these was the U.S. housing boom, which began in the mid-1990s and picked up steam around 2000. Between 1996 and 2005, house prices nationwide increased about 90 percent. During the years from 2000 to 2005 alone, house prices increased by roughly 60 percent--far outstripping the increases in incomes and general prices--and single-family home construction increased by about 40 percent. But, as you know, starting in 2006, the boom turned to bust. Over the past two years, building activity has fallen by more than half and now is well below where it was in 2000. House prices have shown significant declines in many areas of the country.A second critical development was an even broader credit boom, in which lenders and investors aggressively sought out new opportunities to take credit risk even as market risk premiums contracted. Aspects of the credit boom included rapid growth in the volumes of private equity deals and leveraged lending and the increased use of complex and often opaque investment vehicles, including structured credit products. The explosive growth of subprime mortgage lending in recent years was yet another facet of the broader credit boom. Expanding access to homeownership is an important social goal, and responsible subprime lending is beneficial for both borrowers and lenders. But, clearly, much of the subprime lending that took place during the latter stages of the credit boom in 2005 and 2006 was done very poorly.A third longer-term factor contributing to recent financial and economic developments is the unprecedented growth in developing and emerging market economies. From the U.S. perspective, this growth has been a double-edged sword. On the one hand, low-cost imports from emerging markets for many years increased U.S. living standards and made the Fed's job of managing inflation easier. Moreover, currently, the demand for U.S. exports arising from strong global growth has been an important offset to the factors restraining domestic demand, including housing and tight credit. On the other hand, the rapid growth in the emerging markets and the associated sharp rise in their demand for raw materials have been--together with a variety of constraints on supply--a major cause of the escalation in the relative prices of oil and other commodities, which has placed intense economic pressure on many U.S. households and businesses.In the financial sphere, the three longer-term developments I have identified are linked by the fact that a substantial increase in the net supply of saving in emerging market economies contributed to both the U.S. housing boom and the broader credit boom.1The sources of this increase in net saving included rapid growth in high-saving East Asian countries and, outside of China, reduced investment rates in that region; large buildups in foreign exchange reserves in a number of emerging markets; and the enormous increases in the revenues received by exporters of oil and other commodities. The pressure of these net savings flows led to lower long-term real interest rates around the world, stimulated asset prices (including house prices), and pushed current accounts toward deficit in the industrial countries--notably the United States--that received these flows.To be sure, the large inflows of savings and low global interest rates presented a valuable opportunity to the recipient countries, provided they invested the inflows wisely. Unfortunately, this did not always occur, as an increased appetite for risk-taking‑‑a "reaching for yield"--stimulated some financial innovations and lending practices that proved imprudent or otherwise questionable. Regulators identified some of these issues in real time; for example, federal banking regulators issued new guidance on nontraditional mortgage lending and on commercial real estate lending. The Federal Reserve, in cooperation with the other supervisors, encouraged improvements in market infrastructure and conducted a series of targeted reviews designed to improve risk‑management practice with respect to derivatives, exposures to hedge funds, leveraged lending, and other areas. And, in preparation for the new Basel II capital regulations, supervisors required more-demanding standards for the measurement and management of risk. Despite these efforts, however, the risk-management systems of many financial institutions proved inadequate in the face of a major housing downturn and substantial disruptions in market liquidity.The current economic and financial situation reflects, in significant part, the unwinding of two of these longer-term developments--the housing boom and the credit boom--and the continuation of the pressure of global demand on commodity prices.The housing boom came to an end because rising prices made housing increasingly unaffordable. The end of rapid house price increases in turn undermined a basic premise of many adjustable-rate subprime loans--that home price appreciation alone would always generate enough equity to permit the borrower to refinance and thereby avoid ever having to pay the fully-indexed interest rate. When that premise was shown to be false and defaults on subprime mortgages rose sharply, investors quickly backpedaled from mortgage-related securities. The reduced availability of mortgage credit caused housing to weaken further.The losses from subprime mortgages have been significant in themselves, but their greater impact was to trigger the end of the broader credit boom. Notably, as subprime losses forced the credit rating agencies to downgrade what had been highly rated mortgage-backed securities, investors also came to doubt the reliability of ratings that had been awarded to other highly complex securities. As a result, investors became much more cautious and reversed their aggressive risk-taking of the credit boom period. The resulting pullback affected a much broader range of securities, including leveraged and syndicated loans, asset-backed commercial paper, commercial mortgage-backed securities, and a variety of structured credit products. Large financial institutions, especially in the United States and Europe, were particularly affected by these events, having reported a total of roughly $300 billion in writedowns and credit losses. These institutions have also been forced to bring onto their balance sheets the assets of sponsored investment vehicles that can no longer be financed on a standalone basis. Fortunately, most financial institutions entered this episode with strong capital positions, and many have raised substantial amounts of new capital. Still, balance sheet pressures and the relatively high cost of new bank capital have reduced the willingness and ability of these institutions to make markets and extend new credit. Prospectively, financial conditions seem likely to be closely tied to both domestic and global economic developments, including the course of the prices of oil and other commodities.This brief overview makes clear that both global and domestic factors have played important roles in recent developments in the United States. The housing and credit booms were driven to some extent by global savings flows, but they also reflected domestic factors, such as weaknesses in risk measurement and management and lax standards in subprime lending. Higher commodity prices are for the most part a global phenomenon, but U.S. dependence on oil imports makes this country quite vulnerable on that score.The OutlookWith this broader perspective as background, I turn now to a brief discussion of the current situation and outlook. Broadly speaking, the functioning of financial markets has improved of late, but conditions remain strained and some key funding and securitization markets have shown only tentative signs of recovery. Some borrowers, such as highly-rated corporations, retain good access to credit, but credit conditions generally remain restrictive in areas related to residential or commercial real estate.Residential construction continues to contract, and the overhang of unsold new homes remains large, although it has declined some in absolute terms. Consumer spending has thus far held up a bit better than expected, but households continue to face significant headwinds, including falling house prices, a softer job market, tighter credit, and higher energy prices, and consumer sentiment has declined sharply since the fall. Businesses are also facing challenges, including rapidly escalating costs of raw materials and weaker domestic demand. However, the strength of foreign demand for U.S. goods and services has offset, to some extent, the slowing of domestic sales.Overall economic growth was quite slow but apparently positive in both the fourth quarter of 2007 and the first quarter of this year. Activity during the current quarter is also likely to be relatively weak. We may see somewhat better economic conditions during the second half of 2008, reflecting the effects of monetary and fiscal stimulus, reduced drag from residential construction, further progress in the repair of financial and credit markets, and still solid demand from abroad. This baseline forecast is consistent with our recently released projections, which also see growth picking up further in 2009. However, until the housing market, and particularly house prices, shows clearer signs of stabilization, growth risks will remain to the downside. Recent increases in oil prices pose additional downside risks to growth.Inflation has remained high, largely reflecting continued sharp increases in the prices of globally traded commodities. Thus far, the pass-through of high raw materials costs to domestic labor costs and the prices of most other products has been limited, in part because of softening domestic demand. However, the continuation of this pattern is not guaranteed and will bear close attention. Futures markets continue to predict--albeit with a great range of uncertainty--that commodity prices will level out, a forecast consistent with our expectation of some overall slowing in the global economy and thus in the demand for raw materials. A rough stabilization of commodity prices, even at high levels, would result in a relatively rapid moderation of inflation, consistent with the projections of Federal Reserve governors and Reserve Bank presidents for 2009 and 2010. Unfortunately, the prices of a number of commodities, most notably oil, have continued upward recently, even as expectations of future policy rates and the foreign exchange value of the dollar have remained generally stable in the past few months. The possibility that commodity prices will continue to rise is an important risk to the inflation forecast. Another significant upside risk to inflation is that high headline inflation, if sustained, might lead the public to expect higher long-term inflation rates, an expectation that could ultimately become self-confirming.The Federal Reserve's Policy ResponseThe Federal Reserve's mandate is to foster maximum sustainable employment and price stability. To achieve these goals, we must also support the return of financial markets to more normal functioning.The Federal Reserve is pursuing its objectives through several means. First, we have eased monetary policy substantially and proactively to address the sharp deterioration in financial conditions and to forestall some of the potential adverse effects on the broader economy. Our decisive policy actions were premised on the view that a more gradual reduction in short-term rates could well have failed to contain the financial and economic problems confronting us. For now, policy seems well positioned to promote moderate growth and price stability over time. We will, of course, be watching the evolving situation closely and are prepared to act as needed to meet our dual mandate.In collaboration with our colleagues at the Treasury, we continue to carefully monitor developments in foreign exchange markets. The challenges that our economy has faced over the past year or so have generated some downward pressures on the foreign exchange value of the dollar, which have contributed to the unwelcome rise in import prices and consumer price inflation. We are attentive to the implications of changes in the value of the dollar for inflation and inflation expectations and will continue to formulate policy to guard against risks to both parts of our dual mandate, including the risk of an erosion in longer-term inflation expectations. Over time, the Federal Reserve's commitment to both price stability and maximum sustainable employment and the underlying strengths of the U.S. economy--including flexible markets and robust innovation and productivity--will be key factors ensuring that the dollar remains a strong and stable currency.Second, to improve market liquidity and functioning, we have taken a range of measures to ensure that financial institutions have adequate access to central bank liquidity.2The resulting reductions in funding pressures, together with the increased confidence created by the assurance that backstop liquidity is available to eligible institutions, should help to promote an orderly resolution of current market dislocations. In recognition of the global nature of financial markets, we have also cooperated with other major central banks to ensure that central bank liquidity is deployed where needed.Finally, we are taking action in our role as regulators. We have worked with lenders and servicers to encourage appropriate modifications of distressed mortgage loans, and we have proposed new rules to improve disclosure and to ban unfair or deceptive acts and practices in mortgage lending. We are also collaborating with other regulators, both domestically and abroad, to put in place changes that will help make the financial system less vulnerable in the future. Among the changes we expect to see are strengthening of capital and liquidity rules, greater disclosure requirements, an increased emphasis on the measurement and management of firmwide risks, and further steps to increase the transparency and resilience of the financial infrastructure. Our goal is to emerge from this difficult period with a financial system that will be more stable without being less innovative, with a more effective balance between market discipline and regulation.ReferencesBernanke, Ben S. (2005). "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit," speech delivered at the Homer Jones Lecture, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Mo., April 14.Bernanke, Ben S. (2008). "Liquidity Provision by the Federal Reserve," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Financial Markets Conference, Sea Island, Ga., May 13.Footnotes1.Bernanke (2005).Return to text2.Bernanke (2008).Return to text The first of these was the U.S. housing boom, which began in the mid-1990s and picked up steam around 2000. Between 1996 and 2005, house prices nationwide increased about 90 percent. During the years from 2000 to 2005 alone, house prices increased by roughly 60 percent--far outstripping the increases in incomes and general prices--and single-family home construction increased by about 40 percent. But, as you know, starting in 2006, the boom turned to bust. Over the past two years, building activity has fallen by more than half and now is well below where it was in 2000. House prices have shown significant declines in many areas of the country. A second critical development was an even broader credit boom, in which lenders and investors aggressively sought out new opportunities to take credit risk even as market risk premiums contracted. Aspects of the credit boom included rapid growth in the volumes of private equity deals and leveraged lending and the increased use of complex and often opaque investment vehicles, including structured credit products. The explosive growth of subprime mortgage lending in recent years was yet another facet of the broader credit boom. Expanding access to homeownership is an important social goal, and responsible subprime lending is beneficial for both borrowers and lenders. But, clearly, much of the subprime lending that took place during the latter stages of the credit boom in 2005 and 2006 was done very poorly. A third longer-term factor contributing to recent financial and economic developments is the unprecedented growth in developing and emerging market economies. From the U.S. perspective, this growth has been a double-edged sword. On the one hand, low-cost imports from emerging markets for many years increased U.S. living standards and made the Fed's job of managing inflation easier. Moreover, currently, the demand for U.S. exports arising from strong global growth has been an important offset to the factors restraining domestic demand, including housing and tight credit. On the other hand, the rapid growth in the emerging markets and the associated sharp rise in their demand for raw materials have been--together with a variety of constraints on supply--a major cause of the escalation in the relative prices of oil and other commodities, which has placed intense economic pressure on many U.S. households and businesses. In the financial sphere, the three longer-term developments I have identified are linked by the fact that a substantial increase in the net supply of saving in emerging market economies contributed to both the U.S. housing boom and the broader credit boom.1The sources of this increase in net saving included rapid growth in high-saving East Asian countries and, outside of China, reduced investment rates in that region; large buildups in foreign exchange reserves in a number of emerging markets; and the enormous increases in the revenues received by exporters of oil and other commodities. The pressure of these net savings flows led to lower long-term real interest rates around the world, stimulated asset prices (including house prices), and pushed current accounts toward deficit in the industrial countries--notably the United States--that received these flows. To be sure, the large inflows of savings and low global interest rates presented a valuable opportunity to the recipient countries, provided they invested the inflows wisely. Unfortunately, this did not always occur, as an increased appetite for risk-taking‑‑a "reaching for yield"--stimulated some financial innovations and lending practices that proved imprudent or otherwise questionable. Regulators identified some of these issues in real time; for example, federal banking regulators issued new guidance on nontraditional mortgage lending and on commercial real estate lending. The Federal Reserve, in cooperation with the other supervisors, encouraged improvements in market infrastructure and conducted a series of targeted reviews designed to improve risk‑management practice with respect to derivatives, exposures to hedge funds, leveraged lending, and other areas. And, in preparation for the new Basel II capital regulations, supervisors required more-demanding standards for the measurement and management of risk. Despite these efforts, however, the risk-management systems of many financial institutions proved inadequate in the face of a major housing downturn and substantial disruptions in market liquidity. The current economic and financial situation reflects, in significant part, the unwinding of two of these longer-term developments--the housing boom and the credit boom--and the continuation of the pressure of global demand on commodity prices. The housing boom came to an end because rising prices made housing increasingly unaffordable. The end of rapid house price increases in turn undermined a basic premise of many adjustable-rate subprime loans--that home price appreciation alone would always generate enough equity to permit the borrower to refinance and thereby avoid ever having to pay the fully-indexed interest rate. When that premise was shown to be false and defaults on subprime mortgages rose sharply, investors quickly backpedaled from mortgage-related securities. The reduced availability of mortgage credit caused housing to weaken further. The losses from subprime mortgages have been significant in themselves, but their greater impact was to trigger the end of the broader credit boom. Notably, as subprime losses forced the credit rating agencies to downgrade what had been highly rated mortgage-backed securities, investors also came to doubt the reliability of ratings that had been awarded to other highly complex securities. As a result, investors became much more cautious and reversed their aggressive risk-taking of the credit boom period. The resulting pullback affected a much broader range of securities, including leveraged and syndicated loans, asset-backed commercial paper, commercial mortgage-backed securities, and a variety of structured credit products. Large financial institutions, especially in the United States and Europe, were particularly affected by these events, having reported a total of roughly $300 billion in writedowns and credit losses. These institutions have also been forced to bring onto their balance sheets the assets of sponsored investment vehicles that can no longer be financed on a standalone basis. Fortunately, most financial institutions entered this episode with strong capital positions, and many have raised substantial amounts of new capital. Still, balance sheet pressures and the relatively high cost of new bank capital have reduced the willingness and ability of these institutions to make markets and extend new credit. Prospectively, financial conditions seem likely to be closely tied to both domestic and global economic developments, including the course of the prices of oil and other commodities. This brief overview makes clear that both global and domestic factors have played important roles in recent developments in the United States. The housing and credit booms were driven to some extent by global savings flows, but they also reflected domestic factors, such as weaknesses in risk measurement and management and lax standards in subprime lending. Higher commodity prices are for the most part a global phenomenon, but U.S. dependence on oil imports makes this country quite vulnerable on that score. The OutlookWith this broader perspective as background, I turn now to a brief discussion of the current situation and outlook. Broadly speaking, the functioning of financial markets has improved of late, but conditions remain strained and some key funding and securitization markets have shown only tentative signs of recovery. Some borrowers, such as highly-rated corporations, retain good access to credit, but credit conditions generally remain restrictive in areas related to residential or commercial real estate. Residential construction continues to contract, and the overhang of unsold new homes remains large, although it has declined some in absolute terms. Consumer spending has thus far held up a bit better than expected, but households continue to face significant headwinds, including falling house prices, a softer job market, tighter credit, and higher energy prices, and consumer sentiment has declined sharply since the fall. Businesses are also facing challenges, including rapidly escalating costs of raw materials and weaker domestic demand. However, the strength of foreign demand for U.S. goods and services has offset, to some extent, the slowing of domestic sales. Overall economic growth was quite slow but apparently positive in both the fourth quarter of 2007 and the first quarter of this year. Activity during the current quarter is also likely to be relatively weak. We may see somewhat better economic conditions during the second half of 2008, reflecting the effects of monetary and fiscal stimulus, reduced drag from residential construction, further progress in the repair of financial and credit markets, and still solid demand from abroad. This baseline forecast is consistent with our recently released projections, which also see growth picking up further in 2009. However, until the housing market, and particularly house prices, shows clearer signs of stabilization, growth risks will remain to the downside. Recent increases in oil prices pose additional downside risks to growth. Inflation has remained high, largely reflecting continued sharp increases in the prices of globally traded commodities. Thus far, the pass-through of high raw materials costs to domestic labor costs and the prices of most other products has been limited, in part because of softening domestic demand. However, the continuation of this pattern is not guaranteed and will bear close attention. Futures markets continue to predict--albeit with a great range of uncertainty--that commodity prices will level out, a forecast consistent with our expectation of some overall slowing in the global economy and thus in the demand for raw materials. A rough stabilization of commodity prices, even at high levels, would result in a relatively rapid moderation of inflation, consistent with the projections of Federal Reserve governors and Reserve Bank presidents for 2009 and 2010. Unfortunately, the prices of a number of commodities, most notably oil, have continued upward recently, even as expectations of future policy rates and the foreign exchange value of the dollar have remained generally stable in the past few months. The possibility that commodity prices will continue to rise is an important risk to the inflation forecast. Another significant upside risk to inflation is that high headline inflation, if sustained, might lead the public to expect higher long-term inflation rates, an expectation that could ultimately become self-confirming. The Federal Reserve's Policy ResponseThe Federal Reserve's mandate is to foster maximum sustainable employment and price stability. To achieve these goals, we must also support the return of financial markets to more normal functioning. The Federal Reserve is pursuing its objectives through several means. First, we have eased monetary policy substantially and proactively to address the sharp deterioration in financial conditions and to forestall some of the potential adverse effects on the broader economy. Our decisive policy actions were premised on the view that a more gradual reduction in short-term rates could well have failed to contain the financial and economic problems confronting us. For now, policy seems well positioned to promote moderate growth and price stability over time. We will, of course, be watching the evolving situation closely and are prepared to act as needed to meet our dual mandate. In collaboration with our colleagues at the Treasury, we continue to carefully monitor developments in foreign exchange markets. The challenges that our economy has faced over the past year or so have generated some downward pressures on the foreign exchange value of the dollar, which have contributed to the unwelcome rise in import prices and consumer price inflation. We are attentive to the implications of changes in the value of the dollar for inflation and inflation expectations and will continue to formulate policy to guard against risks to both parts of our dual mandate, including the risk of an erosion in longer-term inflation expectations. Over time, the Federal Reserve's commitment to both price stability and maximum sustainable employment and the underlying strengths of the U.S. economy--including flexible markets and robust innovation and productivity--will be key factors ensuring that the dollar remains a strong and stable currency. Second, to improve market liquidity and functioning, we have taken a range of measures to ensure that financial institutions have adequate access to central bank liquidity.2The resulting reductions in funding pressures, together with the increased confidence created by the assurance that backstop liquidity is available to eligible institutions, should help to promote an orderly resolution of current market dislocations. In recognition of the global nature of financial markets, we have also cooperated with other major central banks to ensure that central bank liquidity is deployed where needed. Finally, we are taking action in our role as regulators. We have worked with lenders and servicers to encourage appropriate modifications of distressed mortgage loans, and we have proposed new rules to improve disclosure and to ban unfair or deceptive acts and practices in mortgage lending. We are also collaborating with other regulators, both domestically and abroad, to put in place changes that will help make the financial system less vulnerable in the future. Among the changes we expect to see are strengthening of capital and liquidity rules, greater disclosure requirements, an increased emphasis on the measurement and management of firmwide risks, and further steps to increase the transparency and resilience of the financial infrastructure. Our goal is to emerge from this difficult period with a financial system that will be more stable without being less innovative, with a more effective balance between market discipline and regulation. ReferencesBernanke, Ben S. (2005). "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit," speech delivered at the Homer Jones Lecture, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Mo., April 14. Bernanke, Ben S. (2008). "Liquidity Provision by the Federal Reserve," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Financial Markets Conference, Sea Island, Ga., May 13. Footnotes 1.Bernanke (2005).Return to text 2.Bernanke (2008).Return to text
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn Before the Subcommittee on Securities, Insurance, and Investment, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Chairman Reed, Ranking Member Allard and members of the Subcommittee, it is my pleasure to appear today to discuss several issues related to the oversight of financial institutions. First, I will discuss the circumstances leading to the establishment of our temporary facility for lending to primary securities dealers and our arrangements for monitoring their financial condition. Then, I will describe Federal Reserve activities related to the banking institutions we supervise, including concrete steps to address identified issues and to help these institutions improve risk management practices. Finally, I will briefly summarize planned enhancements to our consolidated supervision of bank and financial holding companies. Federal Reserve Monitoring Activities Related to the Primary Dealer Credit FacilityThree months ago, the Board approved the establishment of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF). This action was taken pursuant to Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, which empowers the Board of Governors to authorize a Federal Reserve Bank to lend to a corporation, including a securities firm, in "unusual and exigent" circumstances when the corporation cannot "secure adequate credit accommodations from other banking institutions." In doing so, the Board of Governors made the necessary statutory finding that market circumstances were indeed unusual and exigent. We judged that without increased access to Federal Reserve liquidity by major securities firms, overall financial market conditions would have deteriorated further and would have had a substantially adverse effect on the economy. We fully recognized that the use of this legal authority was an extraordinary step, but considered it necessary given the circumstances. To quickly design and implement a facility to provide this liquidity, we made use of existing business relationships with a group of 20 securities firms, known as primary dealers. The Open Market Desk of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York trades U.S. government securities with primary dealers to implement monetary policy on behalf of the Federal Reserve System. The PDCF makes available overnight funding to sound primary dealers in the form of loans secured by collateral eligible to be pledged in open market operations, plus investment-grade corporate, municipal, and mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities. The PDCF was authorized for a minimum period of six months. Most of the primary dealers are owned by either U.S. or foreign banking organizations that have been approved as U.S. financial holding companies. The U.S. financial holding companies owning primary dealers are subject to consolidated supervision by the Federal Reserve, but for the primary dealers within financial holding companies we rely extensively on the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) as functional regulator. The SEC, rather than the Federal Reserve, serves as consolidated supervisor for the major U.S. investment banks with primary dealers. In connection with the establishment of the PDCF, we created a program to monitor the financial and funding positions of primary dealers, focusing on those primary dealers not owned by financial holding companies. From the beginning, we have coordinated closely with the SEC, and we are currently working on an agreement with that agency to enhance information sharing both for primary dealers that are part of financial holding companies and for those that are not. The objectives of our PDCF monitoring program are: (1) to establish the basis for an informed judgment by the Federal Reserve of the liquidity and capital positions of the primary dealers accessing the PDCF; and (2) to minimize the risk that the availability of financing under the PDCF undermines the incentives for the consolidated entity to manage capital and liquidity to levels appropriate for a sustained period of market disruption. The Federal Reserve's monitoring program for primary dealers includes a limited on-site presence at the four largest investment banks and has a narrower focus than our broader supervision and examination of state member banks, bank holding companies, and the U.S. operations of foreign banking organizations. Specifically, the Federal Reserve isnotsupervising investment firms comprehensively to assess risk management. Rather, our purpose is specifically to assess the adequacy of liquidity and capital. To support our monitoring efforts, which are closely coordinated with the SEC, we receive internal information from the firms on a daily basis that enables us to identify changes in the level and composition of the firms' holdings of cash and unencumbered, highly liquid assets. We also receive qualitative information regarding the posture of counterparties and clients toward the firms, including the extent, if any, to which the firms are encountering difficulty in rolling over secured and unsecured funding. In addition, along with the SEC, we are assessing the firms' current and planned capital positions in light of their near-term earnings prospects. In both of these areas--liquidity and capital--we are evaluating the firms' efforts and, with the SEC, providing feedback to their senior management teams. Broadly speaking, we believe that primary dealers are strengthening liquidity and capital positions to better protect themselves against extreme events. We also believe their management has learned some valuable lessons from the events of the recent financial turmoil that should translate into better risk management. We continue to monitor the effect of the PDCF and are studying a range of options going forward. Federal Reserve Supervisory ActivitiesI would now like to discuss the Federal Reserve's recent activities relating to banking institutions we supervise. As I noted intestimonybefore the full Committee on June 5, recent events have highlighted a number of risk management lessons for banking organizations, many of which have been documented in recent public reports.1In that testimony, I outlined the Federal Reserve's broad supervisory responses to recent events, which include requiring banking institutions to improve risk management, augmenting existing supervisory guidance, and where necessary, enhancing our own supervisory processes. Naturally, the risk management lessons from recent events vary by institution, since the types of deficiencies differed and some institutions fared better than others. Thus, in our supervisory efforts, we are taking these broad lessons and applying them to each institution as needed. But we can point to some general areas where we are focusing supervisory attention and encouraging better risk management at banking institutions. For one, supervisors are reinforcing and strengthening their assessments and testing of fundamental risk management processes, requiring vigorous corrective action when weaknesses are identified. We are ensuring that institutions take a more comprehensive and forward-looking approach to risk management across the entire firm, and are more intensely verifying assertions made by bank management about the robustness of their risk management capabilities. Supervisors are also ensuring that banks understand the full spectrum and the scale of the risks inherent in increasingly complex banking activities and the potential for their risks to crystallize in times of stress. In particular, banks must focus on the inter-relationships among risk types, not just with respect to those areas that precipitated recent events, but more broadly. In light of recent events, we have redoubled our efforts to ensure that senior management properly defines overall risk preferences and creates incentives for employees to abide by those preferences, such as effective firm-wide limits and controls. We are reminding banks of the importance of information-sharing throughout the entire organization and of the dangers of information silos. In addition, we are strongly encouraging institutions to improve and/or build out their risk functions, so that independent risk managers are empowered to dig deep for latent risks, including concentrations that often arise only in times of stress. Having given some general thoughts on current supervisory issues and supervisory approaches to improving risk management, I would now like to turn to a few specific areas in which we are addressing the challenges facing institutions and helping bring about improvements in their risk management. Residential lendingRisks associated with residential mortgage and home equity lending remain a top supervisory priority due to the continued negative trends in home prices, elevated levels of delinquencies and foreclosures, and slack demand for residential mortgage securities in the secondary markets. Banks continue to experience losses on residential first mortgage loans, especially, but not exclusively, on nonprime lending. Losses on home equity loans are also increasing significantly, even for lenders not heavily involved in subprime lending, and loss severities as a percentage of outstanding exposure on this product are greater than for first lien loans. And mortgage securities markets whose instruments are not supported by government-sponsored entities continue to be adversely affected by problems in the housing market, complicating banks' risk management in this sector. Supervisors are acting on several fronts to address problems related to residential first and second mortgages. First, we are making sure institutions comply with our existing guidance on nontraditional mortgages and on home equity loans, issued in 2006 and 2005, respectively, as well as guidance on subprime lending issued last year. And we are evaluating institutions based on the risk management practices discussed in those guidance documents. We expect institutions to conduct rigorous stress tests of potential future losses related to residential mortgage loans, home equity lines, and mortgage-backed securities. We continue to encourage lenders and mortgage servicers to work constructively with borrowers at risk of default and to consider prudent workout arrangements to avoid unnecessary foreclosures. As you know, the Federal Reserve believes that prudent workout arrangements that are consistent with safe and sound lending practices are generally in the long-term best interest of both the financial institution and the borrower. Furthermore, we are working to finalize the proposed amendments to the rules under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act that we proposed in December. The proposed amendments, which would apply to all creditors, would better protect consumers from a range of unfair or deceptive mortgage lending and advertising practices that have been the source of considerable concern and criticism. Our proposal includes key protections for higher-priced mortgage loans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling and addresses concerns about a lender's assessment of a borrower's ability to make the scheduled payments, including verification of the consumer's income and assets. The proposal also addresses concerns about prepayment penalties and the adverse impact on consumers of lenders failing to escrow for taxes and insurance. Protecting consumers also has benefits for lenders because it should reduce delinquencies and defaults that can occur when consumers do not understand or cannot afford certain types of loans. We are working toward issuing final regulations in July. Commercial real estate lendingCommercial real estate (CRE) lending is another area that requires close supervisory attention. In 2006, well before CRE markets began to soften, property values began to level off or decline in certain markets, and fundamentals began to turn somewhat negative, the Federal Reserve and other banking agencies issued guidance on CRE concentrations. We were concerned that the increasing concentrations of CRE loans in the portfolios of many banks, especially small and medium-sized lenders, made them more vulnerable to a softening in this market if the risks were not well managed. Since then, delinquencies on construction loans have begun to rise, particularly for residential construction loans, and they are expected to rise further. Those institutions with high CRE concentrations in geographic areas suffering real estate pressures will likely bear losses. Further, the significant slowdown in the origination of commercial mortgage-backed securities will reduce banks' options to manage CRE portfolio risks through the secondary market. As I noted in my Marchtestimonyon the condition of the U.S. banking industry, we have been stepping up our reviews of state member banks and bank holding companies exhibiting concentrations in CRE, especially in those areas of the country exhibiting signs of weakness. We continue to monitor banks' adherence to the supervisory guidance I just noted. These efforts include monitoring carefully the potential impact of lower valuations on CRE exposures. Through those reviews, we are identifying weaknesses in banks' risk management practices, including underwriting practices, appraisal processes, stress testing, and market analysis. Based on these results, we are updating our supervisory plans and examination schedules to focus our resources most effectively on those institutions presenting the greatest risk and needing the most improvement. Finally, we just concluded a Federal Reserve examiner training effort on CRE topics, including appraisal practices, loan loss allowances, stress testing, and board and management oversight. The training focused on the importance of ensuring prudent risk management practices, without unduly curtailing credit availability. Counterparty credit riskConcerns in financial markets about the creditworthiness of some financial intermediaries have eased somewhat since the first half of March, but those concerns remain relatively high. More fundamentally, the proper management of counterparty credit risk--which is the risk of loss from a counterparty's failure to perform its financial obligations--is a prerequisite for protecting the entire system from contagion when any one institution fails. Consistent with the recommendations of recent reports, we are looking at how firms are addressing weaknesses in counterparty credit risk management practices highlighted by recent events, including the measurement and aggregation of exposures stemming from a wide range of transactions with both unregulated and regulated entities. For instance, we are emphasizing that firms should use a variety of techniques to measure potential exposure on over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives, repurchase agreements, and other contracts, and that they should aggregate all exposures to each counterparty. In this context, we have been closely monitoring counterparty exposures arising from transactions with monoline financial guarantors and have been discussing with banks the measurement and management of these positions. In addition, we are working to strengthen the market infrastructure for financial transactions to make it more robust and more resilient. In particular, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York continues to work with domestic and international prudential supervisors of OTC derivatives dealers to strengthen the infrastructure for those large and rapidly growing markets. The supervisors are emphasizing to the major dealers and to other active market participants the importance of setting standards for the accuracy and timeliness of trade data submission and for the timeliness of resolutions of errors in trade matching for OTC derivatives contracts. Furthermore, consistent with the recommendations made in recent reports on turbulence in financial markets, supervisors are encouraging the development by the industry of a longer-term plan for an integrated operational infrastructure supporting OTC derivatives that captures all significant processing events over the entire lifecycle of trades, delivers operational reliability, and maximizes the efficiencies obtainable from automation and electronic processing platforms. In addition to supporting more robust exposure measurement and capture, these enhancements should strengthen participants' ability to manage counterparty risk through loss mitigation techniques such as the use of netting and collateral agreements. We are encouraged by recent industry efforts to address counterparty credit risk, such as plans to extend central counterparty clearinghouse services to credit derivatives and other initiatives. Credit cardsCredit card charge-offs have continued to rise over the past several quarters, although charge-offs remain well below their early 2002 peak. Not surprisingly, some banks report that delinquency rates for unsecured consumer debt are generally higher in areas that have experienced significant home price depreciation and increased unemployment. In response to these trends, many issuers are tightening credit standards and reducing exposures in these higher risk markets. Rising delinquencies and increased card usage that has been reported in recent months are likely to push charge-off levels higher in future quarters. Therefore, we will continue to monitor credit card markets and other consumer lending sectors for potential weaknesses. The Federal Reserve has also taken steps toward improving consumer protection for credit card users. Our first step was the Board's 2007 proposal to substantially revise and improve credit card disclosures under the Truth in Lending Act. In preparing this proposal, we conducted extensive consumer testing to determine the type and format of information that consumers find most useful in shopping for and choosing a credit card. This extensive consumer testing--and the thousands of public comments on our proposal--suggested that disclosures may not provide sufficient consumer protection with regard to certain practices. Therefore, we recently proposed rules under the Federal Trade Commission Act to protect consumers from financial harm caused by those practices. If implemented, the proposed rules would require financial institutions to make changes to their business models and to alter some practices. The Federal Reserve developed this proposal jointly with the Office of Thrift Supervision and the National Credit Union Administration. We are continuing to use consumer testing as we work toward issuing final rules for credit cards by year-end. Commercial lendingCommercial lending activity, aside from a few sectors such as leveraged lending, has not been markedly affected by the recent volatility in the financial markets, but may encounter more difficulty should slow economic growth persist. Lenders and investors are demanding stricter underwriting standards and higher returns for commercial loans. With regard to the condition of existing commercial loan portfolios, delinquencies have been rising recently as has the volume of criticized assets. This has been most evident in the leveraged loan market, where lending standards appeared to weaken noticeably in recent years, and which tends to be more susceptible to soft economic conditions.Supervisors are monitoring banks' commercial lending activities, particularly leveraged loan portfolios, to detect weaknesses in asset quality that may result from slowing economic conditions and to ensure appropriate risk management practices. In part, the agencies rely on their Shared National Credit (SNC) program to assess the credit quality of banks' commercial loan portfolios. The 2008 review is now underway and will provide additional insight into the condition of large syndicated credits that are shared by three or more banks, including an evaluation of underwriting practices and trends in the leveraged loan market and the broader syndicated loan market.Adequacy of loan loss allowanceAs the banking system has faced a more difficult environment in recent quarters, our examiners have identified significant weaknesses at some institutions in identifying and reserving against problem loans, which in some cases have led to deficiencies in allowance levels at some supervised institutions. In response, our examiners continue to remind bankers that allowance levels should be reflective of loan portfolio quality, based on sound processes, and consistent with current supervisory guidance. We recently provided additional clarity to our examiners regarding existing interagency guidance on loan loss allowances that should be factored into current examinations and inspections of state member banks, bank holding companies, and their nonbank subsidiaries. We believe this further clarity to our examination staff will help them in their regular discussions with bankers to ensure that reserving practices are robust and loan loss allowances are indeed adequate to the circumstances facing each institution.Liquidity risk managementRecent reports cite the need for enhancement to liquidity risk management as one of the key lessons from recent events. Financial institutions must understand their liquidity needs at both the legal entity and enterprise-wide level and be prepared for the possibility that market liquidity may erode quickly, unexpectedly, and for a protracted time. As is now widely recognized, many contingency funding plans did not adequately prepare for the possibility that certain off-balance-sheet exposures might have to be brought onto the firm's balance sheet, calling on available liquidity. Nor did they adequately account for the possibility of widespread and protracted declines in asset market liquidity. While liquidity pressures in banking and financial markets have eased of late, we do recognize that institutions must prepare themselves for the possibility that liquidity problems could return, either market-wide or at an individual institution.Supervisors are working with institutions to improve liquidity risk management practices. For instance, we are reviewing banks' contingent funding needs and sources of funding. We are ensuring that bankers develop appropriate short-term and long-term liquidity risk management strategies. Consistent with the findings of recent reports, we are emphasizing the importance of appropriate stress testing of liquidity needs and maintenance of robust liquidity buffers. In addition, we worked with our colleagues on the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to enhance existing guidance on the management of liquidity risks, which was released two days ago. That work was drawn from recent and ongoing efforts on liquidity risk by the public and private sectors and is intended to strengthen banks' liquidity risk management and improve global supervisory practices. Of course, the Federal Reserve has undertaken a number of programs to bolster market liquidity.Capital needsClearly, capital is a critical defense against unexpected losses. Even with the recent turmoil, the U.S. banking system remains well capitalized. However, as I noted in my June 5testimony, we are encouraging institutions to raise capital as needed, in part so that they will be well positioned to take advantage of future opportunities and to support a strengthening of financial conditions and a rebound in economic growth. And the recent capital injections into banking organizations and other financial institutions are a good sign that investors see value in those institutions and in the banking industry as a whole.To assess the sufficiency of firms' capacity to absorb unexpected losses from a wide range of sources, Federal Reserve supervisors have heightened their review of capital analysis and forecasting at banking organizations. Examiners are reviewing the reasonableness of assumptions banking organizations use to assess capital needs and are emphasizing forward-looking analysis. For example, we are evaluating banks' use of stress scenarios to see if they adequately incorporate a range of possible events and properly identify potential capital needs and capacity across the firms. The scenarios address a number of possible factors including unexpected balance sheet expansion, earnings deterioration across key business lines, and stress-level losses generated by a variety of positions and multiple sources.In addition, last year the Federal Reserve conducted a review across a number of large banking organizations to assess these firms' use of so-called "economic capital" practices, which are a means for firms to calculate, for internal purposes, their capital needs given their risk profile. Consistent with other findings, we found that some banks relied too extensively on the output of internal models, not viewing model output with appropriate skepticism. Models are dependent on the data used to construct them. When data histories are short or are drawn mostly from periods of benign economic conditions, model results may not be fully applicable to an institution's risk profile. We concluded that banks would generally benefit from better evaluation of inputs used in their internal capital models, stronger validation of their models, and broader use of stress testing and scenario analysis to supplement the inherent limitations of their models. We are incorporating the results of this horizontal review in our current assessments of banks' overall capital adequacy, as well as using it to evaluate banks' readiness to meet the requirement in Pillar 2 of Basel II that banks develop their own internal process to assess overall capital adequacy, beyond regulatory capital measures.Consolidated Supervision ProgramThe supervisory activities just described are intended to address many of the risk management lapses seen over the past year, some of which pertain to shortcomings in firm-wide risk identification and measurement. Consistent with our regular efforts to improve supervisory practices, we realize that our program of consolidated supervision could be enhanced and made more systematic. Supervising a consolidated banking organization requires review of all risks on an enterprise-wide basis, not just review of the risks contained in each subsidiary legal entity. To this end, the Federal Reserve is nearing completion of enhancements to its supervisory guidance to clarify our role as consolidated supervisor of bank and financial holding companies.The updated consolidated supervision guidance, which will be publicly available, is primarily intended to provide greater clarity to our own examination staff. For example, it provides for more consistent Federal Reserve supervisory practices and assessments across institutions with similar activities and risks, detailing expectations for understanding and assessing primary governance functions and risk controls, material business lines, nonbank operations, funding and liquidity management, consumer compliance, and other key activities and risks. In this sense the forthcoming guidance is very consistent with the Federal Reserve supervisory actions I have just described. The enhanced guidance will help us better identify and address firm-wide issues at supervised banking organizations, while also promoting better risk management.I want to make clear that consolidated supervision of bank and financial holding companies in the United States generally works well, with strong, cooperative relationships between the Federal Reserve and other relevant bank supervisors and functional regulators. Indeed, much of the supervisory work I just described is being done in cooperation with primary supervisors and functional regulators. Information sharing among relevant supervisors and regulators is essential to ensure that a banking organization's global activities are effectively supervised on a consolidated basis, and we have worked over the years to develop and enhance interagency coordination and information sharing. But as institutions grow larger and more complex, we need to ensure that our system of consolidated supervision keeps pace.Finally, it is worth noting that the Federal Reserve's umbrella supervision role closely complements our other central bank responsibilities, including the objectives of fostering financial stability and deterring or managing financial crises. The information, expertise, and powers derived from our supervisory authority enhances the Federal Reserve's ability to help prevent financial crises, and to manage such crises should they occur, working with the Treasury Department and other U.S. and foreign authorities. In this manner, enhancements to our consolidated supervision program, which include close coordination with primary supervisors and functional regulators, should provide broad benefits for the financial system and the economy.Footnotes1.President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)," March 13;Financial Stability Forum (2008), "Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience (399 KB PDF)," April 7;Senior Supervisors Group (2008). "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence (373 KB PDF)" March 6.Return to text Commercial lendingCommercial lending activity, aside from a few sectors such as leveraged lending, has not been markedly affected by the recent volatility in the financial markets, but may encounter more difficulty should slow economic growth persist. Lenders and investors are demanding stricter underwriting standards and higher returns for commercial loans. With regard to the condition of existing commercial loan portfolios, delinquencies have been rising recently as has the volume of criticized assets. This has been most evident in the leveraged loan market, where lending standards appeared to weaken noticeably in recent years, and which tends to be more susceptible to soft economic conditions. Supervisors are monitoring banks' commercial lending activities, particularly leveraged loan portfolios, to detect weaknesses in asset quality that may result from slowing economic conditions and to ensure appropriate risk management practices. In part, the agencies rely on their Shared National Credit (SNC) program to assess the credit quality of banks' commercial loan portfolios. The 2008 review is now underway and will provide additional insight into the condition of large syndicated credits that are shared by three or more banks, including an evaluation of underwriting practices and trends in the leveraged loan market and the broader syndicated loan market. Adequacy of loan loss allowanceAs the banking system has faced a more difficult environment in recent quarters, our examiners have identified significant weaknesses at some institutions in identifying and reserving against problem loans, which in some cases have led to deficiencies in allowance levels at some supervised institutions. In response, our examiners continue to remind bankers that allowance levels should be reflective of loan portfolio quality, based on sound processes, and consistent with current supervisory guidance. We recently provided additional clarity to our examiners regarding existing interagency guidance on loan loss allowances that should be factored into current examinations and inspections of state member banks, bank holding companies, and their nonbank subsidiaries. We believe this further clarity to our examination staff will help them in their regular discussions with bankers to ensure that reserving practices are robust and loan loss allowances are indeed adequate to the circumstances facing each institution. Liquidity risk managementRecent reports cite the need for enhancement to liquidity risk management as one of the key lessons from recent events. Financial institutions must understand their liquidity needs at both the legal entity and enterprise-wide level and be prepared for the possibility that market liquidity may erode quickly, unexpectedly, and for a protracted time. As is now widely recognized, many contingency funding plans did not adequately prepare for the possibility that certain off-balance-sheet exposures might have to be brought onto the firm's balance sheet, calling on available liquidity. Nor did they adequately account for the possibility of widespread and protracted declines in asset market liquidity. While liquidity pressures in banking and financial markets have eased of late, we do recognize that institutions must prepare themselves for the possibility that liquidity problems could return, either market-wide or at an individual institution. Supervisors are working with institutions to improve liquidity risk management practices. For instance, we are reviewing banks' contingent funding needs and sources of funding. We are ensuring that bankers develop appropriate short-term and long-term liquidity risk management strategies. Consistent with the findings of recent reports, we are emphasizing the importance of appropriate stress testing of liquidity needs and maintenance of robust liquidity buffers. In addition, we worked with our colleagues on the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to enhance existing guidance on the management of liquidity risks, which was released two days ago. That work was drawn from recent and ongoing efforts on liquidity risk by the public and private sectors and is intended to strengthen banks' liquidity risk management and improve global supervisory practices. Of course, the Federal Reserve has undertaken a number of programs to bolster market liquidity. Capital needsClearly, capital is a critical defense against unexpected losses. Even with the recent turmoil, the U.S. banking system remains well capitalized. However, as I noted in my June 5testimony, we are encouraging institutions to raise capital as needed, in part so that they will be well positioned to take advantage of future opportunities and to support a strengthening of financial conditions and a rebound in economic growth. And the recent capital injections into banking organizations and other financial institutions are a good sign that investors see value in those institutions and in the banking industry as a whole. To assess the sufficiency of firms' capacity to absorb unexpected losses from a wide range of sources, Federal Reserve supervisors have heightened their review of capital analysis and forecasting at banking organizations. Examiners are reviewing the reasonableness of assumptions banking organizations use to assess capital needs and are emphasizing forward-looking analysis. For example, we are evaluating banks' use of stress scenarios to see if they adequately incorporate a range of possible events and properly identify potential capital needs and capacity across the firms. The scenarios address a number of possible factors including unexpected balance sheet expansion, earnings deterioration across key business lines, and stress-level losses generated by a variety of positions and multiple sources. In addition, last year the Federal Reserve conducted a review across a number of large banking organizations to assess these firms' use of so-called "economic capital" practices, which are a means for firms to calculate, for internal purposes, their capital needs given their risk profile. Consistent with other findings, we found that some banks relied too extensively on the output of internal models, not viewing model output with appropriate skepticism. Models are dependent on the data used to construct them. When data histories are short or are drawn mostly from periods of benign economic conditions, model results may not be fully applicable to an institution's risk profile. We concluded that banks would generally benefit from better evaluation of inputs used in their internal capital models, stronger validation of their models, and broader use of stress testing and scenario analysis to supplement the inherent limitations of their models. We are incorporating the results of this horizontal review in our current assessments of banks' overall capital adequacy, as well as using it to evaluate banks' readiness to meet the requirement in Pillar 2 of Basel II that banks develop their own internal process to assess overall capital adequacy, beyond regulatory capital measures. Consolidated Supervision ProgramThe supervisory activities just described are intended to address many of the risk management lapses seen over the past year, some of which pertain to shortcomings in firm-wide risk identification and measurement. Consistent with our regular efforts to improve supervisory practices, we realize that our program of consolidated supervision could be enhanced and made more systematic. Supervising a consolidated banking organization requires review of all risks on an enterprise-wide basis, not just review of the risks contained in each subsidiary legal entity. To this end, the Federal Reserve is nearing completion of enhancements to its supervisory guidance to clarify our role as consolidated supervisor of bank and financial holding companies. The updated consolidated supervision guidance, which will be publicly available, is primarily intended to provide greater clarity to our own examination staff. For example, it provides for more consistent Federal Reserve supervisory practices and assessments across institutions with similar activities and risks, detailing expectations for understanding and assessing primary governance functions and risk controls, material business lines, nonbank operations, funding and liquidity management, consumer compliance, and other key activities and risks. In this sense the forthcoming guidance is very consistent with the Federal Reserve supervisory actions I have just described. The enhanced guidance will help us better identify and address firm-wide issues at supervised banking organizations, while also promoting better risk management. I want to make clear that consolidated supervision of bank and financial holding companies in the United States generally works well, with strong, cooperative relationships between the Federal Reserve and other relevant bank supervisors and functional regulators. Indeed, much of the supervisory work I just described is being done in cooperation with primary supervisors and functional regulators. Information sharing among relevant supervisors and regulators is essential to ensure that a banking organization's global activities are effectively supervised on a consolidated basis, and we have worked over the years to develop and enhance interagency coordination and information sharing. But as institutions grow larger and more complex, we need to ensure that our system of consolidated supervision keeps pace. Finally, it is worth noting that the Federal Reserve's umbrella supervision role closely complements our other central bank responsibilities, including the objectives of fostering financial stability and deterring or managing financial crises. The information, expertise, and powers derived from our supervisory authority enhances the Federal Reserve's ability to help prevent financial crises, and to manage such crises should they occur, working with the Treasury Department and other U.S. and foreign authorities. In this manner, enhancements to our consolidated supervision program, which include close coordination with primary supervisors and functional regulators, should provide broad benefits for the financial system and the economy. Footnotes 1.President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)," March 13; Financial Stability Forum (2008), "Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience (399 KB PDF)," April 7; Senior Supervisors Group (2008). "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence (373 KB PDF)" March 6.Return to text
The Federal Open Market Committee on Tuesday announced its tentative meeting schedule for 2009:January 27-28 (Tuesday-Wednesday)March 17 (Tuesday)April 28-29 (Tuesday-Wednesday)June 23-24 (Tuesday-Wednesday)August 11 (Tuesday)September 22 (Tuesday)November 3-4 (Tuesday-Wednesday)December 15 (Tuesday)January 26-27, 2010 (Tuesday-Wednesday) January 27-28 (Tuesday-Wednesday) March 17 (Tuesday) April 28-29 (Tuesday-Wednesday) June 23-24 (Tuesday-Wednesday) August 11 (Tuesday) September 22 (Tuesday) November 3-4 (Tuesday-Wednesday) December 15 (Tuesday) January 26-27, 2010 (Tuesday-Wednesday)
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday, announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve’s public website,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday, announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public website,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur.Banco de Chile and Banco de Chile Miami BranchCease and Desist Order dated February 1, 2005Terminated June 2, 2008
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public website,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur. Bank of York, York, AlabamaCease and Desist Order dated August 14, 2006Terminated June 19, 2008
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public website,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur. Deutsche Bank Trust Company AmericasWritten Agreement dated October 12, 2005Terminated June 16, 2008
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public website,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur. First BanCorp, Santurce, Puerto RicoCease and Desist Order dated March 16, 2006Terminated June 24, 2008
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Millennium Bankshares Corporation, Reston, Virginia, a registered bank holding company that owns and controls Millennium Bank, N.A., Reston, Virginia, a national bank, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.A copy of the Agreement is attached.