Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the 13th Annual University of North Carolina Banking Institute, Charlotte, North Carolina In August 2008 I joined the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, leaving behind a 30-year career as a commercial banker to become a central banker. My time as a commercial banker spanned numerous business cycles. It also encompassed at least one severe financial system crisis, in the late 1980s through the early 1990s, albeit one that was not as severe as the current one. From my time as a commercial banker, I already understood the factors considered by bankers in the initial lending decision as well as those in loss mitigation when collecting those same loans. As a central banker, I have come to appreciate even more fully the role of credit in our economic well-being. So I thought it would be appropriate for me to provide my perspective on credit conditions in our economy and the current crisis. Today, I would like to discuss a three-dimensional view of the flow of credit to households and businesses and describe the evolving role of banks in the U.S. economy. I will begin by taking a look at recent trends in aggregate borrowing by households and by the nonfinancial business sector. These trends will be placed in a historical context by looking back at previous booms and busts in the credit cycle. One might call this the "macroeconomic view" of credit. When looking at aggregate borrowing, it is important to remember that a change in debt outstanding can be driven by any one of three factors or, more commonly, a combination of all three. In the macroeconomic view of credit, I will discuss indicators related to changes in demand for credit. I will also examine two determinants of the supply of credit. The first determinant relates to lenders' assessment of the creditworthiness of borrowers given future economic conditions. The second relates to credit constraints caused by the financial condition of the lenders. Although fiscal and monetary policies that improve macroeconomic conditions will also boost the demand for credit and improve the creditworthiness of borrowers, if credit is constrained by the balance sheets of the banks, only programs to relieve such strain will improve credit availability. This condition is the reason for the injections of capital into banks through the Troubled Asset Relief Program, or TARP, and the financing provisions offered through the Public-Private Investment Program, or PPIP, as well as the expansion of Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) deposit and nondeposit guarantee programs. Next, I will consider the providers of credit. Using the Federal Reserve's flow of funds data, I will look at the evolution from 1950 to 2008 in the market shares of financial intermediation for banks, thrifts, insurance companies, and "other" firms, which range from finance companies to the entities that issue asset-backed securities (ABS). Although these data could suggest that the importance of banks has significantly diminished, I will argue that it matters how we measure what banks have been doing. In particular, it is important to take into account the off-balance-sheet activities of banks when securitization became more pervasive and when it abruptly stopped. This "financial intermediation view" of credit, in my opinion, illustrates the importance of supporting the availability of all forms of lending, whether it be on-balance-sheet lending by banks, credit originated by banks and securitized and sold to investors, or credit supplied by nonbank lenders. The Federal Reserve has long served as a lender to banks, providing them with liquidity to maintain lending in times of stress. Over the past year and a half, however, the Federal Reserve has greatly expanded its provision of liquidity, establishing facilities under which we auction term funding to banks on a secured basis, provide liquidity to primary dealers and money market mutual funds, and supply credit to issuers of commercial paper. In addition, through our purchases of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities, the Federal Reserve is lowering the cost of borrowing for mortgages as well as creating an outlet for loans that are originated by banks and nonbanks and securitized by the agencies.1Most recently, the Federal Reserve, in conjunction with the Treasury, has established the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, or TALF, which uses capital provided by the Treasury in combination with liquidity provided by the Federal Reserve to enhance the availability of credit to households and businesses. Because banks remain central to financial intermediation, they deserve a closer look, particularly during this time of financial-sector turmoil. In my discussion of the "banking view" of credit, I will summarize the current state of the banking industry. As you know, banks play a special role in just about every economy in the world, and the United States is no exception. Banks' liabilities are generally more liquid than their assets. They are also the main repositories of deposits, which provide immediately available liquidity to households and businesses and are used to undertake transactions for goods and services. In addition, banks provide intermediation between borrowers and savers. Indeed, banks remain the principal source of finance for a large part of the economy. Given these important and distinctive functions, it is, perhaps, obvious that adverse shocks to the financial system and the banking industry can have detrimental effects on economic activity. The current financial turbulence, like several similar events in the past, has placed severe strains on the U.S. banking system with serious repercussions for the economy as a whole. The "Macroeconomic View" of CreditLooking back over the past 50 years or so, credit extended to households and businesses has almost always declined just before, and during, economic downturns. And almost as often, a debate has ensued about whether the nation was in a "credit crunch."2According to the White House Council of Economic Advisers, "a credit crunch occurs when the supply of credit is restricted below the range usually identified with prevailing market interest rates and the profitability of investment projects."3Judging whether a credit crunch is happening in real time is not easy. It is extremely difficult to sort out the relative importance on the flow of credit of reduced demand due to weaker economic activity, reduced supply because borrowers appear less creditworthy, or reduced supply because lenders face pressures, such as a shortage of capital, that restrain them from extending credit. In other words, while demand considerations could certainly result in a decline in credit flows, a reduction in the supply of credit--caused either by bank balance sheet pressures or by banks reluctant to lend to less-creditworthy borrowers--could produce the same result. Figure 1presents annualized quarterly percent changes in debt growth for home mortgages in the United States from 1952 to 2008, with shaded areas denoting National Bureau of Economic Research recession periods. Strikingly, the quarterly rate of growth for home mortgage debt, which includes mortgages and drawn-upon home equity lines, has typically declined before and during each recession and then picked up when economic conditions improved. What is different this time around is the runoff in home mortgage debt: It declined in the fourth quarter for the first time in more than 50 years. The recent decline in mortgage debt was likely partly driven by weaker demand for housing amid rising unemployment and rapidly falling home prices. It is equally likely that supply-side considerations have played a role. First, the run-up in mortgage delinquency rates and the higher loss rates associated with reductions in collateral values indicate that the creditworthiness of borrowers has declined. The unprecedented increase in mortgage defaults has resulted in more foreclosures and tighter mortgage lending terms, which are shown from 1990 onward infigure 2. Although the net fraction of banks tightening lending standards on mortgage loans was about 50 percent in our most recent Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, it should be noted that most banks had already tightened their lending standards substantially in 2008. Second, the shutdown of the private mortgage-backed securities market has placed greater pressures on bank balance sheets not only to provide credit to borrowers with damaged credit histories, but also to provide so-called jumbo mortgages that are originated in amounts that are over the conforming loan limits applicable to loans sold to or guaranteed by the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and by Ginnie Mae. Of course, credit provision to some borrowers was helped through mortgage insurance programs offered by the Federal Housing Administration, which were recently expanded by the Congress through increases in coverage levels. Similarly, other borrowers have been able to qualify for mortgages that became eligible for securitizations by the GSEs because of increases in conforming loan limits. Indeed, as the non-agency mortgage-backed security market contracted by roughly 15 percent in 2008, Ginnie Mae increased its outstanding supply of single-family mortgage-backed securities by roughly 33 percent. Even with the growth of such securitizations, banks still needed to expend some balance sheet capacity to warehouse loans on their books prior to securitization.4 In response to these supply-side developments, the Treasury, the FDIC, and the Federal Reserve have encouraged banks to work with existing borrowers to avoid preventable foreclosures.5The Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies also have encouraged banking organizations to participate in the Treasury's Home Affordable Modification Program.6Doing so should help to stem the runoff in mortgage debt and to damp the added downward pressure on house prices that can occur when neighborhoods have clusters of foreclosed properties. In addition, the Treasury's Capital Assistance Program, the FDIC's Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program, and the Federal Reserve's programs to provide liquidity are intended to help ease the funding and balance sheet pressures banking organizations face, thereby allowing them to undertake responsible lending activities, including new mortgage originations. I will now turn to nonmortgage consumer credit, which is shown infigure 3. The growth rate for consumer credit has been trending down, on balance, for years, but it remained quite robust until the latter half of last year. Indeed, consumer credit fell quite sharply in the fourth quarter. Looking back over the past 50 years, nonmortgage consumer credit typically weakens throughout a recession as labor markets deteriorate and often turns down even after the recession ends. Thus, history suggests that consumer credit growth will likely slow further in the near term; in addition, many banks have tightened terms and standards for nonmortgage consumer loans. Turning to the business sector, and in particular the corporate sector, the major components of borrowing are bonds, commercial paper, commercial mortgages, and commercial and industrial bank loans. As shown in the left panel offigure 4, gross bond issuance for investment-grade firms increased in the fourth quarter of last year from a very weak third quarter and seems to have increased further in the first quarter of this year as firms appear to have strengthened their balance sheets by shifting toward longer-term debt. In contrast, speculative-grade bond issuance has remained sluggish. In September 2008, nonfinancial corporations' commercial paper outstanding contracted (the black solid line in the right panel of figure 4, as money market mutual funds--ordinarily major investors in commercial paper--faced significant strains. Losses on Lehman Brothers paper led one prominent fund to "break the buck"--that is, to fail to maintain a net asset value of $1.00 a share--which undermined investor confidence in such funds and triggered significant withdrawals from funds that typically invest in private-sector debt. In response, the Treasury established an insurance program for money market mutual fund investors, and the Federal Reserve introduced new programs to provide liquidity to money market mutual funds. In addition, the Federal Reserve authorized the Commercial Paper Funding Facility to provide a liquidity backstop for U.S. issuers of commercial paper.7These programs helped to restore confidence in money market mutual funds and improve the functioning of the commercial paper market. By early this year, the strains in the commercial paper market had eased notably. The volume of bank lending in 2008 mirrored developments in the commercial paper market. In the fall, bank commercial and industrial lending surged for a time (the red dotted line in the right panel of figure 4, reportedly reflecting, in part, substantial draws on previously existing long-term lending commitments; then such lending contracted sharply as access to other sources of funding, such as commercial paper, improved. In this manner, bank loans provided at least a partial substitute for market-based funding until market functioning improved. That said, the growth rate for debt of nonfinancial businesses decreased sharply in 2008. As shown infigure 5, debt growth for nonfinancial corporate businesses reached almost 15 percent at the peak of the business cycle in December 2007, but it was less than 3 percent by the end of 2008. Looking back, it is apparent that debt growth for nonfinancial corporate businesses can, and often does, decline sharply as the economy slows. During recessions, which are indicated in the figure by shading, debt growth has typically decreased and sometimes even become negative, such as during 1990-91. In part, such declines in debt growth are derived from declines in demand for the goods and services produced by nonfinancial firms. In addition, such declines reflect the ongoing tightening of lending standards that can result from the deterioration of the fundamentals that support lending. Turning to commercial mortgage growth,figure 6presents such data from the 1950s through 2008. As with the debt series plotted in previous charts, commercial mortgage growth typically drops off during a recession as retail sales slow and less office space is needed for workers. Especially striking is the prolonged contraction in commercial mortgages outstanding after the 1990-91 recession. Since the peak of the recent business cycle, commercial mortgage growth has slowed with each passing quarter. By the fourth quarter of 2008, its annualized growth was only about 1 percent. The "Financial Intermediation View" of CreditThe commercial paper market example, which I briefly described earlier, highlights the fact that financial intermediaries can play an important safety-valve role for the financial system. When the commercial paper market suddenly dried up, financial intermediaries were able to fund firms that had unused lines of credit or other commitments.8Moreover, the Federal Reserve, through its lending programs, contributed to improved conditions in the commercial paper market so that issuance of these short-term funding instruments could resume. In today's economy, much of the flow of credit comes from lending that occurs outside of the banking system. Here again, it is useful to take a historical look at financial intermediation to better understand the potential effect on the availability of credit to households and businesses from the recent shutdowns in the securitization and commercial paper markets and to get a first glimpse at how financial intermediation markets responded. Consider, for example, the shares of commercial mortgages outstanding--funded by depositories, insurance companies, other financial institution, and commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS)--presented infigure 7. The share funded by CMBS (the orange line) increased from almost nothing in 1990 to almost 30 percent in 2008. In an accounting sense, most of this increase in funding from the capital markets came at the expense of direct holdings of whole loans by insurance companies (the dashed green line) and other intermediaries (the black line), whose funding shares fell by half between 2000 and 2008. In contrast, depositories' share of commercial mortgages outstanding (the purple line) held steady from 1990 through 2007. In 2008, the decrease in the commercial mortgages funded by CMBS--the downtick of the orange line at the end of the sample--was offset by an increase in commercial mortgages funded by depositories--the uptick of the purple line. These data suggest that depositories increased their share of commercial mortgages as securitization markets stalled in 2008. Again, banks and other depositories served an important safety-valve function for the commercial mortgage market. Infigure 8, Federal Reserve flow of funds data are used to construct market shares of all financial intermediation provided by four major classes of institutions: banks, thrifts, insurance companies, and "other financial intermediaries," which range from finance companies to the entities that issue ABS.9In 1950, banks' share of financial intermediation (the red line) was about 50 percent; it declined and then rose to about 48 percent in the mid-1970s, then it trended down to about 33 percent at the turn of the century. From the fourth quarter of 2007 to the fourth quarter of 2008, this measure of total financial intermediation grew by about 5 percent. At the same time, the banking system's share increased from 32.8 percent to 33.4 percent--a 0.6 percentage point increase in market share. Thrifts and insurance companies--represented by the blue solid and green dashed lines, respectively--had declines in their market shares in the fourth quarter of 2008. Infigure 9, the shares for banks and thrifts are combined so that there is a depositories' share of this measure of U.S. financial intermediation (the purple line). Comparing the purple line for the depositories' share with the black line for other financial intermediaries' share, it is apparent that these lines mirror one another. Although both of these shares equaled 40 percent in 2001, by the end of 2008, the other financial intermediaries' share had increased to 45 percent, but the depositories' share had decreased to 38 percent. Interestingly, the shares for other financial intermediaries and for depositories continued their respective upward and downward trends despite the disruptions in securitization and financial markets during 2008. Turning back to banks, the standard market shares of financial intermediation reported in figures 8 and 9 neglect their off-balance-sheet activities. Such off-balance-sheet intermediation has generated considerable earnings for banks. For example, banks receive fees for lines of credit regardless of whether borrowers use the lines of credit. In addition, securitization activities have provided many benefits to banks. Even when banks have not securitized the loans, such as when mortgages were securitized by the GSEs, banks often originated and serviced the loans that were pooled and have earned fees in the process. If one adjusts the financial intermediation data for banks to include "credit equivalents" for the off-balance-sheet activities of banks, then the adjusted market share of financial intermediation for banks would remain above 40 percent in recent years.10These adjusted financial intermediation data are shown using the red dashed line infigure 10.11With the near shutdown in securitization markets, adjusted bank assets declined from almost 45 percent in fourth quarter 2007 to 42 percent in fourth quarter 2008. Even with this decline, however, banks' adjusted share of financial intermediation would be in the higher end of the range observed since the 1980s. These adjusted financial intermediation data, however, do not tell the full story. Ideally, we also would want to adjust the data for all of the other financial intermediaries to include credit equivalents for their off-balance-sheet activities. Unfortunately, the data do not exist to make such an adjustment. Nor do the data generally exist to convert the fee income that financial intermediaries generate by off-balance-sheet activities into balance-sheet equivalents. That said, the adjusted flow of funds data suggest that banks have remained important financial intermediaries despite the growth (and disruption) in securitization activities and the arrival of new competitors. The "Banking View" of CreditEven though the total provision of financial intermediation services by banks remained high relative to other financial intermediaries and their on-balance-sheet financial intermediation services increased in the fourth quarter of 2008, it must be recognized that there are many types of banks in the United States with different specializations, geographic concentrations, and comparative advantages. Consequently, the extraordinary stress in the financial system, the downturn in the U.S. and global economies, and the associated reductions in asset values have affected each bank differently. Much attention has been focused on the negative loan growth of the largest five bank holding companies in the fourth quarter of 2008--about negative 16 percent at an annual rate on a merger-adjusted basis. The next 20 largest bank holding companies had a notably smaller decrease in loans over the same period--about a negative 4-1/4 percent rate of decline--and other (smaller) bank holding companies increased their lending at about a 5 percent pace. This loan growth may reflect that smaller banks in strong financial condition are finding that they can gain creditworthy customers--even in the current economic environment--as other banks cut back on lending to conserve capital and liquidity. Smaller banks may also be finding opportunities to reclaim consumer and business customers from nonbank competitors who have pulled back as the securitization markets have dried up. A decomposition of changes in loans held on bank balance sheets across banking organizations in the three size groups provides a glimpse into how diverse the portfolio changes were across banks in the fourth quarter of 2008.12figure 11presents balance sheet changes for loans held by the banking organizations in all three size groups. The heights of the red bars indicate declines in loan categories measured in billions of dollars, and the heights of the blue bars indicate increases in loan categories, also measured in billions of dollars. For each bank-size group, the bars within the panel add up as one looks from left to right, so that the total dollar-value change in lending is measured either by the bottom of the bar (if loan growth, on net, is negative) or by the top of the bar (if loan growth, on net, is positive). The number at the bottom (or top) of each bar provides the net decrease (or increase) in loan amounts as one adds the changes from left to right within a bank-size category.13 The left panel of figure 11 contains changes in loans (on a merger-adjusted and seasonally adjusted basis) held on the books of the largest bank holding companies, which together ended the quarter with $6.4 trillion of balance sheet assets. These firms reduced their loan holdings by about $119 billion, which is indicated at the bottom of the right-most bar in the left panel. Declines were substantial in commercial and industrial loans ($19 billion), real estate loans ($47 billion), and consumer loans ($13 billion). The middle panel of figure 11 contains loan changes for the next 20 largest banking organizations, which together ended the quarter with about $5.2 trillion of balance sheet assets. Together, these organizations increased their commercial and industrial loans (by $3 billion), real estate loans (by $7 billion), and consumer loans (by $4 billion) as of year-end 2008. That said, the category of 'other loans and leases" fell by more than enough to offset those increases. Total loans held on the balance sheets of banks in this group decreased by about $9 billion over the fourth quarter. The right panel of figure 11 presents the increases in loans held by banking organizations not included in the largest 25. These organizations ended the quarter with $3.3 trillion of balance sheet assets. These entities increased their holdings of commercial and industrial loans (by $4 billion), real estate loans (by $17 billion), and consumer loans (by $9 billion). On net, bank holding companies and banks in this size class increased their lending by about $27 billion--far less than the reductions in lending at banks in the larger-size groups. Within real estate loans, residential mortgage holdings by banking organizations declined sharply over the second half of 2008. In part, this decline reflected a slower pace of originations owing to tighter lending standards and weaker demand. But this decline also reflected the fact that banks continued to originate and sell mortgages to the GSEs as this securitization mechanism has continued to function. In contrast, home equity loan growth has recently been brisk as borrowers tapped their existing lines of credit. Unlike mortgage loans, home equity loans tended to remain on bank balance sheets. Abstracting from a couple of bank restructuring events, growth in consumer loans--the other category of household lending--was weak in the fourth quarter, in line with lackluster retail sales and declines in consumer confidence. Originations may pick up as the TALF gains traction and ABS can be issued that are collateralized with such loans.14 Turning to business lending, commercial and industrial lending, which, as previously discussed, had surged during the period of particularly acute financial stress in September and October, was very weak during the fourth quarter, and commercial mortgage holdings remained flat. Changes in the liabilities of banks were equally diverse across the three banking organization size groups.Figure 12has the same format as figure 11, with each red bar indicating a decline in a liability type and each blue bar indicating an increase in a liability type. As with figure 11, the data are merger-adjusted and seasonally adjusted. The figure presents changes in core deposits; large time deposits, which are deposits in denominations greater than $100,000; other managed liabilities; and other liabilities. Other managed liabilities mostly consist of foreign-booked deposits, demand notes issued to the Treasury, other borrowed money, and federal funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements. Other liabilities are noninterest earning liabilities such as trading liabilities. Numbers at the top and bottom of each bar within a panel represent the sum of liability changes as one looks from left to right. As with lending growth, the growth in core deposits at U.S. banking organizations was likely influenced by both demand-side and supply-side considerations as well as by government policies implemented to improve financial conditions. Core deposits, which consist of the sum of transaction deposits, savings deposits (including money market deposit accounts), and small time deposits issued in denominations of less than $100,000, expanded at banking organizations of all sizes in the fourth quarter. In part, this deposit growth reflected lower opportunity costs of holding monetary assets as declines in market rates outpaced those on core deposits. In addition, this growth was likely influenced by the increases in deposit insurance coverage that were announced in October 2008.15 Deposit growth also likely reflected bank-led initiatives to increase their deposit funding in order to reduce their reliance on managed liabilities, such as large time deposits and borrowings from the Federal Home Loan Banks, and also to fund future lending opportunities. This substitution of deposits for managed liabilities was particularly pronounced at the 25 largest banking organizations: These banking organizations reduced the category of "other managed liabilities" by about $120 billion. In contrast, banking organizations not included among the largest 25 increased their other managed liabilities by $30 billion (although managed liabilities are, in general, a smaller fraction of these banks' overall liabilities). ConclusionToday, we have taken a three-dimensional view of the flow of credit to households and businesses and described the evolving role of banks in the U.S. economy. The macroeconomic view of credit highlighted the importance for the flow of credit of reduced demand due to weaker economic activity, reduced supply because borrowers appear less creditworthy, and reduced supply because lenders face pressures that restrain them from extending credit. The financial intermediation view of credit highlighted that banks have remained important financial intermediaries long after the originate-to-distribute model for funding credit became the dominant model and can play an important safety-valve role for the financial system. Finally, the banking view of credit emphasized that there are many types of banks in the United States, and the extraordinary stress in the financial system, the downturn in the U.S. and global economies, and the associated reductions in asset values have affected each bank differently. As such, some banks have likely fulfilled the credit needs of consumers and businesses that had been turned away by their peers. For all of these reasons, the Federal Reserve is committed to employing all available tools to promote economic recovery and to preserve price stability. Footnotes 1.Agency debt means debt issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and the Federal Home Loan Banks.Return to text 2.Kaufman (1991) cites credit crunches that occurred in 1959, 1969-70, the mid-1970s, 1981-82, and 1990-91. See Henry Kaufman (1991), "Credit Crunches: The Deregulators Were Wrong,"Wall Street Journal, October 9. See also Albert Wojnilower (1980), "The Central Role of Credit Crunches in Recent Financial History,"Brookings Papers onEconomic Activity, vol. 2, pp. 277-326.Return to text 3.Council of Economic Advisers (1992),Economic Report of the President(Washington: Government Printing Office), p. 46.Return to text 4.See Inside Mortgage Finance Publications (2009),"Mortgage Securities Market Continued to Shrink in Late 2008despite Agency Growth,"Inside MBS & ABS, March 20, p.7.Return to text 5.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers," joint press release, November 12.Return to text 6.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2009), "Federal Financial Regulatory Agencies Issue Statement in Support of the Making Home Affordable Loan Modification Program," joint press release, March 4.Return to text 7.Under the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, authorized on October 7, 2008, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York finances the purchase of unsecured and asset-backed commercial paper from eligible issuers through its primary dealers. Only highly rated, U.S. dollar-denominated, three-month commercial paper is eligible for financing.Return to text 8.Bank's ability to hedge against marketwide liquidity shocks as they did last fall has been documented in the academic banking literature; see Evan Gatev and Philip E. Strahan (2006), "Banks' Advantage in Hedging Liquidity Risk: Theory and Evidence from the Commercial Paper Market,"Journal of Finance, vol. 61 (April), pp. 867-892.Return to text 9.Figure 8 and figure 10 update those in Ron J. Feldman and Mark Lueck (2007), "Are Banks Really Dying This Time?" Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,The Region(September), pp. 6-9 and 42-51. These authors kindly updated their analysis for these remarks. See also John H. Boyd and Mark Gertler (1994), "Are Banks Dead? Or Are the Reports Greatly Exaggerated?" Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,Quarterly Review, vol. 18 (Summer), pp. 2-14. In both cases, "other financial intermediaries" include mutual funds; closed-end funds; exchange-traded funds; ABS issuers; finance companies; real estate investment trusts, or REITs; brokers and dealers; and funding corporations; but exclude the GSEs.Return to text 10.The financial intermediation data were adjusted for banks' off-balance-sheet activities using techniques described in Feldman and Lueck (2007) and Boyd and Gertler (1994) (see note 9).Return to text 11.Exposures include the following types of off-balance-sheet activities: standby letters of credit, participation in bankers' acceptances, retained recourse on assets sold, securities lend, derivatives and unused loan commitments. Bank supervisors weight the volume of these activities by a conversion factor to obtain their credit equivalent. Because of modifications to Call Reports, the off-balance-sheet activities with available credit equivalents have changed over time.Return to text 12.Bank subsidiaries were rolled up to the bank holding company level.Return to text 13.The category labeled "other loans" in figure 11 includes loans to finance agricultural production, loans to foreign governments and official institutions, interbank loans, obligations of states and political subdivisions, as well as lease financing receivables. The most important of these subcategories varies across banks of different sizes. For example, over the last five years, the largest category of other loans was interbank loans for the 5 largest banks, lease financing receivables for the 6 to 25 largest banks, and loans to finance agricultural production for the remaining banks.Return to text 14.The TALF will help market participants meet the credit needs of households and businesses by supporting the issuance of ABS. This support is in the form of nonrecourse loans provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and capital support provided by Treasury under the TARP.Return to text 15.The Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of October 3, 2008 temporarily raised the maximum coverage on all deposits at depositories to $250,000 from $100,000. On October 14, the FDIC announced its temporary Transaction Account Guarantee Program that provides depositors with unlimited coverage for noninterest-bearing transactions accounts if their bank is a participant in the FDIC program. This program is scheduled to end on December 31, 2009.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate having this opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve's involvement with American International Group, Inc. (AIG). In my testimony, I will describe why supporting AIG was a difficult but necessary step to protect our economy and stabilize our financial system. I will also discuss issues related to compensation and note two matters raised by this experience that merit congressional attention. Reasons for Our Original Lending DecisionWe at the Federal Reserve, working closely with the Treasury, made our decision to lend to AIG on September 16 of last year. It was an extraordinary time. Global financial markets were experiencing unprecedented strains and a worldwide loss of confidence. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac had been placed into conservatorship only two weeks earlier, and Lehman Brothers had filed for bankruptcy the day before. We were very concerned about a number of other major firms that were under intense stress. AIG's financial condition had been deteriorating for some time, caused by actual and expected losses on subprime mortgage-backed securities and on credit default swaps that AIG's Financial Products unit, AIG-FP, had written on mortgage-related securities. As confidence in the firm declined, and with efforts to find a private-sector solution unsuccessful, AIG faced severe liquidity pressures that threatened to force it imminently into bankruptcy. The Federal Reserve and the Treasury agreed that AIG's failure under the conditions then prevailing would have posed unacceptable risks for the global financial system and for our economy. Some of AIG's insurance subsidiaries, which are among the largest in the United States and the world, would have likely been put into rehabilitation by their regulators, leaving policyholders facing considerable uncertainty about the status of their claims. State and local government entities that had lent more than $10 billion to AIG would have suffered losses. Workers whose 401(k) plans had purchased $40 billion of insurance from AIG against the risk that their stable value funds would decline in value would have seen that insurance disappear. Global banks and investment banks would have suffered losses on loans and lines of credit to AIG, and on derivatives with AIG-FP. The banks' combined exposures exceeded $50 billion.1Money market mutual funds and others that held AIG's roughly $20 billion of commercial paper would also have taken losses. In addition, AIG's insurance subsidiaries had substantial derivatives exposures to AIG-FP that could have weakened them in the event of the parent company's failure. Moreover, as the Lehman case clearly demonstrates, focusing on the direct effects of a default on AIG's counterparties understates the risks to the financial system as a whole. Once begun, a financial crisis can spread unpredictably. For example, Lehman's default on its commercial paper caused a prominent money market mutual fund to "break the buck" and suspend withdrawals, which in turn ignited a general run on prime money market mutual funds, with resulting severe stresses in the commercial paper market. As I mentioned, AIG had about $20 billion in commercial paper outstanding, so its failure would have exacerbated the problems of the money market mutual funds. Another worrisome possibility was that uncertainties about the safety of insurance products could have led to a run on the broader insurance industry by policyholders and creditors. Moreover, it was well known in the market that many major financial institutions had large exposures to AIG. Its failure would likely have led financial market participants to pull back even more from commercial and investment banks, and those institutions perceived as weaker would have faced escalating pressure. Recall that these events took place before the passage of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act, which provided funds that the Treasury used to help stem a global banking panic in October. Consequently, it is unlikely that the failure of additional major firms could have been prevented in the wake of the failure of AIG. At best, the consequences of AIG's failure would have been a significant intensification of an already severe financial crisis and a further worsening of global economic conditions. Conceivably, its failure could have resulted in a 1930s-style global financial and economic meltdown, with catastrophic implications for production, income, and jobs. The decision by the Federal Reserve on September 16, 2008, with the full support of the Treasury, to lend up to $85 billion to AIG should be viewed with this background in mind. At that time, no federal entity could provide capital to stabilize AIG and no federal or state entity outside of a bankruptcy court could wind down AIG. Unfortunately, federal bankruptcy laws do not sufficiently protect the public's strong interest in ensuring the orderly resolution of nondepository financial institutions when a failure would pose substantial systemic risks, which is why I have called on the Congress to develop new emergency resolution procedures. However, the Federal Reserve did have the authority to lend on a fully secured basis, consistent with our emergency lending authority provided by the Congress and our responsibility as central bank to maintain financial stability. We took as collateral for our loan AIG's pledge of a substantial portion of its assets, including its ownership interests in its domestic and foreign insurance subsidiaries. This decision bought time for subsequent actions by the Congress, the Treasury, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Federal Reserve that have avoided further failures of systemically important institutions and have supported improvements in key credit markets. The Federal Reserve's Ongoing Involvement with AIGHaving lent AIG money to avert the risk of a global financial meltdown, we found ourselves in the uncomfortable situation of overseeing both the preservation of its value and its dismantling, a role quite different from our usual activities. We have devoted considerable resources to this effort and have engaged outside advisers. Using our rights as creditor, we have worked with AIG's new management team to begin the difficult process of winding down AIG-FP and to oversee the company's restructuring and divestiture strategy. Progress is being made on both fronts. However, financial turmoil and a worsening economy since September have contributed to large losses at the company, and the Federal Reserve has found it necessary to restructure and extend our support. In addition, under its Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), the Treasury injected capital into AIG in both November and March. Throughout this difficult period, our goals have remained unchanged: to protect our economy and preserve financial stability, and to position AIG to repay the Federal Reserve and return the Treasury's investment as quickly as possible. In our role as creditor, we have made clear to AIG's management, beginning last fall, our deep concern surrounding compensation issues at AIG. We believe it is in the taxpayers' interest for AIG to retain qualified staff to maintain the value of the businesses that must be sold to repay the government's assistance. But, at the same time, the company must scrupulously avoid any excessive and unwarranted compensation. We have pressed AIG to ensure that all compensation decisions are covered by robust corporate governance, including internal review, review by the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors, and consultations with outside experts. Operating under this framework, AIG has voluntarily limited the salary, bonuses, and other types of compensation for 2008 and 2009 of the CEO and other senior managers. Moreover, executive compensation must comply with the most stringent set of rules promulgated by the Treasury for TARP fund recipients. The New York Attorney General has also imposed restrictions on compensation at AIG. Many of you have raised specific issues with regard to the payout of retention bonuses to employees at AIG-FP. My reaction upon becoming aware of these specific payments was that, notwithstanding the business purposes that might be served by this action, it was highly inappropriate to pay substantial bonuses to employees of the division that had been the primary source of AIG's collapse. I asked that the AIG-FP payments be stopped but was informed that they were mandated by contracts agreed to before the government's intervention. I then asked that suit be filed to prevent the payments. Legal staff counseled against this action, on the grounds that Connecticut law provides for substantial punitive damages if the suit would fail; legal action could thus have the perverse effect of doubling or tripling the financial benefits to the AIG-FP employees. I was also informed that the company had been instructed to pursue all available alternatives and that the Reserve Bank had conveyed the strong displeasure of the Federal Reserve with the retention payment arrangement. I strongly supported President Dudley's conveying that concern and directing the company to redouble its efforts to renegotiate all plans that could result in excessive bonus payments. I have also directed staff to work with the Treasury and the Administration in their review of whether the FP bonus and retention payments can be reclaimed. Moreover, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury will work closely together to monitor and address similar situations in the future. Lessons Learned from AIGTo conclude, I would note that AIG offers two clear lessons for the upcoming discussion in the Congress and elsewhere on regulatory reform. First, AIG highlights the urgent need for new resolution procedures for systemically important nonbank financial firms. If a federal agency had had such tools on September 16, they could have been used to put AIG into conservatorship or receivership, unwind it slowly, protect policyholders, and impose haircuts on creditors and counterparties as appropriate. That outcome would have been far preferable to the situation we find ourselves in now. Second, the AIG situation highlights the need for strong, effective consolidated supervision of all systemically important financial firms. AIG built up its concentrated exposure to the subprime mortgage market largely out of the sight of its functional regulators. More-effective supervision might have identified and blocked the extraordinarily reckless risk-taking at AIG-FP. These two changes could measurably reduce the likelihood of future episodes of systemic risk like the one we faced at AIG. Footnotes 1.In addition, many of these same banks had borrowed securities from AIG's securities lending program for which they had given AIG cash as collateral. Upon an AIG bankruptcy, the banks would have taken possession of the securities instead of receiving back their cash, exposing them to possible losses on those securities.Return to text
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Dodd, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate having this opportunity to discuss the role of the Federal Reserve in stabilizing American International Group, Inc. (AIG). In my testimony, I will detail the support the Federal Reserve, working alongside the Treasury, has given AIG and the reasons for each of our actions. Before I go into the extended narrative, however, I think it would be useful to briefly put our decisions in their broader context. Over the past year and a half, we have all been dealing with the ongoing disruptions and pressures engendered by an extraordinary financial crisis. The weaknesses at financial institutions and resulting constraints on credit, declines in asset prices, and erosion of household and business confidence have in turn led to a sharp weakening in the economy. The Federal Reserve has employed all the tools at its disposal to break this spiral and help address the many challenges of the crisis and its effects on the economy. One of the most important of these tools is the Federal Reserve's authority undersection 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Actto lend on a secured basis under "unusual and exigent" circumstances to companies that are not depository institutions. Since last fall, in order to foster the stability of the financial system and mitigate the effects of ongoing financial stresses on the economy, we have used that authority to help to stabilize the financial condition of AIG. AIG is a widely diversified financial services company that, as of September 30, 2008, which is the reporting date closest to the date we first provided it assistance, reported consolidated total assets of more than $1 trillion. AIG was at that time, and continues to be, one of the largest insurance companies in the world and, in terms of net premiums underwritten, is both the largest life and health insurer in the United States and the second largest property and casualty insurer in the United States. It conducts insurance and finance operations in more than 130 countries and jurisdictions and has more than 74 million individual and corporate customers and 116,000 employees globally. In the United States, it has approximately 30 million customers and 50,000 employees. AIG is the leading commercial insurer in the United States, providing insurance to approximately 180,000 small businesses and other corporate entities, which employ approximately 106 million people in the United States. It is also a major provider of protection to municipalities, pension funds, and other public and private entities through guaranteed investment contracts and products that protect participants in 401(k) retirement plans. AIG has also been a major participant in many derivatives markets through its Financial Products business unit (Financial Products). Financial Products is an unregulated entity that exploited a gap in the supervisory framework for insurance companies and was able to take on substantial risk using the credit rating that AIG received as a consequence of its strong regulated insurance subsidiaries. Financial Products became the counterparty on hundreds of over-the-counter derivatives to a broad range of customers, including many major national and international financial institutions, U.S. pension plans, stable value funds, and municipalities. Financial Products also provided credit protection through credit default swaps it has written on billions of dollars of multi-sector collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). Financial Products did not adequately protect itself against the effects of a declining economy or the loss of the highest ratings from the credit rating agencies, and thereby was a source of weakness to AIG. While Financial Products has been winding down and exiting many of its trades, it continues to have a very large notional amount of derivatives contracts outstanding with numerous counterparties. It is against this background that the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department have taken a series of unusual actions to stabilize the company. These have entailed very difficult and uncomfortable decisions for a central bank. These decisions were particularly difficult and discomforting because they involved addressing systemic problems created largely by poor decisionmaking by the company itself. Moreover, many of these decisions involved an unregulated business entity that exploited the strength, and threatened the viability, of affiliates that were large, regulated entities in good standing. However, uncomfortable as this was, we believe we had no choice if we are to pursue our responsibility for protecting financial stability. Our judgment has been and continues to be that, in this time of severe market and economic stress, the failure of AIG would impose unnecessary and burdensome losses on many individuals, households and businesses, disrupt financial markets, and greatly increase fear and uncertainty about the viability of our financial institutions. Thus, such a failure would deepen and extend market disruptions and asset price declines, further constrict the flow of credit to households and businesses in the United States and in many of our trading partners, and materially worsen the recession our economy is enduring. To mitigate these risks, the Treasury provided equity capital to AIG and the Federal Reserve provided liquidity support backed by the assets of AIG. The Federal Reserve's involvement in AIG began in mid-September of 2008. AIG's financial condition had been deteriorating for some time. The financial and credit markets were experiencing severe stress due to various economic problems arising out of the broad-based decline in home prices, rise in delinquencies and foreclosures, and substantial drop in values of mortgages as well as mortgage-backed securities and other instruments based on such assets. In short-term funding markets, very high spreads between lending rates and the target federal funds rate and very illiquid trading conditions in term money markets had come to prevail. AIG was exposed to these problems because of the protection Financial Products had written on mortgage-related securities, because of investments AIG had made in mortgage-related securities in connection with its securities lending program, and because its counterparties had begun to withdraw funding. These pressures mounted through September. The private sector worked through the weekend of September 13-14 to find a way for private firms to address AIG's mounting liquidity strains. But that effort was unsuccessful in a deteriorating economic and financial environment in which firms were not willing to expose themselves to risks--a risk aversion that greatly increased following the collapse of Lehman Brothers on September 15. Under these circumstances, on September 16, 2008, acting with the full support of the Treasury, the Board authorized the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (New York Reserve Bank) pursuant to section 13(3) to lend up to $85 billion to AIG through a revolving credit facility (Revolving Credit Facility) in order to ease the liquidity strain on AIG. The liquidity pressures experienced by AIG during that time of fragile economic markets threatened its ability to continue to operate, and the prospect of AIG's disorderly failure posed considerable systemic risks in various ways as a consequence of its significant and wide-ranging operations. Such a failure would also have further undermined business and household confidence and contributed to higher borrowing costs, reduced wealth, and general additional weakening of the economy. Moreover, at the time the Board extended the Revolving Credit Facility, there was no federal entity that could provide capital to AIG to help stabilize it. The Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) legislation was requested in part to fill that void and authorized by Congress on October 3, 2008. The Revolving Credit Facility was established with the purpose of assisting AIG in meeting its obligations when due and facilitating a restructuring whereby AIG would sell certain businesses in an orderly manner, with minimal disruption to the overall economy. AIG would repay the Revolving Credit Facility over a period of two years as it sold assets. Importantly, the Revolving Credit Facility was (and remains) secured by a pledge of a substantial portion of the company's assets, including AIG's ownership interests in its domestic and foreign insurance subsidiaries. As additional compensation for the Revolving Credit Facility, AIG agreed to issue to a trust for the benefit of the Treasury, preferred stock convertible into 79 percent of AIG's outstanding common stock. With these protections, the Board believed that the authorization of the Revolving Credit Facility would not result in any net cost to taxpayers. In connection with the extension of credit, AIG's CEO was replaced. In addition, the New York Reserve Bank established a team to review the financial condition of AIG, and monitor the implementation of AIG's plan to restructure itself and repay the Revolving Credit Facility. Furthermore, as an ongoing condition of the Revolving Credit Facility, the New York Reserve Bank staff established an on-site presence to monitor the company's use of cash flows and progress in pursuing its restructuring and divestiture plan. The Federal Reserve does not have statutory supervisory authority over AIG or its subsidiaries as we would over a bank holding company or state chartered bank that is a member of the Federal Reserve System. Rather, the rights of the Federal Reserve are those typical of a creditor and are governed by the credit agreement for the Revolving Credit Facility. Using these rights, the Federal Reserve works with management of AIG to develop and oversee the implementation of the company's business strategy, its strategy for restructuring, and its new compensation policies, monitors the financial condition of AIG, and must approve certain major decisions that might reduce its ability to repay its loan. The Federal Reserve has a team of about 15 staff members, led by senior officials, who conduct oversight of the company pursuant to the credit agreement. The team has frequent on site contact at the company to make sure the Federal Reserve is adequately informed on funding, cash flows, liquidity, earnings, asset valuation, and progress in pursuing restructuring and divestiture. Federal Reserve staff is also assisted by qualified advisers in its monitoring and coordinates with officials of the Treasury. We routinely make our views known on key issues, such as major incidents of corporate spending and executive compensation. For example, we pressed for the company to ensure that robust corporate governance surrounds all compensation actions and worked with AIG management on limits to executive compensation that restrict salary and bonuses for 2008 and 2009. The Treasury has also imposed standards governing executive compensation that are broader than the general restrictions under the TARP Capital Purchase Program. The Treasury has also required a comprehensive written policy on corporate expenses that may be materially amended only with the Treasury's prior consent. Following the establishment of the Revolving Credit Facility, AIG accessed its funds to meet various liquidity needs and by October 1, 2008, the company had drawn down approximately $61 billion. In part these draws were used to settle transactions with counterparties returning securities they had borrowed from AIG entities under a securities lending program used by AIG insurance subsidiaries. The cash collateral received by AIG in these lending programs was used to purchase a portfolio of residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS). As the value of RMBS declined, these transactions became a significant source of liquidity strain on AIG. When securities borrowing counterparties chose to terminate their securities borrowing transactions with AIG, AIG was unable to immediately dispose of the illiquid and price-depressed RMBS as a source of repayment to securities borrowers without realizing substantial losses. As a result, AIG had to supply cash from its own resources to repay the securities borrowing counterparties. To reduce these liquidity pressures, the Board approved an additional credit facility (the Secured Borrowing Facility) that permitted the New York Reserve Bank to lend to certain AIG domestic insurance subsidiaries up to $37.8 billion in order to allow them to return the cash collateral they received from their securities borrowing counterparties. The Secured Borrowing Facility was designed to provide the company additional time to arrange and complete the orderly sales of RMBS and other assets in a manner that would minimize losses to AIG and disruption to the financial markets. AIG borrowed approximately $20 billion under the Securities Borrowing Facility by November of 2008. State insurance authorities of AIG's regulated insurance subsidiaries participating in the securities lending program supported the Board's action. Additionally, toward the end of October, four AIG affiliates began participating in the Federal Reserve's Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) on the same terms and conditions as other participants. The CPFF is a generally available program that involves the purchase, through a special purpose vehicle with financing from the Federal Reserve, of three-month unsecured and asset-backed commercial paper directly from eligible issuers. As of February 18, 2009, the AIG-affiliated CPFF participants had borrowed approximately $14 billion in the aggregate from the facility. During the month of October, credit markets continued to be severely stressed and liquidity pressures on AIG did not abate even with access to government credit. The company was negatively affected by the decline in market value of many assets owned by AIG entities or to which AIG entities were exposed through derivatives. Losses on the RMBS portfolios in the securities borrowing program and credit default swap protection Financial Products had written on multi-sector CDOs together accounted for approximately $19 billion of the $24.5 billion in losses announced by the company for the third quarter of 2008. The losses experienced through the third quarter, and the consequent capital erosion placed in jeopardy the credit ratings of AIG. Had the credit ratings agencies downgraded AIG in November, AIG would have been required to find additional funds to meet collateral calls and termination events on the exposures held by Financial Products alone. The Board and Treasury therefore took a series of actions, announced on November 10, 2008, to mitigate the effect of third quarter losses and liquidity drains on AIG and its subsidiaries, and provide for a more stable capital structure. These actions were designed to facilitate AIG's execution of its divestiture plan in an orderly manner, and thereby protect the interests of the taxpayers, both by preserving financial stability and by giving AIG more time to repay the Federal Reserve and return the Treasury's investment. As part of the set of actions, Treasury invested $40 billion in newly issued Senior Preferred Stock of AIG under its recently granted TARP authority. In connection with that investment, the Federal Reserve modified the terms of the Revolving Credit Facility to be more sustainable: The maturity of loans extended under the facility was extended to five years (due 2013), the maximum amount available was reduced from $85 billion to $60 billion, and the interest rate and commitment fees were reduced. The facility remained secured by substantially all of AIG's assets, and the company continued to be required to apply proceeds of asset sales to permanently repay any outstanding balances under the facility. At the same time, the Board approved the establishment of an additional lending facility that would provide a permanent solution to the AIG securities lending program's losses and liquidity drains, thus eliminating the need for the Securities Borrowing Facility. Under the new facility, the New York Reserve Bank extended approximately $19.5 billion in secured, non-recourse credit to a special purpose limited liability company in which AIG would hold a $1 billion first-loss position (Maiden Lane II). Maiden Lane II then purchased, at market prices, RMBS with a par value of $39.3 billion from certain AIG domestic insurance company subsidiaries. This facility allowed AIG to terminate its securities lending program and to repay fully all outstanding amounts under the Securities Borrowing Facility, which was then terminated. The Federal Reserve also took steps to help address the drain of liquidity on AIG arising from potential collateral calls associated with credit default swap contracts written by Financial Products on multi-sector CDOs. The New York Reserve Bank made a secured, non-recourse loan in the amount of $24.3 billion to another special purpose limited liability company (Maiden Lane III). Maiden Lane III then purchased, at market prices, multi-sector collateralized debt obligations with a par value of approximately $62 billion from credit default swap counterparties of Financial Products in return for the agreement of the counterparties to terminate the credit default swaps. AIG provided $5 billion in equity to Maiden Lane III to absorb future losses on the CDOs held by Maiden Lane III. The Federal Reserve loans to Maiden Lane II and III have a term of six years and are secured by the entire portfolio of each company. The Federal Reserve reports the amount of the loans to these facilities and the value of the supporting collateral regularly on its website. The investment manager to the New York Reserve Bank for these entities projects that, even under very stressed scenarios, the loans to Maiden Lane II and Maiden Lane III will be repaid over time with no loss to the taxpayer. On Monday, March 2, 2009, AIG announced a loss of approximately $62 billion for the fourth quarter of 2008, ending a year in which AIG suffered approximately $99 billion in total net losses. As a consequence of increased economic weakness and market disruption, the insurance subsidiaries of AIG, like many other insurance companies, have recorded significant losses on investments in the fourth quarter of 2008. Commercial mortgage-backed securities and commercial mortgages have experienced especially severe impairment in market value, requiring a steep markdown on the companies' books, despite a lack of significant credit losses on these assets to date. The loss of value in the company's investment portfolios, which totaled approximately $18.6 billion pre-tax, was primarily attributable to the insurance subsidiaries' holdings. This loss was a substantial contributor to AIG's fourth quarter loss. The remainder of the fourth quarter loss was significantly associated with the mark to market of assets transferred to Maiden Lane II and Maiden Lane III during the middle of that quarter, losses due to accounting on securities lending transactions that occurred during the fourth quarter, impairment of deferred tax assets and goodwill, and other market valuation losses. At the same time, general economic weaknesses, along with a tendency of the public to pull away from a company that it viewed as having an uncertain future, hurt AIG's ability to generate new business during the last half of 2008 and caused a noticeable increase in policy surrenders. In addition, these extreme financial and economic conditions have greatly complicated the plans for divestiture of significant parts of the company in order to repay the U.S. government for its previous support. Would-be buyers themselves are experiencing financial strains and lack access to financing that would make such purchases possible. To address these weaknesses, the Federal Reserve and Treasury, in consultation with management of AIG and outside advisers retained by the Federal Reserve, announced on March 2, 2009, a plan designed to provide longer-term stability to AIG while at the same time facilitating divestiture of its assets and maximizing likelihood of repayment to the U.S. government. The plan involves restructuring the current obligations of AIG to the Federal Reserve and Treasury, additional capital contributions by Treasury, and continued access to Federal Reserve credit on a limited basis for ongoing liquidity needs of AIG. Under the plan, Treasury will create a new capital facility that would allow AIG to issue to the Treasury up to $30 billion over five years in new preferred shares under the TARP as liquidity and capital needs arise. This brings the total equity support of the Treasury to $70 billion. Additionally, Treasury will restructure the $40 billion in preferred equity AIG issued to the Treasury in connection with the actions taken to aid the company in November. This restructuring, along with the injections of capital from the new preferred shares, will bolster AIG's capital position and reduce its leverage, bolstering confidence in the company. Under the plan, the Federal Reserve also has agreed to reduce and restructure AIG's outstanding debt under the Revolving Credit Facility. Capacity under the Revolving Credit Facility will be reduced from $60 billion to $25 billion. The current outstanding debt of $39.5 billion will be restructured in several ways. First, up to about $26 billion will be satisfied by providing the Federal Reserve with preferred equity interests in AIG's two largest life insurance subsidiaries, American Life Insurance Company (ALICO) and American International Assurance Company (AIA). The actual amount will be a percentage of the fair market value of AIA and ALICO based on valuations acceptable to the Federal Reserve. This action would be a positive step toward preparing these two valuable AIG subsidiaries for sale to third parties or disposition through an initial public offering, the proceeds of which would return to the Federal Reserve through its preferred equity interest stake in these two companies. Another component of the debt restructuring involves the use of an insurance industry tool to monetize cash flows on a specified block of life insurance policies already in existence. Under the plan, the Federal Reserve would extend up to $8.5 billion in credit to special purpose vehicles (SPV) that would repay the obligation from the net cash flows of identified blocks of life insurance policies previously issued by certain AIG domestic life insurance subsidiaries. The total amount of principal and interest due to the Federal Reserve on this credit would represent a fixed percentage of the estimated net cash flow from the underlying policies that would flow to the borrowing SPVs. This "buffer" between the amount of the credit and the net cash flow would provide the Federal Reserve with security and provide reasonable assurance of repayment. Each of the decisions to provide assistance to AIG has been difficult and uncomfortable for us. However, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury agree that the risks and potential costs to consumers, municipalities, small businesses and others who depend on AIG for insurance protection in their lives, operations, pensions, and investments, as well as the risks to the wider economy, of not providing this assistance during the current economic environment are unacceptably large. The disorderly failure of systemically important financial institutions during this period of severe economic stress would only deepen the current economic recession. We have been and will continue to work alongside the Treasury and other government agencies to avoid this outcome. At the same time, in exercising the tools at our disposal, we are also committed to acting only when and to the extent that our assistance is necessary and can be effective in addressing systemic risks and we are committed to protecting the interests of the U.S. government and taxpayer.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application by ICE US Trust LLC, New York, New York (ICE Trust), to become a member of the Federal Reserve System. ICE Trust intends to provide central counterparty services for certain credit default swap contracts. ICE Trust is one of several industry proposals that could satisfy the goals of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets regarding the formation of central counterparties for credit default swaps. In November 2008, the President's Working Group called for the successful implementation of central counterparty services with a view toward reducing systemic risk associated with counterparty credit exposures, facilitating greater market transparency, and encouraging a more competitive trading environment. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application by ICE US Trust LLC, New York, New York (ICE Trust), to become a member of the Federal Reserve System. ICE Trust intends to provide central counterparty services for certain credit default swap contracts. ICE Trust is one of several industry proposals that could satisfy the goals of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets regarding the formation of central counterparties for credit default swaps. In November 2008, the President's Working Group called for the successful implementation of central counterparty services with a view toward reducing systemic risk associated with counterparty credit exposures, facilitating greater market transparency, and encouraging a more competitive trading environment. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Southern BancShares (N.C.), Inc., Mount Olive, to acquire up to 9.9 percent of the outstanding voting shares of ECB Bancorp, Inc. and indirectly acquire shares in its subsidiary bank, The East Carolina Bank, both of Engelhard, all of North Carolina. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Southern BancShares (N.C.), Inc., Mount Olive, to acquire up to 9.9 percent of the outstanding voting shares of ECB Bancorp, Inc. and indirectly acquire shares in its subsidiary bank, The East Carolina Bank, both of Engelhard, all of North Carolina. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the adoption of a final rule that delays until March 31, 2011, the effective date of new limits on the inclusion of trust preferred securities and other restricted core capital elements in tier 1 capital of bank holding companies (BHCs). This action is being taken in light of continued stress in financial markets and the efforts of BHCs to increase their overall capital levels. These new limits were scheduled to take effect on March 31, 2009, pursuant to a final rule adopted by the Board on March 10, 2005 (70Federal Register11827). The delay will further the Board's efforts, as well as the efforts of the other Federal banking agencies and the U.S. Department of the Treasury, to respond to the current financial situation. As explained in further detail in the final rule, as a result of delaying implementation of the new limits and until the new effective date in 2011, all BHCs may include cumulative perpetual preferred stock and trust preferred securities in tier 1 capital up to 25 percent of total core capital elements. The Board's final rule is attached. Federal Registernotice:61 KB PDF|HTML
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the adoption of a final rule that delays until March 31, 2011, the effective date of new limits on the inclusion of trust preferred securities and other restricted core capital elements in tier 1 capital of bank holding companies (BHCs). This action is being taken in light of continued stress in financial markets and the efforts of BHCs to increase their overall capital levels. These new limits were scheduled to take effect on March 31, 2009, pursuant to a final rule adopted by the Board on March 10, 2005 (70Federal Register11827). The delay will further the Board's efforts, as well as the efforts of the other Federal banking agencies and the U.S. Department of the Treasury, to respond to the current financial situation. As explained in further detail in the final rule, as a result of delaying implementation of the new limits and until the new effective date in 2011, all BHCs may include cumulative perpetual preferred stock and trust preferred securities in tier 1 capital up to 25 percent of total core capital elements. The Board's final rule is attached. Federal Registernotice:61 KB PDF|HTML
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced that the set of eligible collateral for loans extended by the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) is being expanded to include four additional categories of asset-backed securities (ABS): Mortgage servicing advances are loans extended by residential mortgage servicers to cover payments missed by homeowners. Accepting ABS backed by mortgage servicing advances should improve the servicers' ability to work with homeowners to prevent avoidable foreclosures. The additional new ABS categories complement the consumer and small business loan categories that were already eligible--ABS backed by auto loans (including auto floorplan loans), credit cards loans, student loans, and SBA-guaranteed small business loans. The new categories of collateral will be eligible for the April TALF funding. Additional details on the April funding will be released on March 24. Subscriptions for the April funding will be accepted on April 7, and those loans will settle on April 14. The subscription period for the first TALF funding ends today. The requested loans will settle on March 25. The Board authorized the TALF on November 24, 2008, under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. Under the TALF, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York extends three-year loans secured by AAA-rated ABS backed by newly and recently originated loans. On February 10, 2009, the Board announced that it is prepared to undertake a significant expansion of the TALF. Today's announcement marks the first step in that expansion; a number of other asset classes are under review. A new term sheet and a revised frequently-asked-questions document are attached. Terms and conditions Frequently asked questions
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced that the set of eligible collateral for loans extended by the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) is being expanded to include four additional categories of asset-backed securities (ABS): Mortgage servicing advances are loans extended by residential mortgage servicers to cover payments missed by homeowners. Accepting ABS backed by mortgage servicing advances should improve the servicers' ability to work with homeowners to prevent avoidable foreclosures. The additional new ABS categories complement the consumer and small business loan categories that were already eligible--ABS backed by auto loans (including auto floorplan loans), credit cards loans, student loans, and SBA-guaranteed small business loans. The new categories of collateral will be eligible for the April TALF funding. Additional details on the April funding will be released on March 24. Subscriptions for the April funding will be accepted on April 7, and those loans will settle on April 14. The subscription period for the first TALF funding ends today. The requested loans will settle on March 25. The Board authorized the TALF on November 24, 2008, under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. Under the TALF, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York extends three-year loans secured by AAA-rated ABS backed by newly and recently originated loans. On February 10, 2009, the Board announced that it is prepared to undertake a significant expansion of the TALF. Today's announcement marks the first step in that expansion; a number of other asset classes are under review. A new term sheet and a revised frequently-asked-questions document are attached. Terms and conditions Frequently asked questions
Reports of mortgage foreclosure scams are on the rise. Knowing what to watch for and where to turn for help is vital for families who are struggling to remain in their homes. March 1 to 9 is National Consumer Protection Week, and the Federal Reserve Board has compiled some tips to help protect consumers from becoming victims of foreclosure avoidance scams. It's important for consumers to know that housing counselors and other resources are available at no or low cost to assist homeowners who have fallen behind on their mortgage payments."Saving a home from foreclosure requires fast and informed action but the solution doesn't have to be costly," said Federal Reserve Governor Elizabeth A Duke. "It shouldn't hurt to get help."Solicitors of foreclosure schemes reach out to potential victims by a variety of means using the Internet, the telephone, and direct mailings. Some solicitors go door-to-door or approach homeowners at events related to home preservation. The information the Federal Reserve is providing, which is part of its "5 Tips" series, is intended to give consumers the basic information they need to recognize and avoid foreclosure avoidance scams. Consumers are urged to check the credentials of counselors and to avoid working with someone who collects a fee before providing any services or accepts payment only by cashier's check or wire transfer. Consumers should not pay for a service without knowing exactly what they are buying.Avoiding foreclosure cannot be guaranteed--regardless of the circumstances. Working with a legitimate counselor can increase the chances of keeping a home, but consumers should be wary of people who tell them it's a sure thing. Details of the transaction, along with any promises, should be provided up front and in writing.The tips to follow will help consumers select a reputable counselor and avoid fraudulent foreclosure scams.Work only with a non-profit HUD-approved counselor. For a list of certified counselors visitwww.hud.gov/offices/hsg/sfh/hcc/hcs.cfmor call 877-HUD-1515 (877-483-1515). If the name of the organization you are working with isn't on the list, then switch to one that is.Don't pay an arm and a leg. Most housing counselors provide no- or low-cost counseling services. You should not have to pay hundreds, or thousands, of dollars for assistance.Be wary of "guarantees." No one can ensure you good results.Know what you are signing. Don't let a counselor pressure you into signing paperwork you haven't had a chance to read thoroughly or that you don't understand.If it sounds too good to be true, it probably is.If you feel you are a victim of foreclosure fraud, trust your instincts and ask for help. Report suspicious schemes to your state and local consumer protection agencies, which you can find on theConsumer Action Website.Additional information about avoiding foreclosure scams may be found on the Board's website:5 Tips for Avoiding Foreclosure Scams Reports of mortgage foreclosure scams are on the rise. Knowing what to watch for and where to turn for help is vital for families who are struggling to remain in their homes. March 1 to 9 is National Consumer Protection Week, and the Federal Reserve Board has compiled some tips to help protect consumers from becoming victims of foreclosure avoidance scams. It's important for consumers to know that housing counselors and other resources are available at no or low cost to assist homeowners who have fallen behind on their mortgage payments. "Saving a home from foreclosure requires fast and informed action but the solution doesn't have to be costly," said Federal Reserve Governor Elizabeth A Duke. "It shouldn't hurt to get help." Solicitors of foreclosure schemes reach out to potential victims by a variety of means using the Internet, the telephone, and direct mailings. Some solicitors go door-to-door or approach homeowners at events related to home preservation. The information the Federal Reserve is providing, which is part of its "5 Tips" series, is intended to give consumers the basic information they need to recognize and avoid foreclosure avoidance scams. Consumers are urged to check the credentials of counselors and to avoid working with someone who collects a fee before providing any services or accepts payment only by cashier's check or wire transfer. Consumers should not pay for a service without knowing exactly what they are buying. Avoiding foreclosure cannot be guaranteed--regardless of the circumstances. Working with a legitimate counselor can increase the chances of keeping a home, but consumers should be wary of people who tell them it's a sure thing. Details of the transaction, along with any promises, should be provided up front and in writing. The tips to follow will help consumers select a reputable counselor and avoid fraudulent foreclosure scams. Work only with a non-profit HUD-approved counselor. For a list of certified counselors visitwww.hud.gov/offices/hsg/sfh/hcc/hcs.cfmor call 877-HUD-1515 (877-483-1515). If the name of the organization you are working with isn't on the list, then switch to one that is. Don't pay an arm and a leg. Most housing counselors provide no- or low-cost counseling services. You should not have to pay hundreds, or thousands, of dollars for assistance. Be wary of "guarantees." No one can ensure you good results. If it sounds too good to be true, it probably is. If you feel you are a victim of foreclosure fraud, trust your instincts and ask for help. Report suspicious schemes to your state and local consumer protection agencies, which you can find on theConsumer Action Website. Additional information about avoiding foreclosure scams may be found on the Board's website: 5 Tips for Avoiding Foreclosure Scams
Reports of mortgage foreclosure scams are on the rise. Knowing what to watch for and where to turn for help is vital for families who are struggling to remain in their homes. March 1 to 9 is National Consumer Protection Week, and the Federal Reserve Board has compiled some tips to help protect consumers from becoming victims of foreclosure avoidance scams. It's important for consumers to know that housing counselors and other resources are available at no or low cost to assist homeowners who have fallen behind on their mortgage payments."Saving a home from foreclosure requires fast and informed action but the solution doesn't have to be costly," said Federal Reserve Governor Elizabeth A Duke. "It shouldn't hurt to get help."Solicitors of foreclosure schemes reach out to potential victims by a variety of means using the Internet, the telephone, and direct mailings. Some solicitors go door-to-door or approach homeowners at events related to home preservation. The information the Federal Reserve is providing, which is part of its "5 Tips" series, is intended to give consumers the basic information they need to recognize and avoid foreclosure avoidance scams. Consumers are urged to check the credentials of counselors and to avoid working with someone who collects a fee before providing any services or accepts payment only by cashier's check or wire transfer. Consumers should not pay for a service without knowing exactly what they are buying.Avoiding foreclosure cannot be guaranteed--regardless of the circumstances. Working with a legitimate counselor can increase the chances of keeping a home, but consumers should be wary of people who tell them it's a sure thing. Details of the transaction, along with any promises, should be provided up front and in writing.The tips to follow will help consumers select a reputable counselor and avoid fraudulent foreclosure scams.Work only with a non-profit HUD-approved counselor. For a list of certified counselors visitwww.hud.gov/offices/hsg/sfh/hcc/hcs.cfmor call 877-HUD-1515 (877-483-1515). If the name of the organization you are working with isn't on the list, then switch to one that is.Don't pay an arm and a leg. Most housing counselors provide no- or low-cost counseling services. You should not have to pay hundreds, or thousands, of dollars for assistance.Be wary of "guarantees." No one can ensure you good results.Know what you are signing. Don't let a counselor pressure you into signing paperwork you haven't had a chance to read thoroughly or that you don't understand.If it sounds too good to be true, it probably is.If you feel you are a victim of foreclosure fraud, trust your instincts and ask for help. Report suspicious schemes to your state and local consumer protection agencies, which you can find on theConsumer Action Website.Additional information about avoiding foreclosure scams may be found on the Board's website:5 Tips for Avoiding Foreclosure Scams Reports of mortgage foreclosure scams are on the rise. Knowing what to watch for and where to turn for help is vital for families who are struggling to remain in their homes. March 1 to 9 is National Consumer Protection Week, and the Federal Reserve Board has compiled some tips to help protect consumers from becoming victims of foreclosure avoidance scams. It's important for consumers to know that housing counselors and other resources are available at no or low cost to assist homeowners who have fallen behind on their mortgage payments. "Saving a home from foreclosure requires fast and informed action but the solution doesn't have to be costly," said Federal Reserve Governor Elizabeth A Duke. "It shouldn't hurt to get help." Solicitors of foreclosure schemes reach out to potential victims by a variety of means using the Internet, the telephone, and direct mailings. Some solicitors go door-to-door or approach homeowners at events related to home preservation. The information the Federal Reserve is providing, which is part of its "5 Tips" series, is intended to give consumers the basic information they need to recognize and avoid foreclosure avoidance scams. Consumers are urged to check the credentials of counselors and to avoid working with someone who collects a fee before providing any services or accepts payment only by cashier's check or wire transfer. Consumers should not pay for a service without knowing exactly what they are buying. Avoiding foreclosure cannot be guaranteed--regardless of the circumstances. Working with a legitimate counselor can increase the chances of keeping a home, but consumers should be wary of people who tell them it's a sure thing. Details of the transaction, along with any promises, should be provided up front and in writing. The tips to follow will help consumers select a reputable counselor and avoid fraudulent foreclosure scams. Work only with a non-profit HUD-approved counselor. For a list of certified counselors visitwww.hud.gov/offices/hsg/sfh/hcc/hcs.cfmor call 877-HUD-1515 (877-483-1515). If the name of the organization you are working with isn't on the list, then switch to one that is. Don't pay an arm and a leg. Most housing counselors provide no- or low-cost counseling services. You should not have to pay hundreds, or thousands, of dollars for assistance. Be wary of "guarantees." No one can ensure you good results. If it sounds too good to be true, it probably is. If you feel you are a victim of foreclosure fraud, trust your instincts and ask for help. Report suspicious schemes to your state and local consumer protection agencies, which you can find on theConsumer Action Website. Additional information about avoiding foreclosure scams may be found on the Board's website: 5 Tips for Avoiding Foreclosure Scams
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday requested public comment on proposed changes to the methodology for calculating the imputed costs, collectively known as the private sector adjustment factor (PSAF), that are considered when setting fees and measuring cost recovery for certain payment services provided to depository institutions (DIs). The comment period ends on May 29, 2009. Specifically, the Board requests comment on its proposal to replace the current correspondent bank model underlying the PSAF calculation with a model based on elements derived from publicly traded firms more broadly. The Board is considering a new methodology because the recent implementation of the payment of interest on DI required reserve balances and excess balances held at Reserve Banks and the subsequent reduction in clearing balances held at Reserve Banks have changed the priced services balance sheet to more closely reflect publicly traded firms more generally rather than correspondent banks. Any change to the methodology could be effective as early as the 2010 pricing process. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires the Federal Reserve to set fees for the services it provides to depository institutions at a level sufficient to recover, over the long run, the actual costs of providing these services, as well as the imputed costs and profits. The PSAF is an allowance for imputed costs, including financing costs, return on equity capital, taxes, and certain other expenses that are not explicitly incurred by the Reserve Banks but would be incurred by a private business firm providing the services. The methodology underlying the PSAF is reviewed periodically to ensure that it is appropriate and relevant in light of changes that may have occurred in Reserve Bank priced-services activities, accounting standards, finance theory, and regulatory and business practices. The Board's notice is attached. Federal Registernotice:2 MB PDF|HTML
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday requested public comment on proposed changes to the methodology for calculating the imputed costs, collectively known as the private sector adjustment factor (PSAF), that are considered when setting fees and measuring cost recovery for certain payment services provided to depository institutions (DIs). The comment period ends on May 29, 2009. Specifically, the Board requests comment on its proposal to replace the current correspondent bank model underlying the PSAF calculation with a model based on elements derived from publicly traded firms more broadly. The Board is considering a new methodology because the recent implementation of the payment of interest on DI required reserve balances and excess balances held at Reserve Banks and the subsequent reduction in clearing balances held at Reserve Banks have changed the priced services balance sheet to more closely reflect publicly traded firms more generally rather than correspondent banks. Any change to the methodology could be effective as early as the 2010 pricing process. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires the Federal Reserve to set fees for the services it provides to depository institutions at a level sufficient to recover, over the long run, the actual costs of providing these services, as well as the imputed costs and profits. The PSAF is an allowance for imputed costs, including financing costs, return on equity capital, taxes, and certain other expenses that are not explicitly incurred by the Reserve Banks but would be incurred by a private business firm providing the services. The methodology underlying the PSAF is reviewed periodically to ensure that it is appropriate and relevant in light of changes that may have occurred in Reserve Bank priced-services activities, accounting standards, finance theory, and regulatory and business practices. The Board's notice is attached. Federal Registernotice:2 MB PDF|HTML
The Federal Reserve Board announced Monday that the Consumer Advisory Council will hold its next meeting on Thursday, March 26. The meeting will take place in Dining Room E, Terrace Level, in the Board's Martin Building. The session will begin at 9:00 a.m. and is open to the public. Anyone planning to attend the meeting should, for security purposes, register no later than Tuesday, March 24, by completing the form found online at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/secure/forms/cacregistration.cfmAttendees must present photo identification to enter the building. The Council's function is to advise the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under various consumer financial services laws and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics: Reports by committees and other matters initiated by the Council members may also be discussed. The Board invites comments from the public on any of these matters. The Board's notice is attached. Federal Registernotice:46 KB PDF|HTML
The Federal Reserve Board announced Monday that the Consumer Advisory Council will hold its next meeting on Thursday, March 26. The meeting will take place in Dining Room E, Terrace Level, in the Board's Martin Building. The session will begin at 9:00 a.m. and is open to the public. Anyone planning to attend the meeting should, for security purposes, register no later than Tuesday, March 24, by completing the form found online at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/secure/forms/cacregistration.cfmAttendees must present photo identification to enter the building. The Council's function is to advise the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under various consumer financial services laws and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics: Reports by committees and other matters initiated by the Council members may also be discussed. The Board invites comments from the public on any of these matters. The Board's notice is attached. Federal Registernotice:46 KB PDF|HTML
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Interstate Interchange Dedication Ceremony, Dillon, South Carolina It is a great pleasure to be back in Dillon today and to enjoy the signal distinction of having Exit 190 on Interstate 95 named in my honor. As some of you know, my family ties to Dillon extend back more than six decades. My paternal grandparents, Jonas and Lina Bernanke, purchased a drugstore on Dillon's Main Street in 1941 and moved here from New York. Jonas called the store Jay Bee Drugs, after his own initials. Eventually, my dad, Philip, and his brother, Mort--who still lives in Dillon--bought the store from my grandfather and ran it for many years. Dillon had very few doctors at the time, so a lot of people came to my dad and uncle for advice on basic health matters. They became known to their customers as "Dr. Phil" and "Dr. Mort." When my mother, Edna, wasn't keeping an eye on me or my siblings, she kept the store books and paid the bills. I remember working in the store as a boy, or, as Uncle Mort likes to remind me, avoiding work by hiding out by the comic-book rack. I attended East Elementary, J.V. Martin Junior High, and Dillon High School, where I played saxophone in the marching band. (I wish Dillon High had a math team when I was attending; I understand this year's team had done quite well.) I especially remember with fondness the many friends I made during those years. I remember, too, in the summer after I graduated from high school, working construction to help build Saint Eugene Hospital, now McLeod Medical Center, and I remember, during the summers of my college years, waiting tables six days a week at South of the Border. As a teenager, like many teenagers, I itched to get away from the small town in which I grew up. I got my wish when I left Dillon to attend Harvard University. And, although I have since been privileged to study and teach at some of the finest universities in this country, I realize now how much I learned during my 17 years here. First and foremost, I learned how very hard people in small towns like Dillon, and in communities large and small all across the United States, have to work to support themselves and their families and to offer opportunities to their children. I got a taste of that when, on the first day I came home from working on the construction site at St. Eugene's, I was too tired to eat and fell asleep in my chair. Second, I learned in Dillon that Americans are economically ambitious. I remember the fellow construction worker who wanted to become a foreman and the waitress at South of the Border who wanted to be the first in her family to go to college. I knew that these things characterized Americans then, and know that they still do today. So, in that way and many others, I carry my hometown with me, and it is very good to return, if only for a short visit to accept this honor. I must confess that, until recently, I did not realize that highway interchanges were named after people. But, as I thought about it, I realized that it is indeed a high honor for someone whose job is focused on supporting the economy. Efficient transportation is crucial to economic development. Indeed, Dillon owed its early prosperity to the railroad station at the center of town, as well as to the cotton and tobacco that flowed through it. Just as railroads were instrumental to economic development in the 19th century, interstate highways such as I-95--the vision of President Eisenhower--have been crucial in our own time. The interstates lowered transportation costs markedly and knitted our national economy together, thereby raising productivity. The proximity of Interstate 95, which stretches the length of the East Coast from Maine to Florida, supports manufacturing and distributive industries in and around Dillon. Of course, I am aware that Dillon faces challenges today, as do many communities. But the area has much to offer. This Wellness Center, for example, just two years old, serves as a valuable community resource. But perhaps Dillon's greatest resource is the determination and resilience of its people. Like all natives of Dillon, I'm sure, I was proud to see Ty'Sheoma Bethea sitting alongside Michele Obama as the President delivered his speech to the Congress. (In fact, since Ty'Sheoma is now Dillon's most-famous resident, I wonder if it might not be more appropriate to name this interchange after her.) As all of Dillon knows, Ty'Sheoma was sitting with the First Lady because of a letter she had written to members of Congress to ask them for help for her school (and my former school). She also wrote of the desire of her classmates to achieve, to become lawyers and doctors--and members of Congress. I want to applaud Ty'Sheoma and her classmates for their thirst for knowledge. Education is the foundation of our country's past and future economic prosperity. The determination of Ty'Sheoma and her classmates is an inspiration. As she wrote in her letter, "We are not quitters." Well, neither are the American people, despite the economic challenges we now confront. For our part, at the Federal Reserve, we will continue to forcefully deploy all the tools at our disposal as long as necessary to support the restoration of financial stability and the resumption of healthy economic growth. I want to conclude by expressing my heartfelt thanks. I appreciate the thoughtfulness of the Dillon Chamber of Commerce in asking the state to name this interchange after me and of the state legislature in approving the resolution. But even more than the honor itself, I am touched by what it represents--the prayers, good wishes, and support of the people of my home state and hometown. I cannot express how much those good wishes mean to me. I think of them often during my work in Washington and travels on behalf of the Federal Reserve, and I will be reminded of them, very tangibly, whenever I return to Dillon.
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus and members of the Committee, I am pleased to appear today to discuss several issues related to the state of the banking system. First, I will discuss the condition of the banking system, credit conditions, and bank underwriting standards. Then I will describe Federal Reserve activities to enhance liquidity in financial markets and improve conditions in financial markets. Finally, I will discuss the Federal Reserve's efforts to ensure the overall safety and soundness of the banking system as well as promote credit availability. As you are well aware, the Federal Reserve has taken significant steps to improve financial market conditions, and has worked with the Treasury and other bank and thrift supervisors to address issues at U.S. banking organizations. We remain attentive to the need for banks to remain in sound financial condition while at the same time to continue lending prudently to creditworthy borrowers. Fortunately, many banks continue to lend in this environment, but with the shutdown of most securitization markets and the evaporation of many types of nonbank credit, it is that much more important right now for the U.S. banking system to be able to carry out its credit intermediation function. BackgroundThe Federal Reserve has supervisory and regulatory authority for bank holding companies, state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System (state member banks), and certain other financial institutions and activities. We work with other federal and state supervisory authorities to ensure the safety and soundness of the banking industry, foster the stability of the financial system, and provide for fair and equitable treatment of consumers in their financial transactions. The Federal Reserve is not the primary federal supervisor for the majority of commercial bank assets. Rather, it is the consolidated supervisor of bank holding companies, including financial holding companies, and conducts inspections of those institutions. The primary purpose of inspections is to ensure that the holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries do not pose a threat to the soundness of the company's depository institutions. In fulfilling this role, the Federal Reserve is required to rely to the fullest extent possible on information and analysis provided by the appropriate supervisory authority of the company's bank, securities, or insurance subsidiaries. The Federal Reserve is also the primary federal supervisor of state member banks, sharing supervisory responsibilities with state agencies. In this role, Federal Reserve supervisory staff regularly conduct on-site examinations and off-site monitoring to ensure the soundness of supervised state member banks. The Federal Reserve is involved in both regulation--establishing the rules within which banking organizations must operate--and supervision--ensuring that banking organizations abide by those rules and remain, overall, in safe and sound condition. A key aspect of the supervisory process is evaluating risk-management practices. Because rules and regulations in many cases cannot reasonably prescribe the exact practices each individual bank should use for risk management, supervisors design policies and guidance that expand upon requirements set in rules and regulations and establish expectations for the range of acceptable practices. Supervisors rely extensively on these policies and guidance as they conduct examinations and assign supervisory ratings. Beginning in the summer of 2007, the U.S. and global economies entered a period of intense financial turmoil that has presented significant challenges for the financial services industry. These challenges intensified in the latter part of 2008 as the global economic environment weakened further. As a result, parts of the U.S. banking system have come under severe strain, with some banking institutions suffering sizable losses. State of the Banking SystemI would now like to briefly summarize overall conditions at U.S. commercial banks and large banking holding companies (BHCs). For U.S. commercial banks as a group, profitability measures deteriorated dramatically during 2008. Indeed, commercial banks posted a substantial and rare aggregate loss for fourth quarter of 2008, the first time this has happened since the late 1980s. This loss in large part reflected write-downs on trading assets, high goodwill impairment charges, and, most significantly, increased loan-loss provisions taken in response to deteriorating asset quality, higher net charge-offs, and weakening economic conditions. As of year-end 2008, loans delinquent 30 days or more or on nonaccrual status exceeded 4.5 percent of total loans, the highest level since the early 1990s. Moreover, nonaccruing loans--those most likely to result in additional charge-offs--reached almost two-percent of loans, a ratio more than double that of year-end 2007. Despite poor earnings performance, capital ratios held up relatively well, with reported tier 1 and total risk-based capital ratios increasing over the course of the year. The performance of state member banks tracked that of the industry as a whole. The earnings performance of the 50 largest U.S.-based bank holding companies (BHCs) as a group, which together represent more than three-fourths of all assets at BHCs, deteriorated rapidly during the last two quarters of 2008. In aggregate, these companies reported a fourth quarter net loss of $42.7 billion--versus a $25.5 billion third-quarter loss--due mainly to elevated loan-loss provisions, very large goodwill impairment charges, and a continuation of heavy trading asset write-downs. For the year, these companies generated a $67 billion loss. Nonetheless, regulatory capital ratios actually improved during 2008--supported by substantial private capital investments in these companies during the first half and by the Troubled Assets Relief Program (TARP) investments by the U.S. Treasury toward the end of the year. As a consequence, these bank holding companies in aggregate continued to maintain capital ratios well in excess of minimum regulatory requirements. Conditions in Credit MarketsAs Chairman Bernanke noted in presenting the Board's most recent monetary policy testimony to Congress in February, the U.S. economy is undergoing a severe contraction. From past experience, we know that borrowing by households and nonfinancial businesses has tended to slow during economic downturns. Since 1953, the inflation-adjusted growth rate of debt owed by households and nonfinancial businesses has fallen, on average, about 2 percentage points at an annual rate in the year following a business cycle peak (as dated by the National Bureau of Economic Research, or NBER). The inflation-adjusted slowdown in debt growth during the past year has been much more pronounced than in previous downturns: Annualized debt growth for households and nonfinancial businesses in the fourth quarter of 2008 (the most up-to-date reading) was, adjusted for inflation, about 7 percentage points slower than it was during the NBER-designated peak in the fourth quarter of 2007. The slowdown in debt growth has differed by type of borrower. For example, after increasing nearly 6 percent in the fourth quarter of 2007 (unadjusted for inflation), home mortgage debt declined at an annual rate of 1.5 percent in the fourth quarter of last year. The decline in home mortgage debt has been sharper in this period than in any other recession for which we have good data--dating back to the 1950s. Non-mortgage consumer credit also declined in the fourth quarter of last year--at an annual rate of 3.25 percent. The pull-back in consumer credit has also been somewhat sharper than the average experience during the previous nine NBER recessions. Among businesses, growth in debt for nonfinancial corporations slowed from a 12.5 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 2007 to a 1.5 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of last year. The slowdown in debt growth for this sector is also more substantial than has been experienced in past recessions. This simple comparison of the current slowdown in credit market flows to those in previous recessions ignores the many important changes to the financial landscape that have occurred during the past half-century. Significant among those changes was the large increase in the flow of credit coming from nonbank sources. For example, holdings of household mortgages by banks, savings institutions, and credit unions decreased from a share of more than 50 percent in 1985 to a share of about 30 percent of the total at the end of 2007. Similarly, banks held about 70 percent of outstanding consumer credit in 1985, but only about 45 percent in 2007. Of course, banks remain vital financial intermediaries, as the current financial crisis demonstrates. The severe turmoil in markets for securitized assets has served to increase banks' importance. And the significance of banks in the provision of credit extends far beyond their direct loans. Banks supply credit indirectly by providing back-up liquidity and credit support to other financial institutions and conduits that also intermediate credit flows. In 1950, banks' share of financial intermediation was about 50 percent, it fell and then rose to about 48 percent in the mid-1970s, then declined to about 33 percent at the turn of the century. If one adjusts the data to include "credit equivalents" for the off-balance-sheet activities of banks, then the adjusted market share of financial intermediation for banks would remain above 40 percent in recent years. In terms of direct lending, weekly data that the Federal Reserve Board collects from banks shows that total bank loans and leases increased almost 4 percent during 2008. The increase in bank lending for the year as a whole was below the roughly 10 percent pace of growth seen in both 2006 and 2007. Much of the increase in bank lending last year likely reflected households and businesses drawing down existing lines of credit rather than extensions of new loans. In addition, the freeze-up of the securitization markets likely contributed to banks' balance sheet growth. According to the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, banks have tightened lending standards sharply over the past 18 months. The January 2009 Survey found that respondents had tightened their lending policies for all major loan categories further in late 2008. Respondents also indicated that demand for loans from both businesses and households continued to weaken, on balance, over the survey period. With regard to commercial loans in particular, many survey respondents pointed to a less favorable or more uncertain economic outlook as a reason for tightening their lending standards and terms over the previous three months. Most respondents indicated that a worsening of industry-specific problems and their bank's reduced tolerance for risk were also important factors in their decision to tighten lending policies for commercial loans. Among the few respondents that saw an increase in loan demand over the previous three months, all indicated that business borrowing had shifted to their bank from other bank or nonbank sources because the other sources had become less attractive. In addition, more than 30 percent reported that inquiries from potential business borrowers had decreased during the survey period. For commercial real estate (CRE) lending, 80 percent of domestic banks reported that they had tightened their lending standards over the previous three months, slightly less than the roughly 85 percent that reported doing so in the October survey. Of note, about 30 percent of the respondents indicated that the shutdown of the commercial mortgage backed-securities (CMBS) securitization market had led to an increase in CRE lending at their bank over the second half of 2008, whereas about 15 percent indicated that the shutdown of the CMBS securitization market had reduced the volume of their CRE lending. Survey respondents also noted continued tightening for consumer products, including residential real estate lending and revolving home equity lines of credit (HELOCs). Notably, only four of the nearly 80 respondents reported making subprime mortgage loans over the previous three months. Stepping back, it is now clear that in recent years banking and financial markets experienced a period in which risk was generally under-priced and where credit was too freely available. The realization by many market participants that risks were larger than anticipated has contributed to the decline in prices for financial assets. As a result, some financial institutions--including some banking organizations--have experienced significant losses, leading to the need to raise additional capital or, in some cases, sell or shut down operations. It is apparent that all banking institutions have now been impacted in some way by the adverse conditions of the current environment. Federal Reserve Actions Since 2007The Federal Reserve has responded forcefully to the financial and economic crisis and it will continue to do so. In discussing Federal Reserve actions, I will first summarize monetary policy actions and those related to liquidity provision, and then highlight our supervisory actions. Monetary Policy and Liquidity ProvisionIn terms of monetary policy, the Federal Reserve has been aggressive. As you know, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) began to ease monetary policy in September 2007, and in December 2008, the Committee set a range of 0 to 25 basis points for the target federal funds rate. We have also employed additional tools to ease financial conditions, improve the functioning of credit markets, and thereby support economic activity. To improve mortgage market functioning and support housing markets and economic activity more broadly, the Federal Reserve has begun to purchase large amounts of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities, and we recently announced substantial additional purchases of such securities through year-end. In addition, the Federal Reserve announced plans to purchase up to $300 billion of long-term Treasury securities to help improve conditions in private credit markets. Since first announcing such purchases last November, the conforming fixed mortgage rate has fallen more than 1 percentage point. The Federal Reserve has also established new lending facilities and expanded existing facilities to enhance the flow of credit to businesses and households. In response to heightened stress in bank funding markets, we increased the size of the Term Auction Facility to help ensure that banks could obtain the funds they need to provide credit to their customers, and we expanded our network of swap lines with foreign central banks to ease conditions in interconnected dollar funding markets at home and abroad. Last fall, when money markets tightened considerably following the failure of Lehman Brothers, we established new lending facilities to provide liquidity to money market mutual funds and to support the functioning of the commercial paper market. The U.S. Treasury, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Federal Reserve have taken a number of actions to strengthen the financial sector and to promote the availability of credit to businesses and households. This included injecting additional capital into banks, increasing FDIC deposit coverage, providing guarantees of selected senior bank obligations and noninterest-bearing deposits, and establishing new liquidity facilities to financial markets. In addition, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury recently launched the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) to facilitate the extension of credit to households and small businesses and anticipates that the range of eligible collateral for this facility is likely to be expanded to other financial assets. The Federal Reserve expects to assist in the Treasury's Public-Private Partnership Investment Program, announced on Monday, by expanding the range of collateral eligible for the TALF program to include certain legacy securities. Supervisory Activities and Improvements to Risk-Management PracticesMany of the current problems in the banking and financial system stem from risk-management failures at a number of financial institutions, including some firms under federal supervision. Clearly, these lapses are unacceptable. The Federal Reserve has been involved in a number of exercises to understand, document and help address the risk-management lapses and shortcomings at major financial institutions, including those undertaken by the Senior Supervisors Group, the President's Working Group on Financial Markets, and the multinational Financial Stability Forum.1 Based on the results of these and other efforts, the Federal Reserve is taking vigorous steps to improve risk-management practices at regulated institutions. Our actions have covered liquidity risk management, capital planning and capital adequacy, firm-wide risk identification, residential lending, counterparty credit exposures, and commercial real estate lending, among other areas. Liquidity and capital have been given special attention. The crisis has undermined previous conventional wisdom that a company, even in stressed environments, may readily borrow funds if it can offer high-quality collateral. For example, the inability of Bear Stearns to borrow even against U.S. government securities led to its collapse. As a result, we have been working to bring about needed improvements in institutions' liquidity risk-management practices. Along with our U.S. supervisory colleagues, we are closely monitoring the liquidity positions of banking organizations--on a daily basis for the largest and most critical firms--and are discussing key market developments and our supervisory analyses with senior management. We use these analyses and findings from examinations to ensure that liquidity and funding management, as well as contingency funding plans, are sufficiently robust and incorporate various stress scenarios. Looking beyond the present period, we also have underway a broader-ranging examination of liquidity requirements. Similarly, the Federal Reserve is closely monitoring the capital levels of banking organizations on a regular basis and discussing our evaluation with senior management. As part of our supervisory process, we have been conducting our own analysis of loss scenarios to anticipate the potential future capital needs of institutions. These needs may arise from, among other things, future losses or the potential for off-balance-sheet exposures to return to institutions' balance sheets. Here, too, we have been discussing our analyses with bankers and ensuring that their own internal analyses reflect a broad range of scenarios and capture stress environments that could impair solvency. We have intensified efforts to evaluate institutions' capital planning and to bring about improvements where needed. Our efforts related to capital planning and capital adequacy are embodied in the interagency supervisory capital assessment process, which began in February. We are conducting assessments of selected banking institutions' capital adequacy, based on certain macroeconomic scenarios. For this assessment, we are carefully evaluating the forecasts submitted by each financial institution to ensure they are appropriate, consistent with the firm's underlying portfolio performance, and reflective of each entity's particular business activities and risk profile. The capital assessment program will permit supervisors to assess whether institutions' capital buffers over the regulatory capital minimum are appropriate under more severe but plausible scenarios. To sum up our efforts to improve banks' risk management, we are looking at all areas of risk management--both on an individual and collective basis--to ensure that all institutions have their risk-management practices at satisfactory levels. More generally, where we have not seen appropriate progress, we are aggressively downgrading supervisory ratings and using our enforcement tools. Maintaining Balance in the Supervisory ProcessThe Federal Reserve has long-standing policies and procedures in place to promote sound risk identification and management practices at regulated institutions that also support bank lending and the credit intermediation process. In fact, guidance issued as long ago as 1991, during the commercial real estate crisis that began in the late 1980s, specifically instructs examiners to ensure that regulatory policies and actions do not inadvertently curtail the availability of credit to sound borrowers.2The 1991 guidance also states that examiners are to "ensure that supervisory personnel are reviewing loans in a consistent, prudent, and balanced fashion and to ensure that all interested parties are aware of the guidance." The 1991 policy statement covers a wide range of specific topics, including: This emphasis on achieving an appropriate balance between credit availability and safety and soundness continues today. To the extent that institutions have experienced losses, hold less capital, and are operating in a more risk-sensitive environment, supervisors expect banks to employ appropriate risk-management practices to ensure their viability. At the same time, it is important that supervisors remain balanced and not place unreasonable or artificial constraints on lenders that could hamper credit availability. As part of our effort to help stimulate appropriate bank lending, the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies issued regulatory guidance in November 2008 to encourage banks to meet the needs of creditworthy borrowers.3The guidance was issued to encourage bank lending in a manner consistent with safety and soundness--specifically, by taking a balanced approach in assessing borrowers' ability to repay and making realistic assessments of collateral valuations. This guidance has been reviewed and discussed with examination staff within the Federal Reserve System. Earlier, in April 2007, the federal financial institutions regulatory agencies issued a statement encouraging financial institutions to work constructively with residential borrowers who are financially unable to make their contractual payment obligations on their home loans.4The statement noted that, "prudent workout arrangements that are consistent with safe and sound lending practices are generally in the long-term interest of both the financial institution and the borrower." The statement also noted that, "the agencies will not penalize financial institutions that pursue reasonable workout arrangements with borrowers who have encountered financial problems." It further stated that, "existing supervisory guidance and applicable accounting standards do not require institutions to immediately foreclose on the collateral underlying a loan when the borrower exhibits repayment difficulties." This guidance has also been reviewed by examiners within the Federal Reserve System. More generally, we have directed our examiners to be mindful of the procyclical effects of excessive credit tightening and to encourage banks to make economically viable loans, provided such lending is based on realistic asset valuations and a balanced assessment of borrowers' repayment capacities. Across the Federal Reserve System, we have implemented training and outreach to underscore these intentions. We are mindful of the potential for bankers to overshoot in their attempt to rectify lending standards, and want them to understand that it is in their own interest to continue making loans to creditworthy borrowers. ConclusionThe U.S. banking industry is facing serious challenges. The Federal Reserve, working with the other banking agencies has acted--and will continue to act--to ensure that the banking system remains safe and sound and is able to meet the credit needs of our economy. We have aggressively pursued monetary policy actions and provided liquidity to help repair the financial system. In our supervisory efforts, we are mindful of the risk-management deficiencies at banking institutions revealed by the current crisis and are ensuring that institutions develop appropriate corrective actions. It will take some time for the banking industry to work through this current set of challenges and for the financial markets to recover. During that recovery, the economy will need a strong and stable financial system that can make credit available. The challenge for regulators and other authorities is to support prudential bank intermediation that helps restore the health of the financial system and the economy as a whole. We want banks to deploy capital and liquidity, but in a responsible way that avoids past mistakes and does not create new ones. Bankers should operate prudently in the current challenging environment, but should not let fear drive their decisions. The Federal Reserve will continue to work with other banking agencies and the Congress to promote the concurrent goals of fostering credit availability and a safe and sound banking system. Footnotes 1.Senior Supervisors Group (2008), "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence (373 KB PDF)," March 6; President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)," March 13; Financial Stability Forum (2008), "Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience (399 KB PDF)," April 7.Return to text 2."Interagency Policy Statement on the Review and Classification of Commercial Real Estate Loans," (November 1991).Return to text 3."Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Credit Worthy Borrowers," (November 2008).Return to text 4."Federal Regulators Encourage Institutions to Work with Mortgage Borrowers Who Are Unable to Make Their Payments," (April 2007).Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Conrad, Senator Gregg, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to offer my views on current economic and financial conditions, the federal budget, and related issues. Recent Financial and Economic Developments and the Policy ResponsesOver the past 18 months, the global economy has experienced a period of extraordinary turbulence. The collapse of a global credit boom, triggered by the end of housing booms in the United States and other countries and the associated problems in mortgage markets, has led to a deterioration of asset values and credit conditions and taken a heavy toll on business and consumer confidence. The financial crisis intensified considerably in the fall. In the United States, the government-sponsored enterprises, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, were placed into conservatorship, and Lehman Brothers Holdings and several other large financial institutions either failed, nearly failed, or were acquired by competitors under distressed circumstances. Losses at money market mutual funds led to large withdrawals by their investors, and those outflows undermined both the stability of short-term funding markets, particularly the commercial paper market, and confidence in wholesale bank funding markets. In early October, the loss of investor confidence in financial institutions around the world raised the prospect of an international financial collapse, an event that would have been devastating for global economic prospects. Using authorities granted by the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act, on October 14, the Treasury announced a plan to inject $250 billion in capital into U.S. financial institutions. The Treasury's actions were complemented by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's expansion of bank liability guarantees and by the expansive provision of liquidity by the Federal Reserve. Together with similar measures in other countries, these steps averted a collapse and restored a degree of stability to the financial system. Nevertheless, the cumulative effect of the financial stress was to precipitate a sharp downturn in economic activity around the world. The Federal Reserve responded forcefully to the significant deterioration in financial market conditions and the substantial worsening of the economic outlook by continuing to ease monetary policy aggressively late last year. By December, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) had brought its target for the federal funds rate to a historically low range of 0 to 1/4 percent, where it remains today. The FOMC anticipates that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for some time. With the federal funds rate close to zero, the Federal Reserve has focused on alternative tools to ease conditions in credit markets. We have established new lending facilities and expanded existing facilities that aim to enhance the flow of credit to businesses and households: We increased the size of the Term Auction Facility to help ensure that banks could obtain the funds they need to provide credit to their customers; we expanded our network of swap lines with foreign central banks to help ease conditions in global dollar markets that were spilling over into our own funding markets; we established facilities to promote the functioning of money market mutual funds and the commercial paper market; and we introduced the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, or TALF, which is designed to facilitate the renewed issuance of consumer and small business asset-backed securities. In addition, to improve the functioning of the mortgage market and to support housing markets and economic activity more broadly, the Federal Reserve has begun to purchase large amounts of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities. The measures taken since September by the Federal Reserve, other U.S. government entities, and foreign governments have helped improve conditions in some financial markets. In particular, strains in short-term funding markets have eased notably since last fall, and London interbank offered rates, or Libor--which influence the interest rates faced by many U.S. households and businesses--have decreased sharply. Conditions in the commercial paper market also have improved, even for lower-rated borrowers, and the sharp outflows from money market mutual funds in September have been replaced by modest inflows. In the market for conforming mortgages, interest rates have fallen nearly 1 percentage point since the announcement of our intention to purchase agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities. Corporate risk spreads have also declined somewhat from extraordinarily high levels, although bond spreads remain elevated by historical standards. Likely spurred by the improvements in pricing and liquidity, issuance of investment-grade corporate bonds has been strong, and speculative-grade issuance, which was near zero in the fourth quarter, has picked up somewhat more recently. Nevertheless, significant stresses persist in many markets. For example, most securitization markets remain closed, and some financial institutions remain under pressure. As I noted, the ongoing stresses in the financial markets have been accompanied by a sharp contraction in economic activity. After edging down during the summer, real gross domestic product (GDP) is reported by the Commerce Department to have declined at an annual rate of 6.2 percent in the fourth quarter of last year, with nearly every major category of final sales contributing to the drop. The recent near-term indicators show little sign of improvement. Businesses shed 600,000 jobs in January, about the same pace of job loss as in November and December, and the unemployment rate jumped to 7.6 percent. Moreover, the number of claims for unemployment insurance has moved higher since mid-January, suggesting that labor market conditions may have worsened further in recent weeks. In reaction to the deteriorating job market, the sizable losses of equity and housing wealth, and the tightening of credit conditions, households have continued to rein in their spending. Home sales and new construction have continued to decline despite lower mortgage rates, reflecting the uncertain economic environment and the expectation of many potential buyers that home prices have further to fall. The manufacturing sector has also deteriorated further so far this year. Manufacturing output fell sharply again in January, bringing the rate of capacity utilization to its lowest level in the post-World War II period. Orders and shipments of durable goods, which dropped in the fourth quarter, fell markedly further in January, and most survey-based measures of business conditions are at or near record low levels. Given the weak economic environment, many businesses have apparently cut back their plans for capital expenditures significantly. Moreover, exports, which had provided a welcome offset to the weakness in domestic demand through the middle of 2008, fell sharply in the final months of last year, and the incoming news suggests a widespread contraction in activity abroad. Despite the considerable decline in final demand in the United States, businesses have managed to trim inventories in recent quarters. Still, with sales anticipated to remain poor for a while longer, many businesses are carrying more inventories than they desire and, consequently, are likely to cut production further in the months ahead. Meanwhile, overall consumer price inflation has slowed considerably, primarily because of the steep drop in energy prices in the second half of last year. The PCE price index was up just 0.7 percent in January from its year-earlier level, after having risen 3-1/2 percent over the preceding 12-month period. Core PCE price inflation, which excludes the direct effects of food and energy prices, has also slowed, decreasing to 1-1/2 percent for the 12 months ending in January from 2-1/4 percent in the year-earlier period. Wide margins of economic slack and reduced cost pressures suggest that inflation is likely to remain quite low over the next couple of years. Although the near-term outlook for the economy is weak, over time, a number of factors should promote the return of solid gains in economic activity in the context of low and stable inflation. The effectiveness of the policy actions taken by the Federal Reserve, the Treasury, and other government entities in restoring a reasonable degree of financial stability will be critical determinants of the timing and strength of the recovery. If financial conditions improve, the economy will be increasingly supported by fiscal and monetary stimulus, the beneficial effects of the steep decline in energy prices since last summer, and the better alignment of business inventories and final sales, as well as the increased availability of credit. Fiscal Policy in the Current Economic and Financial EnvironmentAs you are well aware, the Congress recently passed a major fiscal package, which is aimed at strengthening near-term economic activity. The package includes personal tax cuts and increases in transfer payments intended to stimulate household spending, incentives for business investment, federal grants for state and local governments to reduce their need to cut services or cancel building projects, and increases in federal purchases. By supporting public and private spending, the fiscal package should provide a boost to demand and production over the next two years as well as mitigate the overall loss of employment and income that would otherwise occur. That said, the timing and the magnitude of the macroeconomic effects of the fiscal program are subject to considerable uncertainty, reflecting both the state of economic knowledge and the unusual economic circumstances that we face. For example, households confronted with declining incomes and limited access to credit might be expected to spend most of their tax cuts; then again, heightened economic uncertainties and the desire to increase precautionary saving or pay down debt might reduce households' propensity to spend. Likewise, it is difficult to judge how quickly funds dedicated to infrastructure needs and other longer-term projects will be spent and how large any follow-on effects will be. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) has constructed a range of estimates of the effects of the stimulus package on real GDP and employment that appropriately reflects these uncertainties. According to the CBO's estimates, the effect of the stimulus package on the level of real GDP at the end of 2010 could range from about 1 percent to a little more than 3 percent, relative to a baseline forecast that does not include the stimulus. They estimate that these effects on output would leave the corresponding unemployment rate between 1/2 percentage point and 2 percentage points lower at the end of next year than in the baseline forecast. The goal of the fiscal package is not just to provide a one-time boost to the economy, but to lay the groundwork for a self-sustaining, broad-based recovery. Historical experience strongly suggests that without a reasonable degree of financial stability, a sustainable recovery will not occur. Although progress has been made on the financial front since last fall, more needs to be done. As you know, in response to ongoing concerns about the health of financial institutions, the Treasury recently announced plans for further steps to ensure the strength and soundness of the financial system and to promote a more smooth flow of credit to households and businesses. The plan would use the remaining resources appropriated to the Treasury under the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act--approximately $350 billion--and also involve additional spending to support the activities of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Whether further funds will be needed depends on the results of the current supervisory assessment of banks, the evolution of the economy, and other factors. The Administration has included a placeholder in its budget for more funding for financial stabilization, should it be necessary. Unfortunately, the spending for financial stabilization, the increases in spending and reductions in taxes associated with the fiscal package, and the losses in revenues and increases in income-support payments associated with the weak economy will widen the federal budget deficit substantially this year. Taking into account these factors, the Administration recently submitted a proposed budget that projects the federal deficit to increase to about $1.8 trillion this fiscal year and to remain around $1 trillion in 2010 and 2011. As a consequence of this elevated level of borrowing, the ratio of federal debt held by the public to nominal GDP is likely to move up from about 40 percent before the onset of the financial crisis to more than 60 percent over the next several years--its highest level since the early 1950s, in the years following the massive debt buildup during World War II. Of course, all else equal, this is a development that all of us would have preferred to avoid. But our economy and financial markets face extraordinary challenges, and a failure by policymakers to address these challenges in a timely way would likely be more costly in the end. We are better off moving aggressively today to solve our economic problems; the alternative could be a prolonged episode of economic stagnation that would not only contribute to further deterioration in the fiscal situation, but would also imply lower output, employment, and incomes for an extended period. With such large near-term deficits, it may seem too early to be contemplating the necessary return to fiscal sustainability. To the contrary, maintaining the confidence of the financial markets requires that we begin planning now for the restoration of fiscal balance. As the economy recovers and resources become more fully employed, we will need to withdraw the temporary components of the fiscal stimulus. Spending on financial stabilization also must wind down; if all goes well, the disposition of assets acquired by the Treasury in the process of stabilization will be a source of added revenue for the Treasury in the out years. Determining the pace of fiscal normalization will entail some difficult judgments. In particular, the Congress will need to weigh the costs of running large budget deficits for a time against the possibility of a premature removal of fiscal stimulus that could blunt the recovery. We at the Federal Reserve will face similar difficult judgment calls regarding monetary policy. As I mentioned earlier, the President has recently submitted a budget, and it proposes an ambitious agenda, including new initiatives for energy, health care, education, and tax policy. These are all complex policy issues in which the specific design of each program is as important as the budgetary amount allocated to it. The Congress will have considerable work in evaluating how to proceed in each of these areas. As part of that evaluation, it will be critical to consider the formidable challenges and tradeoffs needed to simultaneously achieve an economic and financial recovery, fiscal responsibility, and program reforms that accomplish their desired goals effectively and efficiently. In particular, policymakers must remain prepared to take the actions necessary in the near term to restore stability to the financial system and to put the economy on a sustainable path to recovery. But the near-term imperative of achieving economic recovery and the longer-run desire to achieve programmatic objectives should not be allowed to hinder timely consideration of the steps needed to address fiscal imbalances. Without fiscal sustainability, in the longer term we will have neither financial stability nor healthy economic growth.
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and members of the Committee, I want to thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve Board's ongoing efforts to address and prevent mortgage-related fraud and abusive lending practices in the institutions we supervise. While the expansion of the subprime mortgage market over the past decade increased consumers' access to credit, too many homeowners and communities are suffering today because of lax underwriting standards and other unfair or deceptive practices that resulted in unsustainable loans. The Federal Reserve is committed to improving consumer protections and promoting responsible lending practices through each of the roles we play as supervisor for safety and soundness and consumer compliance, and as rulewriter. I will discuss the Federal Reserve's ongoing efforts as a banking supervisor to ensure that the institutions we supervise are managing their mortgage lending activities in a safe and sound manner and in compliance with laws and regulations. I will also discuss the rules and guidance that have been issued over the past several years that address many of these issues. In addition to our own examination and enforcement activities, I will talk about our ongoing efforts to coordinate with other law enforcement agencies to hold those who are involved in criminal activities in our supervised institutions accountable. The Federal Reserve's enforcement efforts begin with the examination of its supervised institutions. The Federal Reserve conducts regular examinations of state member banks for both safety and soundness and compliance with consumer protection laws. We also conduct regular inspections of bank holding companies. We examine the mortgage businesses of these institutions, including subprime residential portfolios, as applicable. Institutions with weaknesses are expected to take corrective actions that include improving their risk management and underwriting practices in the future. In those rare instances where the bank is not willing to address the problem, we have and use a full range of powerful enforcement tools to compel corrective action. To ensure that banks with performance deficiencies give appropriate attention to supervisory concerns, we may require them to enter into nonpublic enforcement actions, such as memoranda of understanding. When necessary, we use formal, public enforcement actions, such as Written Agreements, Cease and Desist Orders, or civil money penalties. Mortgage Fraud and InvestigationsIn recent years, there has been a significant increase in suspected criminal activity with respect to mortgage fraud and other mortgage-related criminal activity. Mortgage fraud occurs in various ways. In many cases mortgage fraud is perpetrated against the financial institution by brokers, appraisers, and other third parties. In other situations fraud is perpetrated by insiders of the institution. As I will discuss further, there are other abusive practices that occur in mortgage lending that harm borrowers and the safety and soundness of financial institutions. The Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) that banking organizations are required to file reveal significant suspected mortgage fraud activity. As recently reported by FinCEN, there is a continuing upward trend of SARs filed by depository institutions involving suspected mortgage loan fraud.1From July 1, 2007, through June 30, 2008, depository institutions filed a total of 62,084 SARs reporting suspected mortgage loan fraud. This represents an increase of 44 percent in SARs involving mortgage fraud compared with the prior year. During the reporting period, mortgage loan fraud was the third most reported activity in SARs. The top 25 filing institutions of mortgage loan fraud SARs submitted 82 percent of the total 62,084 SAR filings. SARs alleging mortgage fraud involve numerous varieties of conduct from large-scale multi-million-dollar "straw borrower" and property flipping schemes to single incidents of overstated income or assets by individual borrowers. Federal Reserve staff regularly review SARs filed by the financial institutions the Fed supervises. When bank insiders may be involved, we initiate investigations, make referrals to law enforcement, coordinate with law enforcement and other regulatory agencies, and pursue enforcement actions against individuals, including seeking prohibition orders and, in appropriate cases, civil money penalties and restitution. We are pursuing numerous investigations involving insiders relating to possible mortgage-related fraud, both commercial and residential. The Federal Reserve has established a Federal Reserve System examiner group to share information on the detection of fraud and pending investigations. On the local level, Reserve Bank staff also interacts with representatives from law enforcement, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Internal Revenue Service, and other agencies in SAR "review teams" to review SARs and coordinate actions. These meetings provide an opportunity to share information about criminal activities, including mortgage fraud, occurring within the district. The Federal Reserve regularly coordinates with law enforcement in a number of ways. Staff participates in monthly interagency meetings led by the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) Fraud Section and attended by other law enforcement and regulatory agencies. This interagency group, the "Bank Fraud Working Group," discusses and shares information on recent cases, trends, and other issues, including mortgage fraud. Supervision Examinations and EnforcementIn the Federal Reserve's regular safety and soundness examinations of state member banks and bank holding companies, we evaluate risk-management systems, financial condition, and compliance with laws and regulations. In assessing a bank's risk management systems for its mortgage lending activity, examiners evaluate the adequacy of the bank's practices to identify, manage, and control credit risk. This includes the appropriateness of the bank's underwriting standards, credit administration, quality control processes over its own originations and third-party originations, and appraisal and collateral valuation practices. To assist institutions in understanding our supervisory expectations, the Federal Reserve has supplemented its long-standing guidelines on safe and sound real estate lending practices by joining the other federal bank regulatory agencies in issuing additional guidance on mortgage lending practices. Specifically, starting in 2005, the Federal Reserve and the other federal agencies observed that lenders were increasingly originating nontraditional mortgage loans that lacked principal amortization and had the potential for negative amortization. We were also concerned about the growing use of adjustable rate mortgage products with "teaser" rates that adjust to a variable rate plus a margin for the remaining term of the loan, in addition to other risky characteristics. These products could result in payment shock to borrowers, and present heightened risks to lenders and borrowers. Moreover, the easing of underwriting standards and the marketing of these products to lower credit quality borrowers, including those purchasing investment properties, held the potential to create significant risks for institutions and for borrowers. To address those concerns and prevent supervised institutions from making unaffordable mortgage loans, the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies issued theInteragency Guidance on Nontraditional Mortgage Products Risksin 2006 and theInteragency Statement on Subprime Mortgage Lendingin 2007. The nontraditional mortgage guidance highlights sound underwriting procedures, portfolio risk management, and consumer protection practices that institutions should follow to prudently originate and manage mortgage loans with payment option and interest-only features. A key aspect of both statements is the recommendation that a lender's analysis of repayment capacity should include an evaluation of the borrower's ability to repay debt. The subprime guidance emphasizes the risks of stated income or reduced documentation loans in the subprime sector. Further, the subprime guidance outlines certain practices that are considered predatory in nature and stipulates that institutions should not engage in these practices regardless of loan features. Also, in 2005 the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies issued theInteragency Guidance on Independent Appraisal and Evaluation Functions. This statement reinforces the importance of appraiser independence from the loan origination and credit decision process to ensure that valuations are fairly and appropriately determined. Independence has been a core principle in the Board's appraisal regulation and guidance, which have been in place since the early 1990s. When we examine a bank's real estate lending activities, examiners consider the adequacy of the appraisal function to ensure that it complies with the appraisal regulation and has appropriate risk management practices. A strong appraisal function is essential to combating the potential for mortgage fraud by protecting the collateral valuations from influence by individuals whose intent is to deceive the lender about the condition and value of the collateral. The agencies took steps to further strengthen their guidance in this area by proposing interagency appraisal and evaluation guidelines last November. More recently, the collapse of the global credit market, triggered by the end of housing booms in the United States and other countries and the associated problems in mortgage markets, has led to a deterioration of asset values and credit conditions. As a result, financial institutions have incurred losses that in and of themselves have caused financial institutions to tighten credit underwriting standards to ensure that borrowers have the capacity to repay. Furthermore, sweeping new rules issued by the Board under its authority in the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) will further ensure that mortgage lenders that offer high-cost mortgages have appropriate practices to ensure consumers can repay their loans. Consumer Compliance Examination and EnforcementThe Federal Reserve conducts regular examinations of state member banks to evaluate compliance with consumer protection laws, the fair lending laws, and the Community Reinvestment Act. These examinations are conducted by a specially trained cadre of examiners for the approximately 875 banks we supervise. The Board has a long-standing commitment to ensuring that every bank it supervises complies fully with federal financial consumer protection laws, including the fair lending laws. The scope of these examinations includes a review of the bank's compliance with the Truth in Lending Act, the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act, the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA), the Community Reinvestment Act, and other federal consumer protection laws. One objective of our consumer compliance examination program is to identify compliance risks at banks before they harm consumers and ensure that state member banks have appropriate controls in place to manage those risks. In conducting a consumer compliance examination at a state member bank, examiners review the commitment and ability of bank management to comply with consumer protection laws as well as the bank's actual compliance with such laws. Examinations follow a risk-focused approach tailored to fit the risk profile of the bank. This approach directs supervisory attention and resources to the products, services, and areas of the bank's operations that pose the greatest risk to consumers. Our examiners prepare a stand-alone consumer compliance examination report bearing a distinct consumer compliance rating for each state member bank we supervise. These confidential reports include an evaluation of the bank's compliance management program, a summary of the fair lending review, and a discussion of violations of consumer laws and regulations. When examiners identify banks with weak and ineffective compliance programs, they document the weaknesses in the examination report and take appropriate supervisory action. Banks with a poor record of compliance are examined more frequently than those with favorable records. When necessary to obtain compliance with consumer protection laws, we can, and do, use our enforcement tools, ranging from nonpublic actions to public Cease and Desist Orders. However, most banks voluntarily address any violations and weaknesses in consumer compliance management programs that our examiners identify so we find public formal actions are not typically necessary. Important tools for examiners and financial institutions are guidance and examination procedures for enforcing the Federal Trade Commission Act's prohibition of unfair or deceptive acts or practices. TheUnfair or Deceptive Acts or Practices by State-Chartered Banksissued by the Board and the FDIC in 2004 outlines strategies for banks to use to avoid engaging in unfair or deceptive acts or practices, to minimize their own risks and to protect consumers. Among other things, the guidance focuses on loan servicing and managing and monitoring creditors' employees and third-party service providers. The Federal Reserve's consumer compliance supervision authority extends to bank holding companies as well as to state member banks. In recent years, banking organizations have greatly expanded the scope, complexity, and innovation of their business activities. At the same time, compliance requirements associated with these activities have become more complex. To assist financial institutions in addressing these challenges, the Federal Reserve recently issued guidance in 2008 clarifying its expectations regarding firm-wide compliance risk management and oversight for both prudential and consumer protection supervision inComplex Risk Management Programs and Oversight at Large Banking Organizations with Complex Compliance Profiles. Further, Federal Reserve consumer compliance examiners routinely participate in the review and assessment of the adequacy of large bank holding company compliance risk management programs. In addition to its own supervisory efforts related to bank holding companies, the Federal Reserve, along with the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal Trade Commission, and a number of state authorities, recently completed a pilot consumer protection compliance review as part of an interagency project to enhance the supervision of subprime mortgage lenders. Under the pilot project, the agencies coordinated to conduct consumer-protection compliance reviews at selected entities with significant subprime mortgage operations. The reviews included independent state-licensed mortgage lenders, nondepository mortgage lending subsidiaries of bank and thrift holding companies, and mortgage brokers doing business with or serving as agents of these entities. These reviews included targeted evaluations of mortgage underwriting standards, risk management strategies, and compliance with certain consumer protection laws. We are currently assessing the results of the pilot project. The results will guide the Board's decisionmaking as to how it may supervise these entities in the future. Focus on Fair Lending EnforcementAlthough the Federal Reserve's fair lending enforcement program is not intended to detect mortgage fraud, it is a vital component of the Federal Reserve's efforts to ensure fair access to responsible credit. The Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that every bank it supervises complies fully with the federal fair lending laws, the ECOA and the Fair Housing Act. Every consumer compliance examination includes an evaluation of the bank's fair lending compliance program, as well as an assessment of the bank's fair lending risk across all types of lending, including mortgage lending. Examiners also test the institution's actual lending record for specific types of discrimination, such as pricing discrimination in mortgage lending. A specialized Fair Lending Enforcement Section on the Board's staff works closely with staff at the 12 Reserve Banks across the country to provide guidance on fair lending matters and to ensure that the fair lending laws are enforced rigorously. When examiners find fair lending violations, the Board takes appropriate supervisory action. If we have reason to believe that an institution has engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination under the ECOA, the Board, like other federal banking agencies, has a statutory responsibility under the Act to refer the matter to the DOJ, which reviews the referral and decides if further investigation is warranted. A DOJ investigation may result in a public civil enforcement action or settlement. The DOJ may instead return the matter to the Federal Reserve for administrative enforcement. When this occurs, we ensure that the institution takes all appropriate corrective action. If a fair lending violation does not constitute a pattern or practice, we similarly ensure that the bank takes all appropriate corrective action. In carrying out our supervisory responsibilities related to fair lending, Federal Reserve examiners perform many reviews to detect pricing discrimination, redlining, and steering in mortgage lending. These illegal practices can limit fair access to responsible credit, and make it more likely that minorities will fall prey to potentially abusive lending practices. Several of these reviews have resulted in referrals to the DOJ. In the past three years, we have referred fifteen matters to the DOJ and four of these matters have involved illegal discrimination in mortgage lending based on race or ethnicity. The Board referred two nationwide mortgage lenders to the DOJ because we determined that Hispanic and African-American borrowers paid more for their loans than comparable non-Hispanic white borrowers. These reviews resulted from a process of targeted reviews for mortgage pricing discrimination that the Federal Reserve initiated when the mortgage pricing data became available under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act. We also referred a lender for imposing a restriction on rowhouse lending that resulted in discrimination against African Americans. Finally, we referred a lender for redlining. The lender's marketing strategy was based on negative racial stereotypes and, as a result, excluded a cluster of minority neighborhoods from its lending activity. Rules Banning Unfair and Deceptive PracticesIn addition to our supervisory activities, the Federal Reserve Board in 2008 finalized sweeping new rules for home mortgage loans to better protect consumers and facilitate responsible residential mortgage lending. The rules, which amend Regulation Z (Truth in Lending), were adopted under HOEPA, and prohibit unfair, abusive or deceptive home mortgage lending practices and restrict certain other mortgage practices. Importantly, the rules apply to all mortgage lenders, not just depository institutions supervised by the federal banking and thrift regulators. These rules resulted from a series of field hearings conducted by the Board in 2006 and 2007 and a review of approximately 4,500 comment letters representing a broad spectrum of views that were received in response to the Board's proposed rule issued in December 2007. The final rule adds four key protections for a newly defined category of "higher-priced mortgage loans" secured by a consumer's principal dwelling. The higher-priced thresholds adopted by the Board would cover all, or virtually all, of the subprime market and a portion of the Alt-A market. For loans in this category, these protections will prohibit a lender from making a loan without regard to a borrower's ability to repay the loan from income and assets other than the home's value. Second, lenders are prohibited from making "stated income" loans and are required in each case to verify the income and assets they rely upon to determine borrowers' repayment ability. Third, the rules restrict the use of prepayment penalties in cases where the borrower could encounter payment shock. Finally, creditors are required to establish an escrow account for property taxes and homeowner's insurance for all first-lien mortgage loans. In addition to rules for higher-cost loans, the Board adopted other protections that apply to all mortgage loans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling, regardless of the cost. The rules prohibit lenders or brokers from coercing, influencing or otherwise encouraging an appraiser to misstate or misrepresent the value of the property. The rules also prohibit, among other things, servicers from engaging in certain unfair practices. I note that the Board is working on another important rulemaking action with other federal agencies and state organizations to implement the registration requirements for residential mortgage loan originators employed by federally supervised institutions, as required by the S.A.F.E. Mortgaging Licensing Act of 2008 (SAFE Act). The SAFE Act, when implemented, will provide for increased accountability and tracking of loan originators in a publicly accessible database. Under the SAFE Act, an individual is prohibited from engaging in loan origination without obtaining and maintaining annually a unique identifier and either a license and registration as a state-licensed loan originator or a registration as a federal loan originator. Prevention and Future ChallengesThe Federal Reserve will continue to take actions against institutions that violate consumer protection or fair lending laws, engage in unfair or deceptive practices, or otherwise engage in unsafe or unsound lending practices. We will continue to focus on strong supervision to prevent the occurrence of these practices and violations. In addition to our own examination and enforcement activities, we will continue our efforts to coordinate with other law enforcement agencies to hold those who are involved in our supervised institutions accountable for criminal activities related to mortgage lending. Again, I want to thank you for the opportunity to discuss what the Federal Reserve does to address and prevent mortgage-related fraud and abusive lending practices in the institutions we supervise. Footnotes 1.FinCEN,Filing Trends in Mortgage Loan Fraud, February 25, 2009.Return to text
The federal bank, thrift, and credit union regulatory agencies encourage all federally regulated financial institutions that service or hold residential mortgage loans to participate in the "Making Home Affordable" loan modification program. Guidelines for the program were announced today by the Treasury Department. The Treasury Department previously has indicated that institutions receiving financial assistance in the future under the Financial Stability Plan established under the Troubled Assets Relief Program will be required to implement loan modification programs in accordance with the Treasury Department's guidelines. The agencies strongly support the program's goal of promoting sustainable loan modifications for at-risk homeowners that appropriately balance the interests of homeowners, servicers, and investors. The federal bank, thrift, and credit union regulatory agencies worked closely with the Treasury Department in developing the guidelines. By providing servicers and holders of eligible residential mortgages with incentives to modify loans at risk of foreclosure, the program will promote sustainable alternatives to foreclosures on owner-occupied residential properties. These incentives should help make affordable loan modifications more attractive than foreclosure. The program also provides incentives for homeowners whose mortgages are modified to remain current on their mortgages after modification. Taken together, these incentives should help responsible homeowners remain in their homes and avoid foreclosure, thereby easing downward pressures on house prices in many parts of the country and averting the costs to families, communities, and the economy from avoidable foreclosures. Related Press Release:Relief for Responsible Homeowners One Step Closer Under New Treasury GuidelinesU.S. Department of the Treasury
The federal bank, thrift, and credit union regulatory agencies encourage all federally regulated financial institutions that service or hold residential mortgage loans to participate in the "Making Home Affordable" loan modification program. Guidelines for the program were announced today by the Treasury Department. The Treasury Department previously has indicated that institutions receiving financial assistance in the future under the Financial Stability Plan established under the Troubled Assets Relief Program will be required to implement loan modification programs in accordance with the Treasury Department's guidelines. The agencies strongly support the program's goal of promoting sustainable loan modifications for at-risk homeowners that appropriately balance the interests of homeowners, servicers, and investors. The federal bank, thrift, and credit union regulatory agencies worked closely with the Treasury Department in developing the guidelines. By providing servicers and holders of eligible residential mortgages with incentives to modify loans at risk of foreclosure, the program will promote sustainable alternatives to foreclosures on owner-occupied residential properties. These incentives should help make affordable loan modifications more attractive than foreclosure. The program also provides incentives for homeowners whose mortgages are modified to remain current on their mortgages after modification. Taken together, these incentives should help responsible homeowners remain in their homes and avoid foreclosure, thereby easing downward pressures on house prices in many parts of the country and averting the costs to families, communities, and the economy from avoidable foreclosures. Related Press Release:Relief for Responsible Homeowners One Step Closer Under New Treasury GuidelinesU.S. Department of the Treasury
On March 9, 2009, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $150 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: The awarded loans will settle on March 12, 2009, and will mature on April 9, 2009. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EDT on March 10, 2009. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EDT on March 10, 2009, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On March 9, 2009, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $150 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: The awarded loans will settle on March 12, 2009, and will mature on April 9, 2009. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EDT on March 10, 2009. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EDT on March 10, 2009, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On March 23, 2009, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $150 billion in 84-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: The awarded loans will settle on March 26, 2009, and will mature on June 18, 2009. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EDT on March 24, 2009. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EDT on March 24, 2009, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On March 23, 2009, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $150 billion in 84-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: The awarded loans will settle on March 26, 2009, and will mature on June 18, 2009. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EDT on March 24, 2009. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EDT on March 24, 2009, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
(Note: This release supersedes the release of 10 a.m. EDT March 10, 2009. The figures in the previous release for total propositions submitted, total propositions accepted and the bid/cover ratio have been revised to correct a processing error.) On March 9, 2009, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $150 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: The awarded loans will settle on March 12, 2009, and will mature on April 9, 2009. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EDT on March 10, 2009. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EDT on March 10, 2009, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
(Note: This release supersedes the release of 10 a.m. EDT March 10, 2009. The figures in the previous release for total propositions submitted, total propositions accepted and the bid/cover ratio have been revised to correct a processing error.) On March 9, 2009, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $150 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: The awarded loans will settle on March 12, 2009, and will mature on April 9, 2009. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EDT on March 10, 2009. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EDT on March 10, 2009, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
On March 9, 2009, the Federal Reserve will offer $150 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction Parameters Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
On March 9, 2009, the Federal Reserve will offer $150 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction Parameters Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
On March 23, 2009, the Federal Reserve will offer $150 billion in 84-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction Parameters Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
On March 23, 2009, the Federal Reserve will offer $150 billion in 84-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction Parameters Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EDT on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. EDT on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EDT on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday proposed amendments to Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) that would revise the disclosure requirements for private education loans. The amendments implement provisions of the Higher Education Opportunity Act (HEOA), which was signed into law on August 14, 2008. Under the amendments, creditors that extend private education loans would provide disclosures about loan terms and features on or with the loan application and would also have to disclose information about federal student loan programs that may offer less costly alternatives. Additional disclosures would have to be provided when the loan is approved and when the loan is consummated. The Board is also proposing model disclosure forms that creditors could use to comply with the new disclosure requirements. The new disclosure requirements would apply to loans made expressly for postsecondary educational expenses but would not apply where educational expenses are funded by credit card advances, or real-estate-secured loans. In addition, the proposal does not apply to education loans made, insured, or guaranteed by the federal government, which are subject to disclosure rules issued by the Department of Education. The Board's proposal also implements the HEOA's restrictions on using the name, emblem, or mascot of an educational institution in a way that implies that the institution endorses the creditor's loans. The public comment period ends 60 days after publication of the proposed amendments in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. The Board's notice is attached. Federal Registernotice:1.42 MB PDF|HTML Model forms and samples: Consumer Research and Testing for Private Education Loans (9.3 MB PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday proposed amendments to Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) that would revise the disclosure requirements for private education loans. The amendments implement provisions of the Higher Education Opportunity Act (HEOA), which was signed into law on August 14, 2008. Under the amendments, creditors that extend private education loans would provide disclosures about loan terms and features on or with the loan application and would also have to disclose information about federal student loan programs that may offer less costly alternatives. Additional disclosures would have to be provided when the loan is approved and when the loan is consummated. The Board is also proposing model disclosure forms that creditors could use to comply with the new disclosure requirements. The new disclosure requirements would apply to loans made expressly for postsecondary educational expenses but would not apply where educational expenses are funded by credit card advances, or real-estate-secured loans. In addition, the proposal does not apply to education loans made, insured, or guaranteed by the federal government, which are subject to disclosure rules issued by the Department of Education. The Board's proposal also implements the HEOA's restrictions on using the name, emblem, or mascot of an educational institution in a way that implies that the institution endorses the creditor's loans. The public comment period ends 60 days after publication of the proposed amendments in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. The Board's notice is attached. Federal Registernotice:1.42 MB PDF|HTML Model forms and samples: Consumer Research and Testing for Private Education Loans (9.3 MB PDF)
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Council on Foreign Relations, Washington, D.C. The world is suffering through the worst financial crisis since the 1930s, a crisis that has precipitated a sharp downturn in the global economy. Its fundamental causes remain in dispute. In my view, however, it is impossible to understand this crisis without reference to the global imbalances in trade and capital flows that began in the latter half of the 1990s. In the simplest terms, these imbalances reflected a chronic lack of saving relative to investment in the United States and some other industrial countries, combined with an extraordinary increase in saving relative to investment in many emerging market nations. The increase in excess saving in the emerging world resulted in turn from factors such as rapid economic growth in high-saving East Asian economies accompanied, outside of China, by reduced investment rates; large buildups in foreign exchange reserves in a number of emerging markets; and substantial increases in revenues received by exporters of oil and other commodities. Like water seeking its level, saving flowed from where it was abundant to where it was deficient, with the result that the United States and some other advanced countries experienced large capital inflows for more than a decade, even as real long-term interest rates remained low. The global imbalances were the joint responsibility of the United States and our trading partners, and although the topic was a perennial one at international conferences, we collectively did not do enough to reduce those imbalances. However, the responsibility to use the resulting capital inflows effectively fell primarily on the receiving countries, particularly the United States. The details of the story are complex, but, broadly speaking, the risk-management systems of the private sector and government oversight of the financial sector in the United States and some other industrial countries failed to ensure that the inrush of capital was prudently invested, a failure that has led to a powerful reversal in investor sentiment and a seizing up of credit markets. In certain respects, our experience parallels that of some emerging-market countries in the 1990s, whose financial sectors and regulatory regimes likewise proved inadequate for efficiently investing large inflows of saving from abroad. When those failures became evident, investors lost confidence and crises ensued. A clear and highly consequential difference, however, is that the crises of the 1990s were regional, whereas the current crisis has become global.1 In the near term, governments around the world must continue to take forceful and, when appropriate, coordinated actions to restore financial market functioning and the flow of credit. I have spoken on a number of occasions about the steps that the U.S. government, and particularly the Federal Reserve, is taking along these lines.2Until we stabilize the financial system, a sustainable economic recovery will remain out of reach. In particular, the continued viability of systemically important financial institutions is vital to this effort. In that regard, the Federal Reserve, other federal regulators, and the Treasury Department have stated that they will take any necessary and appropriate steps to ensure that our banking institutions have the capital and liquidity necessary to function well in even a severe economic downturn. Moreover, we have reiterated the U.S. government's determination to ensure that systemically important financial institutions continue to be able to meet their commitments. At the same time that we are addressing such immediate challenges, it is not too soon for policymakers to begin thinking about the reforms to the financial architecture, broadly conceived, that could help prevent a similar crisis from developing in the future. We must have a strategy that regulates the financial system as a whole, in a holistic way, not just its individual components. In particular, strong and effective regulation and supervision of banking institutions, although necessary for reducing systemic risk, are not sufficient by themselves to achieve this aim. Today, I would like to talk about four key elements of such a strategy. First, we must address the problem of financial institutions that are deemed too big--or perhaps too interconnected--to fail. Second, we must strengthen what I will call the financial infrastructure--the systems, rules, and conventions that govern trading, payment, clearing, and settlement in financial markets--to ensure that it will perform well under stress. Third, we should review regulatory policies and accounting rules to ensure that they do not induce excessive procyclicality--that is, do not overly magnify the ups and downs in the financial system and the economy. Finally, we should consider whether the creation of an authority specifically charged with monitoring and addressing systemic risks would help protect the system from financial crises like the one we are currently experiencing. My discussion today will focus on the principles that should guide regulatory reform, leaving aside important questions concerning how the current regulatory structure might be reworked to reduce balkanization and overlap and increase effectiveness. I also will not say much about the international dimensions of the issue but will take as self-evident that, in light of the global nature of financial institutions and markets, the reform of financial regulation and supervision should be coordinated internationally to the greatest extent possible. Too Big to FailIn a crisis, the authorities have strong incentives to prevent the failure of a large, highly interconnected financial firm, because of the risks such a failure would pose to the financial system and the broader economy. However, the belief of market participants that a particular firm is considered too big to fail has many undesirable effects. For instance, it reduces market discipline and encourages excessive risk-taking by the firm. It also provides an artificial incentive for firms to grow, in order to be perceived as too big to fail. And it creates an unlevel playing field with smaller firms, which may not be regarded as having implicit government support. Moreover, government rescues of too-big-to-fail firms can be costly to taxpayers, as we have seen recently. Indeed, in the present crisis, the too-big-to-fail issue has emerged as an enormous problem. In the midst of this crisis, given the highly fragile state of financial markets and the global economy, government assistance to avoid the failures of major financial institutions has been necessary to avoid a further serious destabilization of the financial system, and our commitment to avoiding such a failure remains firm. Looking to the future, however, it is imperative that policymakers address this issue by better supervising systemically critical firms to prevent excessive risk-taking and by strengthening the resilience of the financial system to minimize the consequences when a large firm must be unwound. Achieving more effective supervision of large and complex financial firms will require a number of actions. First, supervisors need to move vigorously--as we are already doing--to address the weaknesses at major financial institutions in capital adequacy, liquidity management, and risk management that have been revealed by the crisis. In particular, policymakers must insist that the large financial firms that they supervise be capable of monitoring and managing their risks in a timely manner and on an enterprise-wide basis. In that regard, the Federal Reserve has been looking carefully at risk-management practices at systemically important institutions to identify best practices, assess firms' performance, and require improvement where deficiencies are identified.3Any firm whose failure would pose a systemic risk must receive especially close supervisory oversight of its risk-taking, risk management, and financial condition, and be held to high capital and liquidity standards.4In light of the global reach and diversified operations of many large financial firms, international supervisors of banks, securities firms, and other financial institutions must collaborate and cooperate on these efforts. Second, we must ensure a robust framework--both in law and practice--for consolidated supervision of all systemically important financial firms organized as holding companies. The consolidated supervisors must have clear authority to monitor and address safety and soundness concerns in all parts of the organization, not just the holding company. Broad-based application of the principle of consolidated supervision would also serve to eliminate gaps in oversight that would otherwise allow risk-taking to migrate from more-regulated to less-regulated sectors. Third, looking beyond the current crisis, the United States also needs improved tools to allow the orderly resolution of a systemically important nonbank financial firm, including a mechanism to cover the costs of the resolution. In most cases, federal bankruptcy laws provide an appropriate framework for the resolution of nonbank financial institutions. However, this framework does not sufficiently protect the public's strong interest in ensuring the orderly resolution of nondepository financial institutions when a failure would pose substantial systemic risks. Improved resolution procedures for these firms would help reduce the too-big-to-fail problem by narrowing the range of circumstances that might be expected to prompt government intervention to keep the firm operating. Developing appropriate resolution procedures for potentially systemic financial firms, including bank holding companies, is a complex and challenging task. Models do exist, though, including the process currently in place under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (FDIA) for dealing with failing insured depository institutions and the framework established for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac under the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008. Both models allow a government agency to take control of a failing institution's operations and management, act as conservator or receiver for the institution, and establish a "bridge" institution to facilitate an orderly sale or liquidation of the firm. The authority to "bridge" a failing institution through a receivership to a new entity reduces the potential for market disruption while limiting moral hazard and mitigating any adverse impact of government intervention on market discipline. The new resolution regime would need to be carefully crafted. For example, clear guidelines must define which firms could be subject to the alternative regime and the process for invoking that regime, analogous perhaps to the procedures for invoking the so-called systemic risk exception under the FDIA. In addition, given the global operations of many large and complex financial firms and the complex regulatory structures under which they operate, any new regime must be structured to work as seamlessly as possible with other domestic or foreign insolvency regimes that might apply to one or more parts of the consolidated organization. Strengthening the Financial InfrastructureThe first element of my proposed reform agenda covers systemically important institutions considered individually. The second element focuses on interactions among firms as mediated by what I have called the financial infrastructure, or the financial plumbing if you will: the institutions that support trading, payments, clearing, and settlement. Here the aim should be not only to help make the financial system as a whole better able to withstand future shocks, but also to mitigate moral hazard and the problem of too big to fail by reducing the range of circumstances in which systemic stability concerns might prompt government intervention. I'll give several examples. Since September 2005, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has been leading a major joint initiative by the public and private sectors to improve arrangements for clearing and settling credit default swaps (CDS) and other over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives. As a result, the accuracy and timeliness of trade information has improved significantly. However, the infrastructure for managing these derivatives is still not as efficient or transparent as that for more mature instruments. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York, in conjunction with other domestic and foreign supervisors, will continue to work toward establishing increasingly stringent targets and performance standards for market participants. To help alleviate counterparty credit concerns, regulators are also encouraging the development of well-regulated and prudently managed central clearing counterparties for OTC trades.5Just last week, we approved the application for membership in the Federal Reserve System of ICE Trust, a trust company that proposes to operate as a central counterparty and clearinghouse for CDS transactions. The Federal Reserve and other authorities also are focusing on enhancing the resilience of the triparty repurchase agreement (repo) market, in which the primary dealers and other major banks and broker-dealers obtain very large amounts of secured financing from money market mutual funds and other short-term, risk-averse sources of funding.6For some time, market participants have been working to develop a contingency plan for handling a loss of confidence in either of the two clearing banks that facilitate the settlement of triparty repos. Recent experience demonstrates the need for additional measures to enhance the resilience of these markets, particularly as large borrowers have experienced acute stress. The Federal Reserve's Primary Dealer Credit Facility, launched in the wake of the Bear Stearns collapse and expanded in the aftermath of the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, has stabilized this critical market, and market confidence has been maintained. However, this program was adopted under our emergency powers to address unusual and exigent circumstances. Therefore, more-permanent reforms are needed. For example, it may be worthwhile considering the costs and benefits of a central clearing system for this market, given the magnitude of exposures generated and the vital importance of the market to both dealers and investors. More broadly, both the operational performance of key payment and settlement systems and their ability to manage counterparty and market risks in both normal and stressed environments are critical to the stability of the broader financial system. Currently, the Federal Reserve relies on a patchwork of authorities, largely derived from our role as a banking supervisor, as well as on moral suasion to help ensure that critical payment and settlement systems have the necessary procedures and controls in place to manage their risks. By contrast, many major central banks around the world have an explicit statutory basis for their oversight of these systems. Given how important robust payment and settlement systems are to financial stability, a good case can be made for granting the Federal Reserve explicit oversight authority for systemically important payment and settlement systems. Another issue that warrants attention is the potential fragility of the money market mutual fund sector. Last fall, as a result of losses on Lehman Brothers commercial paper, a prominent money market mutual fund "broke the buck"--that is, was unable to maintain a net asset value of $1 per share. Over subsequent days, fearful investors withdrew more than $250 billion from prime money market mutual funds. The magnitude of these withdrawals decreased only after the Treasury announced a guarantee program for money market mutual fund investors and the Federal Reserve established a new lending program to support liquidity in the asset-backed commercial paper market. In light of the importance of money market mutual funds--and, in particular, the crucial role they play in the commercial paper market, a key source of funding for many businesses--policymakers should consider how to increase the resiliency of those funds that are susceptible to runs. One approach would be to impose tighter restrictions on the instruments in which money market mutual funds can invest, potentially requiring shorter maturities and increased liquidity. A second approach would be to develop a limited system of insurance for money market mutual funds that seek to maintain a stable net asset value. For either of these approaches or others, it would be important to consider the implications not only for the money market mutual fund industry itself, but also for the distribution of liquidity and risk in the financial system as a whole. Procyclicality in the Regulatory SystemIt seems obvious that regulatory and supervisory policies should not themselves put unjustified pressure on financial institutions or inappropriately inhibit lending during economic downturns. However, there is some evidence that capital standards, accounting rules, and other regulations have made the financial sector excessively procyclical--that is, they lead financial institutions to ease credit in booms and tighten credit in downturns more than is justified by changes in the creditworthiness of borrowers, thereby intensifying cyclical changes. For example, capital regulations require that banks' capital ratios meet or exceed fixed minimum standards for the bank to be considered safe and sound by regulators.7Because banks typically find raising capital to be difficult in economic downturns or periods of financial stress, their best means of boosting their regulatory capital ratios during difficult periods may be to reduce new lending, perhaps more so than is justified by the credit environment. We should review capital regulations to ensure that they are appropriately forward-looking, and that capital is allowed to serve its intended role as a buffer--one built up during good times and drawn down during bad times in a manner consistent with safety and soundness.8In the area of prudential supervision, we should also ensure that bank examiners appropriately balance the need for caution and the benefits of maintaining profitable lending relationships when evaluating bank loan policies. The ongoing move by those who set accounting standards toward requirements for improved disclosure and greater transparency is a positive development that deserves full support. However, determining appropriate valuation methods for illiquid or idiosyncratic assets can be very difficult, to put it mildly. Similarly, there is considerable uncertainty regarding the appropriate levels of loan loss reserves over the cycle. As a result, further review of accounting standards governing valuation and loss provisioning would be useful, and might result in modifications to the accounting rules that reduce their procyclical effects without compromising the goals of disclosure and transparency. Indeed, work is underway on these issues through the Financial Stability Forum, and the results of that work may prove useful for U.S. policymakers.9 Another potential source of procyclicality is the system for funding deposit insurance. In recognition of this fact--as well as the weak economic outlook and the current strains on banks and the financial system--the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation recently announced plans to extend from five years to seven years the period over which it would restore the deposit insurance fund to its minimum required level. This plan, if implemented, should help reduce the costs imposed on banks at a time when capital and lending are already under pressure. Policymakers should consider additional steps to reduce the possible procyclical effects of deposit insurance costs while still ensuring that riskier banks pay higher premiums than safer banks. One possibility would be to raise the level to which the designated reserve ratio may grow in benign economic environments, so that a larger buffer is available to be drawn down when economic conditions worsen and insurance losses are high. Systemic Risk AuthorityThe policy actions I've discussed would inhibit the buildup of risks within the financial system and improve the resilience of the financial system to adverse shocks. Financial stability, however, could be further enhanced by a more explicitly macroprudential approach to financial regulation and supervision in the United States. Macroprudential policies focus on risks to the financial system as a whole. Such risks may be crosscutting, affecting a number of firms and markets, or they may be concentrated in a few key areas. A macroprudential approach would complement and build on the current regulatory and supervisory structure, in which the primary focus is the safety and soundness of individual institutions and markets. How could macroprudential policies be better integrated into the regulatory and supervisory system? One way would be for the Congress to direct and empower a governmental authority to monitor, assess, and, if necessary, address potential systemic risks within the financial system. The elements of such an authority's mission could include, for example, (1) monitoring large or rapidly increasing exposures--such as to subprime mortgages--across firms and markets, rather than only at the level of individual firms or sectors; (2) assessing the potential for deficiencies in evolving risk-management practices, broad-based increases in financial leverage, or changes in financial markets or products to increase systemic risks; (3) analyzing possible spillovers between financial firms or between firms and markets, such as the mutual exposures of highly interconnected firms; and (4) identifying possible regulatory gaps, including gaps in the protection of consumers and investors, that pose risks for the system as a whole. Two areas of natural focus for a systemic risk authority would be the stability of systemically critical financial institutions and the systemically relevant aspects of the financial infrastructure that I discussed earlier. Introducing a macroprudential approach to regulation would present a number of significant challenges. Most fundamentally, implementing a comprehensive systemic risk program would demand a great deal of the supervisory authority in terms of market and institutional knowledge, analytical sophistication, capacity to process large amounts of disparate information, and supervisory expertise. Other challenges include defining the range of powers that a systemic risk authority would need to fulfill its mission and then integrating that authority into the currently decentralized system of financial regulation in the United States. On the one hand, it seems clear that any new systemic risk authority should rely on the information, assessments, and supervisory and regulatory programs of existing financial supervisors and regulators whenever possible. This approach would reduce the cost to both the private sector and the public sector and allow the systemic risk authority to leverage the expertise and knowledge of other supervisors. On the other hand, because the goal of any systemic risk authority would be to have a broader view of the financial system, simply relying on existing structures likely would be insufficient. For example, a systemic risk authority would need broad authority to obtain information--through data collection and reports, or when necessary, examinations--from banks and key financial market participants, as well as from nonbank financial institutions that currently may not be subject to regular supervisory reporting requirements. A systemic risk authority likely would also need an appropriately calibrated ability to take measures to address identified systemic risks--in coordination with other supervisors, when possible, or independently, if necessary. The role of a systemic risk authority in setting standards for capital, liquidity, and risk-management practices for the financial sector also would need to be explored, given that these standards have both microprudential and macroprudential implications. In general, much discussion will be needed regarding what can reasonably be expected from a macroprudential regime and how expectations, accountability, and authorities can best be aligned. Important decisions must be made about how the systemic risk regulation function should be structured and located within the government. Several existing agencies have data and expertise relevant to this task, so there are a variety of organizational options. In any structure, however, to ensure accountability, the scope of authorities and responsibilities must be clearly specified Some commentators have proposed that the Federal Reserve take on the role of systemic risk authority; others have expressed concern that adding this responsibility would overburden the central bank. The extent to which this new responsibility might be a good match for the Federal Reserve depends a great deal on precisely how the Congress defines the role and responsibilities of the authority, as well as on how the necessary resources and expertise complement those employed by the Federal Reserve in the pursuit of its long-established core missions. It seems to me that we should keep our minds open on these questions. We have been discussing them a good deal within the Federal Reserve System, and their importance warrants careful consideration by legislators and other policymakers. As a practical matter, however, effectively identifying and addressing systemic risks would seem to require the involvement of the Federal Reserve in some capacity, even if not in the lead role. As the central bank of the United States, the Federal Reserve has long figured prominently in the government's responses to financial crises. Indeed, the Federal Reserve was established by the Congress in 1913 largely as a means of addressing the problem of recurring financial panics. The Federal Reserve plays such a key role in part because it serves as liquidity provider of last resort, a power that has proved critical in financial crises throughout history. In addition, the Federal Reserve has broad expertise derived from its wide range of activities, including its role as umbrella supervisor for bank and financial holding companies and its active monitoring of capital markets in support of its monetary policy and financial stability objectives. ConclusionIn the wake of the ongoing financial crisis, governments have moved quickly to establish a wide range of programs to support financial market functioning and foster credit flows to businesses and households. However, these necessary short-term steps must be accompanied by new policies to limit the incidence and impact of systemic risk. In my remarks today, I have emphasized the need to address the problems posed by firms that are perceived to be too big to fail, the importance of efforts to strengthen the financial infrastructure, the desirability of reducing the procyclical effects of capital regulation and accounting rules, and the potential benefits of taking a more macroprudential approach to the supervision and regulation of financial firms. Some of the policies I propose can be developed and implemented under the existing authority of financial regulators. Indeed, we are in the process of doing just that. In other cases, congressional action will be necessary to create the requisite authority and responsibility. Financial crises will continue to occur, as they have around the world for literally hundreds of years. Even with the sorts of actions I have outlined here today, it is unrealistic to hope that financial crises can be entirely eliminated, especially while maintaining a dynamic and innovative financial system. Nonetheless, these steps should help make crises less frequent and less virulent, and so contribute to a better functioning national and global economy. Footnotes 1.Another important difference is that, unlike in the Asian crisis, investors have not fled U.S. markets. They have, however, fled from many private credit markets.Return to text 2.See, for example, Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "Federal Reserve Policies to Ease Credit and Their Implications for the Fed's Balance Sheet," speech delivered at the National Press Club Luncheon, National Press Club, Washington, D.C., February 18.Return to text 3.The Federal Reserve has issued enhanced guidance on consolidated supervision of bank and financial holding companies. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), "Federal Reserve Issues Guidance for Consolidated Supervision of Bank Holding Companies and Combined U.S. Operations of Foreign Banking Organizations," press release, October 16.Return to text 4.Such an approach would also help offset the incentives for financial firms to become too big to fail.Return to text 5.International standards for central counterparties have been developed, and national authorities should work to ensure that all covered entities adhere to these standards. See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions, Bank for International Settlements (2004), "Recommendations for Central Counterparties," November. The benefits and costs of a central counterparty are discussed in "Assessing the Potential for Instability in Financial Markets," a speech delivered by Randall S. Kroszner (2008) at the Risk Minds Conference, International Center for Business Information, Geneva, Switzerland, December 8.Return to text 6.Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The New York Fed's Open Market Desk engages in trades on behalf of the Federal Reserve System to implement monetary policy.Return to text 7.In addition to ensuring that banking organizations comply with minimum regulatory capital requirements, supervisors also must ensure that organizations have the ability to assess their overall capital needs and hold capital commensurate with their individual risk profiles.Return to text 8.Internationally, the Financial Stability Forum and the Basel Committee have already begun such a review.Return to text 9.Financial Stability Forum (2008), "Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience: Follow-Up on Implementation (157 KB PDF)," October 10.Return to text
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January indicates that the economy continues to contract. Job losses, declining equity and housing wealth, and tight credit conditions have weighed on consumer sentiment and spending. Weaker sales prospects and difficulties in obtaining credit have led businesses to cut back on inventories and fixed investment. U.S. exports have slumped as a number of major trading partners have also fallen into recession. Although the near-term economic outlook is weak, the Committee anticipates that policy actions to stabilize financial markets and institutions, together with fiscal and monetary stimulus, will contribute to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth. In light of increasing economic slack here and abroad, the Committee expects that inflation will remain subdued. Moreover, the Committee sees some risk that inflation could persist for a time below rates that best foster economic growth and price stability in the longer term. In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve will employ all available tools to promote economic recovery and to preserve price stability. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and anticipates that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. To provide greater support to mortgage lending and housing markets, the Committee decided today to increase the size of the Federal Reserves balance sheet further by purchasing up to an additional $750 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities, bringing its total purchases of these securities to up to $1.25 trillion this year, and to increase its purchases of agency debt this year by up to $100 billion to a total of up to $200 billion. Moreover, to help improve conditions in private credit markets, the Committee decided to purchase up to $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities over the next six months. The Federal Reserve has launched the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility to facilitate the extension of credit to households and small businesses and anticipates that the range of eligible collateral for this facility is likely to be expanded to include other financial assets. The Committee will continue to carefully monitor the size and composition of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet in light of evolving financial and economic developments. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Elizabeth A. Duke; Charles L. Evans; Donald L. Kohn; Jeffrey M. Lacker; Dennis P. Lockhart; Daniel K. Tarullo; Kevin M. Warsh; and Janet L. Yellen.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January indicates that the economy continues to contract. Job losses, declining equity and housing wealth, and tight credit conditions have weighed on consumer sentiment and spending. Weaker sales prospects and difficulties in obtaining credit have led businesses to cut back on inventories and fixed investment. U.S. exports have slumped as a number of major trading partners have also fallen into recession. Although the near-term economic outlook is weak, the Committee anticipates that policy actions to stabilize financial markets and institutions, together with fiscal and monetary stimulus, will contribute to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth. In light of increasing economic slack here and abroad, the Committee expects that inflation will remain subdued. Moreover, the Committee sees some risk that inflation could persist for a time below rates that best foster economic growth and price stability in the longer term. In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve will employ all available tools to promote economic recovery and to preserve price stability. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and anticipates that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. To provide greater support to mortgage lending and housing markets, the Committee decided today to increase the size of the Federal Reserves balance sheet further by purchasing up to an additional $750 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities, bringing its total purchases of these securities to up to $1.25 trillion this year, and to increase its purchases of agency debt this year by up to $100 billion to a total of up to $200 billion. Moreover, to help improve conditions in private credit markets, the Committee decided to purchase up to $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities over the next six months. The Federal Reserve has launched the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility to facilitate the extension of credit to households and small businesses and anticipates that the range of eligible collateral for this facility is likely to be expanded to include other financial assets. The Committee will continue to carefully monitor the size and composition of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet in light of evolving financial and economic developments. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; Elizabeth A. Duke; Charles L. Evans; Donald L. Kohn; Jeffrey M. Lacker; Dennis P. Lockhart; Daniel K. Tarullo; Kevin M. Warsh; and Janet L. Yellen.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday released the minutes of its meetings from July 13 through December 16, 2008, concerning Federal Reserve liquidity facilities and other matters related to the financial turmoil of the period. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday released the minutes of its meetings from July 13 through December 16, 2008, concerning Federal Reserve liquidity facilities and other matters related to the financial turmoil of the period. The minutes are attached.
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Dodd, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate this opportunity to present the views of the Federal Reserve Board on the important issue of modernizing financial supervision and regulation. For the last year and a half, the U.S. financial system has been under extraordinary stress. Initially, this financial stress precipitated a sharp downturn in the U.S. and global economies. What has ensued is a very damaging negative feedback loop: The effects of the downturn--rising unemployment, declining profits, and decreased consumption and investment--have exacerbated the problems of financial institutions by reducing further the value of their assets. The impaired financial system has, in turn, been unable to supply the credit needed by households and businesses alike. The catalyst for the current crisis was a broad-based decline in housing prices, which has contributed to substantial increases in mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures and significant declines in the value of mortgage-related assets. However, the mortgage sector is just the most visible example of what was a much broader credit boom, and the underlying causes of the crisis run deeper than the mortgage market. They include global imbalances in savings and capital flows, poorly designed financial innovations, and weaknesses in both the risk-management systems of financial institutions and the government oversight of such institutions. While stabilizing the financial system to set the stage for economic recovery will remain its top priority in the near term, the Federal Reserve has also begun to evaluate regulatory and supervisory changes that could help reduce the incidence and severity of future financial crises. Today's Committee hearing is a timely opportunity for us to share our thinking to date and to contribute to your deliberations on regulatory modernization legislation. Many conclusions can be drawn from the financial crisis and the period preceding it, ranging across topics as diverse as capital adequacy requirements, risk measurement and management at financial institutions, supervisory practices, and consumer protection. In the Board's judgment, one of the key lessons is that the United States must have a comprehensive strategy for containing systemic risk. This strategy must be multifaceted and involve oversight of the financial system as a whole, and not just its individual components, in order to improve the resiliency of the system to potential systemic shocks. In pursuing this strategy, we must ensure that the reforms we enact now are aimed not just at the causes of our current crisis, but at other sources of risk that may arise in the future. Systemic risk refers to the potential for an event or shock triggering a loss of economic value or confidence in a substantial portion of the financial system, with resulting major adverse effects on the real economy. A core characteristic of systemic risk is the potential for contagion effects. Traditionally, the concern was that a run on a large bank, for example, would lead not only to the failure of that bank, but also to the failure of other financial firms because of the combined effect of the failed bank's unpaid obligations to other firms and market uncertainty as to whether those or other firms had similar vulnerabilities. In fact, most recent episodes of systemic risk have begun in markets, rather than through a classic run on a bank. A sharp downward movement in asset prices has been magnified by certain market practices or vulnerabilities. Soon market participants become uncertain about the values of those assets, an uncertainty that spreads to other assets as liquidity freezes up. In the worst case, liquidity problems become solvency problems. The result has been spillover effects both within the financial sector and from the financial sector to the real economy. In my remarks, I will discuss several components of a broad policy agenda to address systemic risk: consolidated supervision, the development of a resolution regime for systemically important nonbank financial institutions; more uniform and robust authority for the prudential supervision of systemically important payment and settlement systems; consumer protection; and the potential benefits of charging a governmental entity with more express responsibility for monitoring and addressing systemic risks in the financial system. In elaborating this agenda, I will both discuss the actions the Federal Reserve is taking under existing authorities and identify areas in which we believe legislation is needed. Effective Consolidated Supervision of Systemically Important FirmsFor the reasons I have just stated, supervision of individual financial firms is not a sufficient condition for fostering financial stability. But it is surely a necessary condition. Thus a first component of an agenda for systemic risk regulation is that each systemically important financial firm be subject to effective consolidated supervision. This means ensuring both that regulatory requirements apply to each such firm and that the consequent supervision is effective. As to the issue of effectiveness, many of the current problems in the banking and financial system stem from risk-management failures at a number of financial institutions, including some firms under federal supervision. Clearly, these lapses are unacceptable. The Federal Reserve has been involved in a number of exercises to understand and document the risk-management lapses and shortcomings at major financial institutions, including those undertaken by the Senior Supervisors Group, the President's Working Group on Financial Markets, and the multinational Financial Stability Forum.1 Based on the results of these and other efforts, the Federal Reserve is taking steps to improve regulatory requirements and risk management at regulated institutions. Our actions have covered liquidity risk management, capital planning and capital adequacy, firm-wide risk identification, residential lending, counterparty credit exposures, and commercial real estate. Liquidity and capital have been given special attention. The crisis has undermined previous conventional wisdom that a company, even in stressed environments, may readily borrow funds if it can offer high-quality collateral. For example, the inability of Bear Stearns to borrow even against U.S. government securities helped cause its collapse. As a result, we have been working to bring about needed improvements in institutions' liquidity risk-management practices. Along with our U.S. supervisory colleagues, we are closely monitoring the liquidity positions of banking organizations--on a daily basis for the largest and most critical firms--and are discussing key market developments and our supervisory analyses with senior management. We use these analyses and findings from examinations to ensure that liquidity and funding management, as well as contingency funding plans, are sufficiently robust and incorporate various stress scenarios. Looking beyond the present period, we also have underway a broader-ranging examination of liquidity requirements. Similarly, the Federal Reserve is closely monitoring the capital levels of banking organizations on a regular basis and discussing our evaluation with senior management. As part of our supervisory process, we have been conducting our own analysis of loss scenarios to anticipate the potential future capital needs of institutions. These needs may arise from, among other things, future losses or the potential for off-balance-sheet exposures and assets to come on balance sheet. Here, too, we have been discussing our analyses with bankers and ensuring that their own internal analyses reflect a broad range of scenarios and capture stress environments that could impair solvency. We have intensified efforts to evaluate firms' capital planning and to bring about improvements where needed. Going forward, we will need changes in the capital regime as the financial environment returns closer to normal conditions. Working with other domestic and foreign supervisors, we must strengthen the existing capital rules to achieve a higher level and quality of required capital. Institutions should also have to establish strong capital buffers above current regulatory minimums in good times, so that they can weather financial market stress and continue to meet customer credit needs. This is but one of a number of important ways in which the current procyclical features of financial regulation should be modified, with the aim of counteracting rather than exacerbating the effects of financial stress. Finally, firms whose failure would pose a systemic risk must be subject to especially close supervisory oversight of their risk-taking, risk management, and financial condition, and be held to high capital and liquidity standards. Turning to the reach of consolidated supervision, the Board believes there should be statutory coverage of all systemically important financial firms--not just those affiliated with an insured bank as provided for under the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (BHC Act). The current financial crisis has highlighted a fact that had become more and more apparent in recent years--that risks to the financial system can arise not only in the banking sector, but also from the activities of financial firms that traditionally have not been subject to the type of consolidated supervision applied to bank holding companies. For example, although the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) had authority over the broker-dealer and other SEC-registered units of Bear Stearns and the other large investment banks, it did not have statutory authority to supervise the diversified operations of these firms on a consolidated basis. Instead, the SEC was forced to rely on a voluntary regime for monitoring and addressing the capital and liquidity risks arising from the full range of these firms' operations. In contrast, all holding companies that own a bank--regardless of size--are subject to consolidated supervision for safety and soundness purposes under the BHC Act.2A robust consolidated supervisory framework, like the one embodied in the BHC Act, provides a supervisor the tools it needs to understand, monitor and, when appropriate, restrain the risks associated with an organization's consolidated or group-wide activities. These tools include the authority to establish consolidated capital requirements for the organization, obtain reports from and conduct examinations of the organization and any of its subsidiaries, and require the organization or its subsidiaries to alter their risk-management practices or take other actions to address risks that threaten the safety and soundness of the organization. Application of a similar regime to systemically important financial institutions that are not bank holding companies would help promote the safety and soundness of these firms and the stability of the financial system generally. It also is worth considering whether a broader application of the principle of consolidated supervision would help reduce the potential for risk-taking to migrate from more-regulated to less-regulated parts of the financial sector. To be fully effective, consolidated supervisors must have clear authority to monitor and address safety and soundness concerns in all parts of an organization. Accordingly, specific consideration should be given to modifying the limits currently placed on the ability of consolidated supervisors to monitor and address risks at an organization's functionally regulated subsidiaries. Improved Resolution ProcessesThe importance of extending effective consolidated supervision to all systemically important firms is, of course, linked to the perception of market participants that such firms will be considered too-big-to-fail, and will thus be supported by the government if they get into financial difficulty. This perception has obvious undesirable effects, including possible moral hazard effects if firms are able to take excessive risks because of market beliefs that they can fall back on government assistance. In addition to effective supervision of these firms, the United States needs improved tools to allow the orderly resolution of systemically important nonbank financial firms, including a mechanism to cover the costs of the resolution if government assistance is required to prevent systemic consequences. In most cases, federal bankruptcy laws provide an appropriate framework for the resolution of nonbank financial institutions. However, this framework does not sufficiently protect the public's strong interest in ensuring the orderly resolution of nondepository financial institutions when a failure would pose substantial systemic risks. Developing appropriate resolution procedures for potentially systemic financial firms, including bank holding companies, is a complex and challenging task that will take some time to complete. We can begin, however, by learning from other models, including the process currently in place under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (FDIA) for dealing with failing insured depository institutions and the framework established for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac under the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008. Both models allow a government agency to take control of a failing institution's operations and management, act as conservator or receiver for the institution, and establish a "bridge" institution to facilitate an orderly sale or liquidation of the firm. The authority to "bridge" a failing institution through a receivership to a new entity reduces the potential for market disruption, limits the value-destruction impact of a failure, and--when accompanied by haircuts on creditors and shareholders--mitigates the adverse impact of government intervention on market discipline. Any new resolution regime would need to be carefully crafted. For example, clear guidelines are needed to define which firms could be subject to the new, alternative regime and the process for invoking that regime, analogous perhaps to the procedures for invoking the so-called systemic risk exception under the FDIA. In addition, given the global operations of many large and diversified financial firms and the complex regulatory structures under which they operate, any new resolution regime must be structured to work as seamlessly as possible with other domestic or foreign insolvency regimes that might apply to one or more parts of the consolidated organization. In addition to developing an alternative resolution regime for systemically critical financial firms, policymakers and experts should carefully review whether improvements can be made to the existing bankruptcy framework that would allow for a faster and more orderly resolution of financial firms generally. Such improvements could reduce the likelihood that the new alternative regime would need to be invoked or government assistance provided in a particular instance to protect financial stability and, thereby, could promote market discipline. Oversight of Payment and Settlement SystemsAs suggested earlier, a comprehensive strategy for controlling systemic risk must focus not simply on the stability of individual firms. Another element of such a strategy is to provide close oversight of important arenas in which firms interact with one another. Payment and settlement systems are the foundation of our financial infrastructure. Financial institutions and markets depend upon the smooth functioning of these systems and their ability to manage counterparty and settlement risks effectively. Such systems can have significant risk-reduction benefits--by improving counterparty credit risk management, reducing settlement risks, and providing an orderly process to handle participant defaults--and can improve transparency for participants, financial markets, and regulatory authorities. At the same time, these systems inherently centralize and concentrate clearing and settlement risks. Thus, if a system is not well designed and able to appropriately manage the risks arising from participant defaults or operational disruptions, significant liquidity or credit problems could result. Well before the current crisis erupted, the Federal Reserve was working to strengthen the financial infrastructure that supports trading, payments, clearing, and settlement in key financial markets. Because this infrastructure acts as a critical link between financial institutions and markets, ensuring that it is able to withstand--and not amplify--shocks is an important aspect of reducing systemic risk, including the very real problem of institutions that are too big or interconnected to be allowed to fail in a disorderly manner. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York has been leading a major joint initiative by the public and private sectors to improve arrangements for clearing and settling credit default swaps (CDS) and other over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives. As a result, the accuracy and timeliness of trade information has improved significantly. In addition, the Federal Reserve, working with other supervisors through the President's Working Group on Financial Markets, has encouraged the development of well-regulated and prudently managed central clearing counterparties for OTC trades. Along these lines, the Board has encouraged the development of two central counterparties for CDS in the United States--ICE Trust and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. In addition, in 2008, the Board entered into a memorandum of understanding with the SEC and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission to promote the application of common prudential standards to central counterparties for CDS and to facilitate the sharing of information among the agencies with respect to such central counterparties. The Federal Reserve also is consulting with foreign financial regulators regarding the development and oversight of central counterparties for CDS in other jurisdictions to promote the application of consistent prudential standards. The New York Federal Reserve Bank, in conjunction with other domestic and foreign supervisors, continues its effort to establish increasingly stringent targets and performance standards for OTC market participants. In addition, we are working with market participants to enhance the resilience of the triparty repurchase agreement (repo) market. Through this market, primary dealers and other major banks and broker-dealers obtain very large amounts of secured financing from money market mutual funds and other short-term, risk-averse investors.3We are exploring, for example, whether a central clearing system or other improvements might be beneficial for this market, given the magnitude of exposures generated and the vital importance of the market to both dealers and investors. Even as we pursue these and similar initiatives, however, the Board believes additional statutory authority is needed to address the potential for systemic risk in payment and settlement systems. Currently, the Federal Reserve relies on a patchwork of authorities, largely derived from our role as a banking supervisor, as well as on moral suasion to help ensure that critical payment and settlement systems have the necessary procedures and controls in place to manage their risks. By contrast, many major central banks around the world have an explicit statutory basis for their oversight of these systems. Given how important robust payment and settlement systems are to financial stability, and the functional similarities between many payment and settlement systems, a good case can be made for granting the Federal Reserve explicit oversight authority for systemically important payment and settlement systems. The Federal Reserve has significant expertise regarding the risks and appropriate risk-management practices at payment and settlement systems, substantial direct experience with the measures necessary for the safe and sound operation of such systems, and established working relationships with other central banks and regulators that we have used to promote the development of strong and internationally-accepted risk management standards for the full range of these systems. Providing such authority would help ensure that these critical systems are held to consistent and high prudential standards aimed at mitigating systemic risk. Consumer ProtectionAnother lesson of this crisis is that pervasive consumer protection problems can signal, and even lead to, trouble for the safety and soundness of financial institutions and for the stability of the financial system as a whole. Consumer protection in the area of financial services is not, and should not be, limited to practices with potentially systemic consequences. However, as we evaluate the range of measures that can help contain systemic problems, it is important to recognize that good consumer protection can play a supporting role by--among other things--promoting sound underwriting practices. Last year the Board adopted new regulations under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act to enhance the substantive protections provided high-cost mortgage customers, such as requiring tax and insurance escrows in certain cases and limiting the use of prepayment penalties. These rules also require lenders providing such high-cost loans to verify the income and assets of a loan applicant and prohibit lenders from making such a loan without taking into account the ability of the borrower to repay the loan from income or assets other than the home's value. More recently, the Board adopted new rules to protect credit card customers from a variety of unfair and deceptive acts and practices. The Board will continue to update its consumer protection regulations as appropriate to provide households with the information they need to make informed credit decisions and to address new unfair and deceptive practices that may develop as practices and products change. Systemic Risk AuthorityOne issue that has received much attention recently is the possible benefit of establishing a systemic risk authority that would be charged with monitoring, assessing and, if necessary, curtailing systemic risks across the entire U.S. financial system. At a conceptual level, expressly empowering a governmental authority with responsibility to help contain systemic risks should, if implemented correctly, reduce the potential for large adverse shocks and limit the spillover effects of those shocks that do occur, thereby enhancing the resilience of the financial system. However, no one should underestimate the challenges involved with developing or implementing a supervisory and regulatory program for systemic risks. Nor should the establishment of such an authority be viewed as a panacea that will eliminate periods of significant stress in the financial markets and so reduce the need for the other important reforms that I have discussed. The U.S. financial sector is extremely large and diverse--with value added amounting to nearly $1.1 trillion or 8 percent of gross domestic product in 2007. Systemic risks may arise across a broad range of firms or markets, or they may be concentrated in just a few key institutions or activities. They can occur suddenly, such as from a rapid and substantial decline in asset prices, even if the probability of their occurrence builds up slowly over time. Moreover, as the current crisis has illustrated, systemic risks may arise at nonbank entities (for example, mortgage brokers), from sectors outside the traditional purview of federal supervision (for example, insurance firms), from institutions or activities that are based in other countries or operate across national boundaries, or from the linkages and interdependencies among financial institutions or between financial institutions and markets. And, while the existence of systemic risks may be apparent in hindsight, identifying such risksex anteand determining the proper degree of regulatory or supervisory action needed to counteract a particular risk without unnecessarily hampering innovation and economic growth is a very challenging assignment for any agency or group of agencies.4 For these reasons, any systemic risk authority would need a sophisticated, comprehensive and multi-disciplinary approach to systemic risk. Such an authority likely would require knowledge and experience across a wide range of financial institutions and markets, substantial analytical resources to identify the types of information needed and to analyze the information obtained, and supervisory expertise to develop and implement the necessary supervisory programs. To be effective, however, these skills would have to be combined with a clear statement of expectations and responsibilities, and with adequate powers to fulfill those responsibilities. While the systemic risk authority should be required to rely on the information, assessments, and supervisory and regulatory programs of existing financial supervisors and regulators whenever possible, it would need sufficient powers of its own to achieve its broader mission--monitoring and containing systemic risk. These powers likely would include broad authority to obtain information--through data collection and reports, or when necessary, examinations--from a range of financial market participants, including banking organizations, securities firms, key financial market intermediaries, and other financial institutions that currently may not be subject to regular federal supervisory reporting requirements. How might a properly constructed systemic risk authority use its expertise and authorities to help monitor, assess, and mitigate potentially systemic risks within the financial system? There are numerous possibilities. One area of natural focus for a systemic risk authority would be the stability of systemically critical financial institutions. It also likely would need some role in the setting of standards for capital, liquidity, and risk-management practices for financial firms, given the importance of these matters to the aggregate level of risk within the financial system. By bringing its broad knowledge of the interrelationships between firms and markets to bear, the systemic risk authority could help mitigate the potential for financial firms to be a source of, or be negatively affected by, adverse shocks to the system. It seems most sensible that the role of the systemic risk authority be to complement, not displace, that of a firm's consolidated supervisor (which, as I noted earlier, all systemically critical financial institutions should have). Under this model, the firm's consolidated supervisor would continue to have primary responsibility for the day-to-day supervision of the firm's risk- management practices, including those relating to compliance risk management, and for focusing on the safety and soundness of the individual institution. Another key issue is the extent to which a systemic risk authority would have appropriately calibrated ability to take measures to address specific practices identified as posing a systemic risk--in coordination with other supervisors when possible, or independently if necessary. For example, there may be practices that appear sound when considered from the perspective of a single firm, but that appear troublesome when understood to be widespread in the financial system, such as if these practices reveal the shared dependence of firms on particular forms of uncertain liquidity. Other activities that a systemic risk authority might undertake include: (1) monitoring large or rapidly increasing exposures--such as to subprime mortgages--across firms and markets; (2) assessing the potential for deficiencies in evolving risk-management practices, broad-based increases in financial leverage, or changes in financial markets or products to increase systemic risks; (3) analyzing possible spillovers between financial firms or between firms and markets, for example through the mutual exposures of highly interconnected firms; (4) identifying possible regulatory gaps, including gaps in the protection of consumers and investors, that pose risks for the system as a whole; and (5) issuing periodic reports on the stability of the U.S. financial system, in order both to disseminate its own views and to elicit the considered views of others. Thus, there are numerous important decisions to be made on the substantive reach and responsibilities of a systemic risk regulator. How such an authority, if created, should be structured and located within the federal government is also a complex issue. Some have suggested the Federal Reserve for this role, while others have expressed concern that adding this responsibility would overburden the central bank. The extent to which this new responsibility might be a good match for the Federal Reserve, acting either alone or as part of a collective body, depends a great deal on precisely how the Congress defines the role and responsibilities of the authority, and how well they complement those of the Federal Reserve's long-established core missions. Nevertheless, as Chairman Bernanke has noted, effectively identifying and addressing systemic risks would seem to require some involvement of the Federal Reserve. As the central bank of the United States, the Federal Reserve has a critical part to play in the government's responses to financial crises. Indeed, the Federal Reserve was established by the Congress in 1913 largely as a means of addressing the problem of recurring financial panics. The Federal Reserve plays such a key role in part because it serves as liquidity provider of last resort, a power that has proved critical in financial crises throughout modern history. In addition, the Federal Reserve has broad expertise derived from its other activities, including its role as umbrella supervisor for bank and financial holding companies and its active monitoring of capital markets in support of its monetary policy and financial stability objectives. It seems equally clear that each financial regulator must be involved in a successful overall strategy for containing systemic risk. In the first place, of course, appropriate attention to systemic issues in the normal regulation of financial firms, markets, and practices may itself support this strategy. Second, the information and insight gained by financial regulators in their own realms of expertise will be important contributions to the demanding job of analyzing inchoate risks to financial stability. Still, while a collective process will surely be valuable in assessing systemic risk, it will be important to assign clearly any responsibilities and authorities for actual systemic risk regulation, since shared authority without clearly delineated responsibility for action is sometimes a prescription for inaction. ConclusionI have tried today to identify the elements of an agenda for limiting the potential for financial crises, including actions that the Federal Reserve is taking to address systemic risks and several measures that Congress should consider to make our financial system stronger and safer. In doing so, we must avoid responding only to the current crisis, but must instead fashion a system that will be up to the challenge of regulating a dynamic and innovative financial system. We at the Federal Reserve look forward to working with the Congress on legislation that meets these objectives. Footnotes 1.See Senior Supervisors Group (2008), "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence (373 KB PDF)," March 6; President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)," March 13; and Financial Stability Forum (2008), "Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience (399 KB PDF)," April 7.Return to text 2.Through the exploitation of a loophole in the BHC Act, certain investment banks, as well as other financial and nonfinancial firms, acquired control of a federally insured industrial loan company (ILC) while avoiding the prudential framework that Congress established for the corporate owners of other full-service insured banks. For the reasons discussed in prior testimony before this Committee, the Board continues to believe that this loophole in current law should be closed. SeeTestimony of Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel of the Board, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Oct. 4, 2007.Return to text 3.Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The New York Reserve Bank's Open Market Desk engages in trades on behalf of the Federal Reserve System to implement monetary policy.Return to text 4.For example, while the existence of supra-normal profits in a market segment may be an indicator of supra-normal risks, it also may be the result of innovation on the part of one or more market participants that does not create undue risks to the system.Return to text
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Ms. Braunstein presented identical remarks before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on April 23, 2009 Chairman Gutierrez, Ranking Member Hensarling, and members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear here today to discuss recent problems in the subprime mortgage market, regulatory actions taken by the Federal Reserve to address these problems, and potential legislative responses. The Federal Reserve is committed to promoting sustainable homeownership through responsible mortgage lending. While the expansion of the subprime mortgage market over the past decade increased consumers' access to credit, too many homeowners and communities are suffering today because of lax underwriting standards and other unfair or deceptive practices that resulted in unsustainable loans. In addition to obvious consumer benefits, protecting borrowers with responsible underwriting standards can provide a broader benefit of enhancing the integrity, consistency, and proper functioning of the mortgage market by increasing investor confidence. The Federal Reserve's goal has been to craft clear rules that deter abuses while preserving responsible lenders' ability to meet the needs of traditionally underserved borrowers and communities. In my testimony today, I will first outline the final rules for mortgage loans that the Federal Reserve issued in July 2008, under the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) and the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA). I will then briefly discuss the Board's pending efforts to improve the usefulness of consumer disclosures in mortgage transactions, because well-informed consumers are in a better position to make decisions that are consistent with their own needs and financial goals. And finally, I will offer some thoughts about possible legislative reforms. The Board's Rules under TILA and HOEPAThe Federal Reserve has primary rulewriting responsibility for many consumer protection laws, including the Truth in Lending Act and the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act, which amended TILA. TILA and HOEPA are implemented by the Board's Regulation Z. Following a series of hearings in 2006 and 2007, the Board last July used its authority under TILA and HOEPA to revise Regulation Z by issuing final rules to establish sweeping new regulatory protections for consumers in the residential mortgage market. Importantly, the Board's new rules apply to all mortgage lenders, not just depository institutions supervised by the federal banking and thrift agencies. In response to specific problems we saw in the subprime market, some restrictions in the final rules apply only to higher-priced mortgage loans. Other provisions, however, apply to all mortgage loans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling. In addition to rules that protect consumers from unfair or abusive lending and mortgage servicing practices, the Board also adopted rules governing mortgage advertisements to ensure they provide accurate and balanced information and do not contain misleading or deceptive representations. A third component of the final rules ensures that for all types of mortgage loans, consumers receive transaction-specific cost disclosures early enough to use while shopping for credit. It is important to note that the Board's final rules resulted from an interactive process that involved extensive research and outreach to consumer groups, industry representatives, and other government agencies at the state and federal levels. The Board held a series of public hearings on consumer protection in the mortgage market in four cities across the country during the summer of 2006. In light of the information received at the 2006 hearings and the rise in defaults that began soon after, the Board held an additional hearing in June 2007, to explore how it could use its authority under HOEPA to prevent abusive lending practices without unduly constricting credit. At the 2007 hearing, and in hearing-related public comments, the Board received input from individual consumers, lenders, mortgage brokers, state government officials, and academicians. The Board's rulemaking was also informed by the comments received in connection with the development of interagency supervisory guidance on nontraditional mortgage products issued in September 2006 and interagency guidance on subprime lending that was issued in June 2007. In response to the proposed rules that were issued under HOEPA in December 2007, the Board received and considered approximately 4,700 comment letters that represented a broad spectrum of views. The Board also used consumer testing by conducting several dozen one-on-one interviews with a diverse group of consumers to test the effectiveness of proposed disclosures related to mortgage broker compensation. The testing results were the basis for making significant changes to the final rule. In sum, listening carefully to the commenters, collecting and analyzing data, and undertaking consumer testing, led to more effective and improved final rules. Rules for Higher-Priced LoansThe Board's HOEPA rules add four key protections for a newly defined category of "higher-priced mortgage loans." These are defined as consumer-purpose loans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling and having an annual percentage rate (APR) that exceeds the average prime offer rate for comparable transactions published by the Board by at least 1.5 percentage points for first-lien loans, or 3.5 percentage points for subordinate lien loans. For the foreseeable future, the Board will obtain or derive average prime offer rates from Freddie Mac's Primary Mortgage Market Survey, and will publish these rates on at least a weekly basis. Based on the available data, the thresholds adopted by the Board would cover all, or virtually all, of the subprime market and a portion of the alt-A market. Concerning the four key protections for higher-priced mortgage loans: First, lenders are prohibited from making any higher-priced mortgage loan without regard to the borrower's ability to repay the obligation from income and assets other than the home. The rule requires the lender to take into account future, predictable changes in payments in determining repayment ability. Lenders comply, in part, by assessing repayment ability using the highest scheduled payment in the first seven years of the loan, rather than the consumer's initial monthly payment. For example, for an adjustable rate mortgage (ARM) with a discounted initial interest rate that is fixed for five years, the lender determines repayment ability using the scheduled payment in the sixth and seventh years, which is based on the fully indexed rate. Second, lenders are prohibited from making "stated income" loans and are required in each case to verify the income and assets they rely upon to determine borrowers' repayment ability. Lenders must also verify and consider the borrower's other debt obligations, such as by using a credit report. The rule is intended to ensure that creditors do not assess repayment ability using overstated incomes or understated payment obligations. The rule is sufficiently flexible to allow lenders to adapt their underwriting process to accommodate a borrower's particular circumstances, such as when the borrower is self-employed. Third, the final rules restrict the use of prepayment penalties. Prepayment penalties can prevent borrowers from refinancing their loans to avoid monthly payment increases or if there are other reasons that their loan becomes unaffordable. Under the Board's rule, prepayment penalties are prohibited when the monthly payment can change during the initial four years after consummation. For other higher-priced loans, a prepayment penalty cannot last for more than two years. Fourth, creditors are required to establish an escrow account for property taxes and homeowner's insurance for all first-lien mortgage loans. This addresses the concern that the lack of escrows in the subprime market increases the risk that consumers' borrowing decisions will be based on misleading low payment quotes that do not reflect the true cost of their homeownership obligations. The rule preserves some consumer choice by permitting creditors to allow consumers to opt-out of the escrow account after 12 months. Protections for All Loans Secured by Consumers' Principal DwellingIn addition to the rules for higher-cost loans, the Board adopted other protections that apply to all mortgage loans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling, regardless of cost. The rules prohibit lenders or brokers from coercing, influencing, or otherwise encouraging an appraiser to misstate or misrepresent the value of the property. The Board also prohibited loan servicers from engaging in certain unfair billing practices. Servicers are prohibited from failing to credit a payment to a consumer's account as of the date received. Second, the rule prohibits the "pyramiding" of late fees by prohibiting servicers from imposing a late fee on a consumer when the consumer's payment was timely and made in full but for any previously assessed late fee. In addition, the rules prohibit loan servicers from failing to provide a loan payoff statement on a timely basis after receiving a request from the consumer or any person acting on the consumer's behalf. Based on the results of consumer testing, the Board did not adopt a proposed rule that would have prohibited a creditor from paying a mortgage broker more in compensation than the consumer agreed in advance the broker would receive. Under the proposal, brokers would have to disclose to consumers their total compensation, including any portion paid directly by a creditor as a "yield spread premium" before obtaining the consumer's written agreement. Brokers would also have to disclose that a creditor payment to the broker could influence the broker to offer the consumer loan terms that would not be in the consumer's interest or the most favorable terms the consumer could obtain. The proposed rule was intended to limit the potential for unfairness, deception, and abuse while preserving the ability of consumers to cover their payments to brokers through rate increases. The Board also anticipated that the proposal would increase transparency and increase competition in the market for brokerage services. The withdrawal of this portion of the proposal was based on the results of the Board's one-on-one interviews with several dozen consumers which demonstrated that the proposed agreement and disclosures would confuse consumers and undermine their decisionmaking rather than improve it. The Board is continuing to explore options for addressing potential unfairness associated with originator compensation arrangements such as yield spread premiums. Advertising RulesAnother goal of the Board's final rules is to ensure that mortgage loan advertisements do not contain misleading or deceptive representations. Thus, the Board's rules require that advertisements for both closed-end loans and home-equity lines of credit (HELOCs) provide accurate and balanced information about rates, monthly payments, and other features in a clear and conspicuous manner. In addition, the Board used its authority under HOEPA to prohibit seven deceptive or misleading advertising practices. For example, an advertisement for a variable rate loan may not use the word "fixed" in referring to the interest rate or payment unless there is an equally prominent statement of the time period for which the rate or payment is fixed. The rules also prohibit misrepresentations about government endorsement of the loan program and misleading claims of "debt elimination." Requiring Earlier Cost DisclosuresWith the increased complexity of today's mortgage products, consumers need to be well-informed shoppers. To assist consumers further, the Board amended Regulation Z to require that lenders provide consumers transaction-specific cost disclosures earlier in the application process, so that they can be used by consumers while shopping for a mortgage loan. Under the revised rules, creditors must provide a good faith estimate of the loan costs, including a payment schedule, within three days after the creditor receives the consumer's application. To ensure that consumers are able to use the information to shop, consumers cannot be charged any fee until after they receive the early disclosures, except a reasonable fee for obtaining the consumer's credit history. The rule applies to any home-secured loan, including home refinance loans and home-equity loans. Currently, early cost estimates are only required for home-purchase loans. Last July, the Congress enacted the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008, which codified the Board's new requirements for providing earlier TILA disclosures and also added some additional requirements, including a requirement that the estimated cost disclosures be provided at least seven days before the loan closing. This will enable consumers to review the transaction-specific disclosures when they have more time and are not confronted by a large number of other loan documents. In December 2008, the Board issued proposed rules to implement these additional changes and, with the recent close of the comment period, we expect the final rules to be issued in early spring. The Board's Current Efforts to Improve Mortgage DisclosuresThe Board recognizes the need to update TILA's cost disclosures for mortgage loans, to better reflect today's more complex products. Last year, we began using one-on-one interviews with consumers to test the current disclosures and potential revisions. We are well aware that consumers receive an overwhelming amount of information at the time they close a mortgage loan. The Truth in Lending disclosure, however, is a single-page form, and we are hopeful that the new requirements for providing this form earlier in the application process will distinguish the TILA disclosure from the many legal documents presented at loan closing as part of the credit contract or to satisfy state or local laws. However, the effectiveness of a disclosure is best judged through the results of consumer testing and not by the length of the disclosures alone. Our goal is to improve the content and format of disclosures for both closed-end loans and home equity lines of credit in order to make mortgage disclosures more useful. The challenge is to strike a proper balance between providing information that is accurate and complete but not so complex as to create information overload. Testing model disclosures with real consumers is critical to the success of this effort. In addition to our consumer testing, we are engaged in extensive outreach to obtain the views and suggestions of consumer advocates, industry representatives, and others. One concern that has been expressed over many years is the fact that consumers must receive separate disclosures under TILA and the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA), which is implemented by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). This issue is not unfamiliar to us. In 1998, the Board and HUD submitted a joint report to the Congress containing recommendations for legislative reforms, including a requirement that a single model form be developed that creditors could use to comply with both TILA and RESPA. The joint report included a sample model form showing one approach to combining the disclosures. Several years ago, HUD initiated efforts to revise the RESPA disclosures and the forms creditors use to provide a Good Faith Estimate (GFE) of settlement charges. Creditors must provide the GFE within three days after receiving a mortgage loan application, which is also the timing requirement for providing loan cost disclosures under TILA. HUD's efforts over the past several years have included testing its proposed disclosure forms with consumers and consulting with the Board's staff. We support the goals of HUD's efforts to make RESPA disclosures more accurate and more useful, and we commend HUD for using consumer testing to develop the new RESPA forms. However, we continue to believe that efforts should be made to develop a single form that creditors could use to satisfy the requirements of both TILA and RESPA. In November 2008, HUD finalized its revised RESPA rules and mandated the use of a new three-page GFE form developed by HUD. As the Board moves forward in revising TILA's mortgage disclosures, we will continue to coordinate with HUD to avoid potential inconsistencies in the two disclosure schemes. We also remain ready to work with HUD in developing a combined disclosure form if HUD is willing to pursue this approach. Legislative ResponsesOn November 15, 2007, the House of Representatives passed H.R. 3915, the Mortgage Reform and Anti-Predatory Lending Act of 2007, which takes a comprehensive approach to addressing mortgage lending problems while appropriately focusing on the practices that took place in the subprime mortgage market. We commend Congress' work on H.R. 3915, which informed the Board's rulemaking and represents a significant contribution to the public debate about these issues. The Board shares Congress' concerns with these practices, many of which are also addressed in the Board's recently adopted rules under HOEPA. As with regulations, it is important that any new laws carefully target abuses without unduly restraining responsible credit. Maintaining this balance is particularly important as many borrowers may need to refinance subprime loans into more affordable loans. At this time, I will share briefly some observations about the bill. It should be noted that members of the Board's staff have previously discussed technical issues concerning the bill with congressional staff. We would be pleased to continue these discussions going forward if the Congress considers additional amendments to the bill. As I stated earlier, H.R. 3915 would address many of the same concerns addressed in the Board's HOEPA rules. Although some of the details regarding implementation differ, H.R. 3915 and the Board's HOEPA rules both set minimum underwriting standards that are designed to ensure creditors verify and document borrowers' ability to repay higher-priced loans. H.R. 3915 would also provide consumer remedies for violations of the bill's minimum standards and consumers would be able to seek these remedies against creditors, assignees, and securitizers. As a general matter, the issue of appropriate remedies is one that is best left to the Congress. We note, however, that in order for assignee liability to create more market discipline, the laws must be clear about what acts or practices are prohibited so that assignees can perform due diligence and detect violations before purchasing the loans. Assignees may have difficulty in determining a creditor's compliance with a broad prohibition against making loans that do not provide a "net tangible benefit" unless that term is capable of being clearly defined in law or regulation. H.R. 3915 also seeks to establish a federal duty of care that would apply to all mortgage originators, although the bill would not create a fiduciary relationship between the originator and the consumer. Loan originators would be required to present a range of loan products for which the consumer is likely to qualify, and which are appropriate for the consumer's current circumstances. The mortgage products presented to a consumer must be consistent with the consumer's ability to pay and provide a net tangible benefit. Because these standards are broad and originators would be liable for violations, we believe that the establishment of clearly defined safe harbors may be appropriate in implementing the law and that the statute should clarify that the rulewriting agency has sufficient flexibility for this purpose. I would also like to say a few words about the bill's delegation of rulewriting responsibility. Since enactment of the Truth in Lending Act in 1968, the Federal Reserve has been the sole agency responsible for issuing rules to implement that Act. Several provisions of H.R. 3915 would amend TILA and would be implemented by regulations that are promulgated jointly by the federal banking agencies. On the one hand, interagency rulemakings ensure that different perspectives are considered in developing a rule and that all agencies have a say in the outcome. On the other hand, the interagency rulemaking process generally is a less efficient way to develop new regulations. Frequently, it can be challenging to achieve a consensus among the different agencies involved in an interagency rulemaking. As a result, interagency rulemakings can take considerably longer to complete than rulemakings that are assigned to a single agency. ConclusionThe Federal Reserve is continuing its efforts to enhance consumer protection in the residential mortgage market. As we develop more useful consumer disclosures for both closed-end loans and home-equity lines, we are mindful that improved disclosure may not always be sufficient to address abuses. Accordingly, we will carefully consider whether additional substantive protections are needed to prevent unfair or deceptive practices. We look forward to working with the Congress to enhance consumer protections while promoting sustainable homeownership and access to responsible credit.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against East Dubuque Savings Bank, East Dubuque, Illinois, a state member bank. East Dubuque Savings Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Boards regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires East Dubuque Savings Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $1,710, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against East Dubuque Savings Bank, East Dubuque, Illinois, a state member bank. East Dubuque Savings Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Boards regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires East Dubuque Savings Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $1,710, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of a Consent Order of Prohibition and Order of Assessment of Civil Money Penalty in the amount of $20,000 against G. Craig Chupik, a former vice president, loan officer, and institution-affiliated party of PlainsCapital Bank, Dallas, Texas. Mr. Chupik, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Orders, which were based on his alleged participation in violations of law, unsafe and unsound banking practices, and breaches of fiduciary duty in connection with his activities as a loan officer of the Bank. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of a Consent Order of Prohibition and Order of Assessment of Civil Money Penalty in the amount of $20,000 against G. Craig Chupik, a former vice president, loan officer, and institution-affiliated party of PlainsCapital Bank, Dallas, Texas. Mr. Chupik, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Orders, which were based on his alleged participation in violations of law, unsafe and unsound banking practices, and breaches of fiduciary duty in connection with his activities as a loan officer of the Bank. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the issuance of a consent Prompt Corrective Action Directive against Heritage Bank, Topeka, Kansas, a state chartered member bank. A copy of the Directive is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the issuance of a consent Prompt Corrective Action Directive against Heritage Bank, Topeka, Kansas, a state chartered member bank. A copy of the Directive is attached.
Sandra F. Braunstein, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee of Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Gutierrez, Ranking Member Hensarling, and members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear today to discuss the Federal Reserve Board's recent regulatory actions to expand protections for consumers who use credit cards and overdraft protection plans. The Federal Reserve is committed to enhancing consumers' ability to use credit cards in a responsible and informed manner. Credit cards provide important benefits for many consumers, both as a source of credit and as a convenient payment mechanism. However, in recent years, credit card terms and features have become more complex, which has reduced transparency in credit card pricing. Growing complexity has increased the risk that consumers will not understand or notice key terms that affect a plan's cost. In December 2008, the Board issued sweeping rules to enhance protections for consumer credit card accounts. One set of rules prohibits certain unfair card practices using the Board's rulemaking authority under the Federal Trade Commission Act (FTC Act), while complementary rules improve disclosures for credit cards under the Truth in Lending Act. Together, these rules are the most comprehensive changes to regulations that govern consumer credit cards ever adopted by the Board. These rules affect nearly all aspects of consumer credit card accounts, including marketing and advertising, disclosures given with applications and at account opening, billing statements, and issuers' ability to change account terms. In addition to these final credit card rules, in December 2008 the Board also proposed rules that would give consumers the right to instruct their depository institutions whether to pay or not pay overdrafts for ATM withdrawals or one-time debit card purchases. In my testimony today, I will first discuss highlights of the Board's revisions to improve the Truth in Lending disclosures provided in connection with consumer credit card accounts, including some of the limitations of a disclosure-based approach. I will then summarize the final rules prohibiting certain unfair acts or practices by banks in connection with consumer credit card accounts, which were issued in conjunction with the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) and the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA). Finally, I will discuss the Board's pending efforts to provide consumer protections in connection with overdraft protection plans. Truth in Lending DisclosuresThe Federal Reserve has primary rule-writing authority for the Truth in Lending Act, which is implemented by the Board's Regulation Z. One of the purposes of the Truth in Lending Act is to assure a meaningful disclosure of credit terms so that consumers can compare available credit terms and avoid the uninformed use of credit. Clear disclosure of credit card terms has always been a challenge. However, this disclosure challenge has grown substantially with the increasing complexity of credit card plans. The Board drew on several sources of data and information in developing improved disclosures to communicate key information to consumers in ways that they would be more likely to pay attention to, understand, and use in their decisionmaking. First, the Board conducted extensive consumer testing, using focus groups and several dozen one-on-one interviews with consumers. The testing first identified what information consumers currently use in making decisions about their credit card accounts, and how they use existing disclosures. The Board used these insights to develop revised credit card disclosures, which also were tested with consumers. Prior to issuing final rules, the Board conducted quantitative testing with over 1,000 consumers nationwide to gauge consumers' comprehension of the newly developed disclosures compared to existing disclosures and formats. In addition, in response to proposed revisions to Regulation Z issued in June 2007 and May 2008, the Board received and considered over 3,000 comment letters representing a broad spectrum of views. The Board used lessons learned from testing and input from those commenting in order to develop a final rule and model disclosures that would enhance consumer understanding of credit card terms. Credit Card Applications and SolicitationsThe final rule includes several changes to the content and terminology of the tabular disclosure of key costs and terms currently provided with credit card applications and solicitations, commonly known as the "Schumer box." These changes were based largely on information from our consumer testing about what information consumers do and do not notice or find important when shopping for credit. The final rules mandate that certain terminology be used in the table in order to enhance consumer understanding, such as by requiring that issuers use the term "penalty rate" to describe the increased rate that may apply if a consumer engages in behavior such as paying late. In order to target the tabular disclosure to those terms that are most useful to consumers, the final rule does not permit a creditor to include in the table information that testing revealed consumers do not use in comparing different credit card offers, for example detailed information about the calculation of variable rates. Account-Opening DisclosuresCurrently, the key terms Truth in Lending requires to be disclosed at account opening are often interspersed within long, complex credit agreements. To make the information more conspicuous and more useful to consumers, the final rule requires creditors to provide a table summarizing the key terms to consumers at account opening. This new account opening table is substantially similar to the Schumer box, based on consumer testing findings indicating that consumers tend not to read disclosures that are in small print and dense prose, but generally are familiar with the table on applications and solicitations. Replicating the tabular format that is familiar to consumers should enhance consumer understanding of the disclosures given at account opening, and also should make it easier for consumers to compare the terms of the offer for which they applied with the terms that they receive. Periodic StatementsThe final rule contains a number of revisions to the periodic statement to improve consumers' understanding of the costs associated with using their credit card accounts. First, the rule includes new formatting and terminology requirements that require creditors to group costs together and identify them as interest charges or fees. Consumer testing demonstrated that consumers more readily understand costs disclosed in dollars than costs disclosed as percentage rates. The final rule also imposes a new requirement to disclose year-to-date totals for interest charges and fees. Finally, the final rule eliminates the requirement to disclose an effective APR, which is an annual percentage rate figure that reflects fees as well as interest charges. Consumer testing demonstrated that consumers find the disclosure of an effective APR that combines rates and fees to be confusing, and that for some consumers, disclosure of an effective APR makes it more difficult to identify the interest rate applicable to the account. Changes in Consumer's Interest Rate and Other Account TermsThe final rule increases advance notice of rate increases or changes in other key account terms from 15 days to 45 days, in order to ensure that consumers will not be surprised by unexpected changes and will have time to explore alternatives. For example, a consumer who receives 45 days' advance notice of an impending rate increase will have time to seek alternative sources of financing for future transactions, or to alter his or her account usage in order to mitigate the impact of the change. The final rule also expands upon the current requirements of Regulation Z by requiring that 45 days' advance notice also be given when a rate increases due to the consumer's delinquency or default or as a penalty. Finally, for rate increases and changes in key terms, the final rule imposes new formatting requirements. Specifically, creditors must disclose changes in key terms in a summary table to enhance the effectiveness of the change-in-terms notice. Additional ProtectionsOther consumer protections in the Regulation Z final rule include: The Board's Rules under the FTC ActThe data obtained in consumer testing informed the development of new rules under Regulation Z to improve the effectiveness of the content, format, and timing of credit card disclosures. However, the testing process also illustrated the limitations of disclosures for today's complex financial products. There are certain key credit card terms, such as how an issuer allocates payments among balances on which interest accrues at different rates, that consumer testing indicates cannot be explained to consumers in a way that would improve their ability to make meaningful decisions about credit. In addition, consumers who commented on the Board's proposals under Regulation Z encouraged the Board to prohibit certain credit card practices that they believe to be unfair. Because improved disclosures alone cannot solve all the problems consumers face in managing their credit card accounts, in December 2008 the Board issued a rule prohibiting certain unfair practices in connection with consumer credit card accounts. The Board has authority under the FTC Act to prescribe regulations to prevent unfair or deceptive acts or practices by banks. The OTS and NCUA have corresponding rule-writing authority for savings associations and federally-chartered credit unions, respectively. In May 2008, the Board, OTS, and NCUA jointly proposed rules to prohibit certain unfair acts or practices with respect to consumer credit card accounts and overdraft services for deposit accounts. The Board received and considered more than 60,000 comments in response to this proposal, more than for any other regulatory proposal in our history. The overwhelming majority of these comments came from individual consumers. In addition to reviewing and considering the comments, the final rules also were informed by the Board's consumer testing, as well as outreach regarding credit card practices with consumer advocates, industry representatives, members of the Board's Consumer Advisory Council, and other federal agencies. The Board's final rule pursuant to its FTC Act authority is set forth in Regulation AA. Time to Make PaymentsThe Board's final rule seeks to ensure consumers have an adequate amount of time to make payments once they receive their billing statements. Banks are prohibited from treating a payment as late for any purpose unless consumers have been provided a reasonable amount of time to make payment. The rule establishes a safe harbor for banks that send periodic statements at least 21 days prior to the payment due date. This rule responds to concerns that credit card issuers have reduced the amount of time provided to consumers to make payment while increasing the costs imposed on consumers whose payments are not received by the due date (such as late payment fees and penalty interest rates). Allocation of PaymentsCredit card accounts often permit consumers to carry multiple balances at different APRs, for example a purchase balance, cash advance balance, and balance transfer balance. When different annual percentage rates apply to different balances on a credit card account, the final rule requires banks to allocate payments in excess of the minimum payment either to the highest rate balance first or pro rata among all the balances on the account. Currently, credit card issuers generally allocate payments first to the balance with the lowest interest rate, which maximizes the assessment of interest charges. Consumer testing conducted by the Board demonstrated that disclosures alone are not sufficient to enable consumers to avoid the higher interest charges caused by current payment allocation practices. Protections Against Interest Rate IncreasesThe final rule restricts the circumstances in which a bank may increase an interest rate applicable to a consumer's credit card account. These provisions address concerns that increases in the interest rate on a credit card account can come as a costly surprise to consumers who relied on the rate in effect when engaging in transactions. For example, many credit card issuers impose penalty rates that can be more than twice the consumer's normal rate on purchases when a payment is late. Some card issuers impose penalty rates based on factors not directly related to the account, such as a drop in the consumer's credit score or the consumer's default on a different account, a practice sometimes referred to as "universal default." In addition, issuers typically reserve the right to increase rates on existing balances at any time, for any reason, in order to, for example, adjust for changes in the creditor's cost of funds. To address these concerns, the final rule restricts penalty pricing and prevents "any time, any reason" repricing of a cardholder's outstanding balances. It also generally prohibits rate increases on new transactions during the first year after account opening. The Board's consumer testing indicated that interest rates are a primary concern for consumers when shopping for credit cards. This final rule promotes fairness in credit card pricing by ensuring that consumers who open accounts based on the rate or rates stated by the card issuer can rely on those rates when engaging in transactions. In addition, the final rule should spur efforts by lenders to improve upfront underwriting by reducing reliance on after-the-fact penalty rate increases. The final rule contains several limited exceptions to the general prohibition on increasing rates on credit card accounts. Each of these exceptions is intended to give issuers sufficient flexibility to respond to changes in the market or changes in the consumer's financial condition while still protecting consumers from unfair surprise. The final rule also establishes rules regarding the repayment of balances on which the rate cannot be increased. These restrictions limit card issuers' ability to accelerate repayment. They complement the rule on repricing of balances by ensuring that consumers are given a reasonable amount of time to pay off any outstanding balances that an issuer may not reprice. Creditors are permitted to establish a repayment period of five years or more, to double the consumer's repayment rate, or use a repayment schedule that is no less beneficial to the consumer than the two specified methods. Finally, in order to prevent banks from imposing new fees in lieu of rate increases, the final rule prohibits the assessment of fees or other charges based solely on a balance that cannot be repriced. The rule strikes a balance between increasing certainty and transparency in the cost of credit for consumers and allowing issuers sufficient flexibility to adjust to changes in borrower creditworthiness and market conditions. In addition to protecting consumers from unexpected increases in the cost of transactions that have already been completed, this rule will enable consumers to more accurately assess the cost of using their credit card accounts at the time they engage in new transactions, particularly during the first year after account opening. Finally, the new rules should enhance competition because issuers that offer rates that realistically reflect risk and market conditions will no longer have to compete with issuers offering artificially reduced rates that can increase unexpectedly. Computing Interest on Account Balances Over Two Billing CyclesThe final rule prohibits the balance computation method sometimes referred to as "two-cycle billing." In general, an institution using the two-cycle method assesses interest not only on the balance for the current billing cycle but also on the balance for days in the preceding billing cycle. The Board's consumer testing indicates that disclosures cannot adequately explain the two-cycle method in a way that enables consumers to make informed choices among credit products with different balance computation methods. Security Deposits and Fees That Limit Credit AvailabilityThe final FTC Act rule includes several provisions to protect vulnerable subprime consumers from credit card products that charge high fees and provide little available credit. Specifically, the final rule prohibits banks from financing security deposits and fees that, in the aggregate, constitute a majority of the initial credit limit in the first year. The final rule also limits the total security deposits and fees that can be charged at account opening to 25 percent of the initial credit limit. Effective DateThese rules represent the most comprehensive and sweeping reforms ever adopted by the Board for credit card accounts and will apply to more than one billion accounts. Given that the changes affect nearly every aspect of credit card lending, card issuers must be afforded sufficient time for implementation to allow for an orderly transition that avoids unintended consequences, compliance difficulties, and potential liabilities. The effective date for both the revised credit card rules under the FTC Act and Regulation Z is July 1, 2010. To comply with the final rules, card issuers must adopt different business models and pricing strategies and then develop new credit products. Depending on how business models evolve, card issuers may need to restructure their funding mechanisms. In addition to these changes, issuers must revise their marketing materials, application and solicitation disclosures, credit agreements, and periodic statements so that the documents reflect the new products and conform to the rules. Changes to issuers' business practices and disclosures will involve extensive reprogramming of automated systems which subsequently must be tested for compliance, and personnel must receive appropriate training. Although the Board has encouraged card issuers to make the necessary changes as soon as practicable, an 18-month compliance period is consistent with the nature and scope of the required changes. Regulatory Proposal on Overdraft ServicesFinally, I will discuss the Board's recent proposal to give consumers greater control over the payment of overdrafts. The term "overdraft service" generally refers to an institution's practice of paying a consumer's transaction that overdraws the consumer's account and charging a fee for doing so. In the past, overdraft services were provided only for check transactions. More recently, institutions have extended the service to apply to other transaction types, including automated teller machine (ATM) withdrawals and point-of-sale debit card purchases. Most institutions have automated the process for determining whether, and to what extent, to pay overdrafts. In most cases, consumers are automatically enrolled in overdraft services. Each time an overdraft is paid, the consumer is charged a flat fee, regardless of the amount of the overdraft. Institutions commonly charge the same amount for paying an overdraft as they would if they returned the item unpaid. According to the Government Accountability Office (GAO), the average cost of overdraft and insufficient funds was just over $26 per item in 2007.1For point-of-sale debit card transactions in particular, the overdraft fee may substantially exceed the dollar amount of the overdraft. The Board's December 2008 proposal under the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (Regulation E) would provide consumers with the opportunity to choose whether overdraft services meet their needs. The proposal contains two alternative approaches. The first approach would prohibit an institution from assessing any fees on a consumer's account after the institution authorizes an overdraft, unless the consumer is first given notice and a reasonable opportunity to opt out of the institution's overdraft service. The second approach would require an institution to obtain the consumer's affirmative consent, or opt-in, before fees may be assessed to the consumer's account for overdrafts authorized by the institution. The proposal would apply to overdrafts for ATM withdrawals and one-time debit card purchases, and thus would not cover overdrafts by check or recurring debit. Consumer testing conducted for the Board indicates that consumers would not opt out if opting out meant that their most significant bills--those typically paid by check or recurring debit--would not be paid. In addition, if their check or recurring debit payment is dishonored for insufficient funds, consumers could incur fees, both from their institution and from the merchant. In contrast, if a consumer does not have sufficient funds to cover an ATM withdrawal or a one-time debit card purchase, the transaction would simply be declined without the assessment of any fees. Thus, limiting the rule to these transactions, and excluding checks and recurring debits, seems appropriate to ensure consumers are given a meaningful choice regarding the payment of overdrafts. The public comment period for the overdrafts proposal concludes on March 30, 2009. After evaluating the comments and conducting additional consumer testing, we expect to issue a final rule later this year. ConclusionIn closing, let me emphasize the Federal Reserve's commitment to enhancing the ability of consumers to use credit cards to their benefit. The Board believes that the package of substantive and disclosure-based regulations issued in December 2008 appropriately promotes fairness in the terms of consumer credit card accounts and ensures that consumers receive disclosures at a time and in a form that meaningfully assists them in making informed decisions regarding the use of credit. The Federal Reserve also is committed to helping consumers better understand the cost of overdraft services and providing a means to exercise choice regarding the use of these services. Footnotes 1.See"Bank Fees: Federal Banking Regulators Could Better Ensure That Consumers Have Required Disclosure Documents Prior to Opening Checking or Savings Accounts", GAO Report 08-281, at 14 (January 2008).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board announced Friday that it will publish the annual revision to the G.17 statistical release, Industrial Production and Capacity Utilization, on Friday, March 27 at 2 p.m. EDT. The revision will be made available on the Board's web site athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/G17/.
The Federal Reserve Board announced Friday that it will publish the annual revision to the G.17 statistical release, Industrial Production and Capacity Utilization, on Friday, March 27 at 2 p.m. EDT. The revision will be made available on the Board's web site athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/G17/.
Roger T. Cole, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Before the Subcommittee on Securities, Insurance, and Investment, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Reed, Ranking Member Bunning and members of the Subcommittee, it is my pleasure to appear today to discuss the state of risk management in the banking industry and steps taken by Federal Reserve supervisors to address risk management shortcomings at banking organizations. In my testimony, I will describe the vigorous and concerted steps the Federal Reserve has taken and is taking to rectify the risk management weaknesses revealed by the current financial crisis. I will also describe actions we are taking internally to improve supervisory practices and apply supervisory lessons learned. This includes a process spearheaded by Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Donald Kohn to systematically identify key lessons revealed by recent events and to implement corresponding recommendations. Because this crisis is ongoing, our review is ongoing. BackgroundThe Federal Reserve has supervisory and regulatory authority over a range of financial institutions and activities. It works with other federal and state supervisory authorities to ensure the safety and soundness of the banking industry, foster the stability of the financial system, and provide for fair and equitable treatment of consumers in their financial transactions. The Federal Reserve is not the primary federal supervisor for the majority of commercial bank assets. Rather, it is the consolidated supervisor of bank holding companies, including financial holding companies, and conducts inspections of all of those institutions. As I describe below, we have recently enhanced our supervisory processes on consolidated supervision to make them more effective and efficient. The primary purpose of inspections is to ensure that the holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries do not pose a threat to the soundness of the company's depository institutions. In fulfilling this role, the Federal Reserve is required to rely to the fullest extent possible on information and analysis provided by the appropriate supervisory authority of the company's bank, securities, or insurance subsidiaries. The Federal Reserve is also the primary federal supervisor of state-member banks, sharing supervisory responsibilities with state supervisory agencies. In this role, Federal Reserve supervisory staff regularly conduct on-site examinations and off-site monitoring to ensure the soundness of supervised state member banks. The Federal Reserve is involved in both regulation--establishing the rules within which banking organizations must operate--and supervision--ensuring that banking organizations abide by those rules and remain, overall, in safe and sound condition. A key aspect of the supervisory process is evaluating risk management practices, in addition to assessing the financial condition of supervised institutions. Since rules and regulations in many cases cannot reasonably prescribe the exact practices each individual bank should use for risk management, supervisors design policies and guidance that expand upon requirements set in rules and regulations and establish expectations for the range of acceptable practices. Supervisors rely extensively on these policies and guidance as they conduct examinations and to assign supervisory ratings. We are all aware that the U.S. financial system is experiencing unprecedented disruptions that have emerged with unusual speed. The principal cause of the current financial crisis and economic slowdown was the collapse of the global credit boom and the ensuing problems at financial institutions, triggered by the end of the housing expansion in the United States and other countries. Financial institutions have been adversely affected by the financial crisis itself, as well as by the ensuing economic downturn. In the period leading up to the crisis, the Federal Reserve and other U.S. banking supervisors took several important steps to improve the safety and soundness of banking organizations and the resilience of the financial system. For example, following the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, we took steps to improve clearing and settlement processes, business continuity for critical financial market activities, and compliance with Bank Secrecy Act, anti-money laundering, and sanctions requirements. Other areas of focus pertained to credit card subprime lending, the growth in leveraged lending, credit risk management practices for home equity lending, counterparty credit risk related to hedge funds, and effective accounting controls after the fall of Enron. These are examples in which the Federal Reserve took aggressive action with a number of financial institutions, demonstrating that effective supervision can bring about material improvements in risk management and compliance practices at supervised institutions. In addition, the Federal Reserve, working with the other U.S. banking agencies, issued several pieces of supervisory guidance before the onset of the recent crisis--taking action on nontraditional mortgages, commercial real estate, home equity lending, complex structured financial transactions, and subprime lending--to highlight emerging risks and point bankers to prudential risk management practices they should follow. Moreover, we identified a number of potential issues and concerns and communicated those concerns to the industry through the guidance and through our supervisory activities. Supervisory Actions to Improve Risk Management PracticesIn testimony last June, Vice Chairman Kohn outlined the immediate supervisory actions taken by the Federal Reserve to identify risk management deficiencies at supervised firms related to the current crisis and bring about the necessary corrective steps. We are continuing and expanding those actions. While additional work is necessary, we are seeing progress at supervised institutions toward rectifying issues identified amid the ongoing turmoil in the financial markets. We are also devoting considerable effort to requiring bankers to look not just at risks from the past but also to have a good understanding of their risks going forward. The Federal Reserve has been actively engaged in a number of efforts to understand and document the risk management lapses and shortcomings at major financial institutions revealed during the current crisis. In fact, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York organized and leads the Senior Supervisors Group (SSG), which published a report last March on risk management practices at major international firms.1I do not plan to summarize the findings of the SSG report and similar public reports, since others from the Federal Reserve have already done so.2But I would like to describe some of the next steps being taken by the SSG. A key initiative of the Federal Reserve and other supervisors since the issuance of the March 2008 SSG report has been to assess the response of the industry to the observations and recommendations on the need to enhance key risk management practices. The work of the SSG has been helpful, both in complementing our evaluation of risk management practices at individual firms and in our discussions with bankers and their directors. It is also providing perspective on how each individual firm's risk management performance compares with that of a broad cross-section of global financial services firms. The continuation of the SSG process requires key firms to conduct self-assessments that are to be shared with the organization's board of directors and serve to highlight progress in addressing gaps in risk management practices and identify areas where additional efforts are still needed. Our supervisory staff is currently in the process of reviewing the firms' self assessments, but we note thus far that in many areas progress has been made to improve risk management practices. We plan to incorporate the results of these reviews into our future examination work to validate management assertions. The next portion of my remarks describes the supervisory actions we have been taking in the areas of liquidity risk management, capital planning and capital adequacy, firm-wide risk identification, residential lending, counterparty credit risk, and commercial real estate. In all of these areas we are moving vigorously to address the weaknesses at financial institutions that have been revealed by the crisis. Liquidity risk managementSince the beginning of the crisis, we have been working diligently to bring about needed improvements in institutions' liquidity risk management practices. One lesson learned in this crisis is that several key sources of liquidity may not be available in a crisis. For example, Bear Stearns collapsed in part because it could not obtain liquidity even on a basis fully secured by high-quality collateral, such as U.S. government securities. Others have found that back-up lines of credit are not made available for use when most needed by the borrower. These lessons have heightened our concern about liquidity and improved our approach to evaluating liquidity plans of banking organizations. Along with our U.S. supervisory colleagues, we are monitoring the major firms' liquidity positions on a daily basis, and are discussing key market developments and our supervisory views with the firms' senior management. We also are conducting additional analysis of firms' liquidity positions to examine the impact various scenarios may have on their liquidity and funding profiles. We use this ongoing analysis along with findings from examinations to ensure that liquidity and funding risk management and contingency funding plans are sufficiently robust and that the institutions are prepared to address various stress scenarios. We are aggressively challenging those assumptions in firms' contingency funding plans that may be unrealistic. Our supervisory efforts require firms to consider the potential impact of both disruptions in the overall funding markets and idiosyncratic funding difficulties. We are also requiring more rigor in the assessment of all expected and unexpected funding uses and needs. Firms are also being required to consider the respective risks of reliance on wholesale funding and retail funding, as well as the risks associated with off-balance sheet contingencies. These efforts include steps to require banks to consider the potential impact on liquidity that arises from firms' actions to protect their reputation, such as an unplanned increase in assets requiring funding that would arise with support given to money market funds and other financial vehicles where no contractual obligation exists. These efforts also pertain to steps banks must take to prepare for situations in which even collateralized funding may not be readily available because of market disruptions or concern about the health of a borrowing institution. As a result of these efforts, supervised institutions have significantly improved their liquidity risk management practices, and have taken steps to stabilize and improve their funding sources as market conditions permit. In conducting work on liquidity risk management, we have used established supervisory guidance on liquidity risk management as well as updated guidelines on liquidity risk management issued by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision last September--a process in which the Federal Reserve played a lead role. So that supervisory expectations for U.S. depository institutions are aligned with these international principles, the U.S. banking agencies plan to update their own interagency guidance on liquidity risk management practices in the near future. The new guidance will emphasize the need for institutions of all sizes to conduct meaningful cash flow forecasts of their funding needs in both normal and stressed conditions and to ensure that they have an adequately diversified funding base and a cushion of liquid assets to mitigate stressful market conditions. Our supervisory efforts at individual institutions and the issuance of new liquidity risk management guidance come on top of broader Federal Reserve efforts outside of the supervision function to improve liquidity in financial markets, such as introduction of the Term Auction Facility and the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility. Capital planning and capital adequacyOur supervisory activities for capital planning and capital adequacy are similar to those for liquidity. We have been closely monitoring firms' capital levels relative to their risk exposures, in conjunction with reviewing projections for earnings and asset quality and discussing our evaluations with senior management. We have been engaged in our own analysis of loss scenarios to anticipate institutions' future capital needs, analysis that includes the potential for losses from a range of sources as well as assumption of assets currently held off balance sheet. We have been discussing our analysis with bankers and requiring their own internal analyses to reflect a broad range of scenarios and to capture stress environments that could impair solvency. As a result, banking organizations have taken a number of steps to strengthen their capital positions, including raising substantial amounts of capital from private sources in 2007 and 2008. We have stepped up our efforts to evaluate firms' capital planning and to bring about improvements where they are needed. For instance, we recently issued guidance to our examination staff--which was also distributed to supervised institutions--on the declaration and payment of dividends, capital repurchases, and capital redemptions in the context of capital planning processes. We are forcefully requiring institutions to retain strong capital buffers--above the levels prescribed by minimum regulatory requirements--not only to weather the immediate environment but also to remain viable over the medium and long term. Our efforts related to capital planning and capital adequacy are embodied in the interagency supervisory capital assessment process, which began in February. We are conducting assessments of selected banking institutions' capital adequacy, based on certain macroeconomic scenarios. For this assessment, we are carefully evaluating the forecasts submitted by each financial institution to ensure they are appropriate, consistent with the firm's underlying portfolio performance, and reflective of each entity's particular business activities and risk profile. The assessment of capital under the two macroeconomic scenarios being used in the capital assessment program will permit supervisors to ascertain whether institutions' capital buffers over the regulatory capital minimum are appropriate under more severe but plausible scenarios. Federal Reserve supervisors have been engaged over the past few years in evaluating firms' internal processes to assess overall capital adequacy as set forth in existing Federal Reserve supervisory guidance. A portion of that work has focused on how firms use economic capital practices to assess overall capital needs. We have communicated our findings to firms individually, which included their need to improve some key practices, and demanded corrective actions. We also presented our overall findings to a broad portion of the financial industry at a System-sponsored outreach meeting last fall that served to underscore the importance of our message. Firm-wide risk identification and compliance risk managementOne of the most important aspects of good risk management is risk identification. This is a particularly challenging exercise because some practices, each of which appears to present low risk on its own, may combine to create unexpectedly high risk. For example, in the current crisis, practices in mortgage lending--which historically has been seen as a very low-risk activity--have become distorted and, consequently riskier, as they have been fueled by another activity that was designed to reduce risk to lenders--the sale of mortgage assets to investors outside the financial industry. Since the onset of the crisis, we have been working with supervised institutions to improve their risk identification practices where needed, such as by helping identify interconnected risks. These improvements include a better understanding of risks facing the entire organization, such as interdependencies among risks and concentrations of exposures. One of the key lessons learned has been the need for timely and effective communication about risks, and many of our previously mentioned efforts pertaining to capital and liquidity are designed to ensure that management and boards of directors understand the linkages within the firm and how various events might impact the balance sheet and funding of an organization. We have demanded that institutions address more serious risk management deficiencies so that risk management is appropriately independent, that incentives are properly aligned, and that management information systems (MIS) produce comprehensive, accurate, and timely information. In our 2006 guidance on nontraditional mortgage products, we recognized that poor risk management practices related to retail products and services could have serious effects on the profitability of financial institutions and the economy; in other words, there could be a relationship between consumer protection and financial soundness. For example, consumer abuses in the subprime mortgage lending market were a contributing cause to the current mortgage market problems. Here, too, we are requiring improvements. The Federal Reserve issued guidance on compliance risk management programs to emphasize the need for effective firm-wide compliance risk management and oversight at large, complex banking organizations. This guidance is particularly applicable to compliance risks, including its application to consumer protection, that transcend business lines, legal entities, and jurisdictions of operation. Residential lendingFinancial institutions are still facing significant challenges in the residential mortgage market, particularly given the rising level of defaults and foreclosures and the lack of liquidity for private label mortgage-backed securities. Therefore, we will continue to focus on the adequacy of institutions' risk management practices, including their underwriting standards, and re-emphasize the importance of a lender's assessment of a borrower's ability to repay the loan. Toward that end, we are requiring institutions to maintain risk management practices that more effectively identify, monitor, and control the risks associated with their mortgage lending activity and that more adequately address lessons learned from recent events. In addition to efforts on the safety and soundness front, last year we finalized amendments to the rules under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA). These amendments establish sweeping new regulatory protections for consumers in the residential mortgage market. Our goal throughout this process has been to protect borrowers from practices that are unfair or deceptive and to preserve the availability of credit from responsible mortgage lenders. The Board believes that these regulations, which apply to all mortgage lenders, not just banks, will better protect consumers from a range of unfair or deceptive mortgage lending and advertising practices that have been the source of considerable concern and criticism. Given escalating mortgage foreclosures, we have urged regulated institutions to establish systematic, proactive, and streamlined mortgage loan modification protocols and to review troubled loans using these protocols. We expect an institution (acting either in the role of lender or servicer) to determine, before proceeding to foreclosure, whether a loan modification will enhance the net present value of the loan, and whether loans currently in foreclosure have been subject to such analysis. Such practices are not only consistent with sound risk management but are also in the long-term interests of borrowers, lenders, investors, and servicers. We are encouraging regulated institutions, through government programs, to pursue modifications that result in mortgages that borrowers will be able to sustain over the remaining maturity of their loan. In this regard, just recently the Federal Reserve joined with other financial supervisors to encourage all of the institutions we supervise to participate in the Treasury Department's Home Affordable loan modification program, which was established under the Troubled Assets Relief Program.3Our examiners are closely monitoring loan modification efforts of institutions we supervise. Counterparty credit riskThe Federal Reserve has been concerned about counterparty credit risk for some time, and has focused on requiring the industry to have effective risk management practices in place to deal with risks associated with transacting with hedge funds, for example, and other key counterparties. This focus includes assessing the overall quality of MIS for counterparty credit risk and ensuring that limits are complied with and exceptions appropriately reviewed. As the crisis has unfolded, we have intensified our monitoring of counterparty credit risk. Supervisors are analyzing management reports and, in some cases, are having daily conversations with management about ongoing issues and important developments. This process has allowed us to understand key linkages and exposures across the financial system as specific counterparties experience stress during the current market environment. Federal Reserve supervisors now collect information on the counterparty credit exposures of major institutions on a weekly and monthly basis, and have enhanced their methods of assessing this exposure. Within counterparty credit risk, issues surrounding the credit default swap (CDS) market have been particularly pertinent. As various Federal Reserve officials have noted in past testimony to congressional committees and in other public statements, regulators have, for several years, been addressing issues surrounding the over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives market in general and the CDS market in particular. Since September 2005, an international group of supervisors, under the leadership of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, has been working with dealers and other market participants to strengthen arrangements for processing, clearing, and settling OTC derivatives. An early focus of this process was on CDS. This emphasis includes promoting such steps as greater use of electronic-confirmation platforms, adoption of a protocol that requires participants to request counterparty consent before assigning trades to a third party, and creation of a contract repository that maintains an electronic record of CDS trades. More recently, and in response to the recommendations of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets and the Financial Stability Forum, supervisors are working to bring about further improvements to the OTC derivatives market infrastructure. With respect to credit derivatives, this agenda includes: (1) further increasing standardization and automation; (2) incorporating an auction-based cash settlement mechanism into standard documentation; (3) reducing the volume of outstanding CDS contracts; and (4) developing well-designed central counterparty services to reduce systemic risks. The most important potential change in the infrastructure for credit derivatives is the creation of one or more central counterparties (CCPs) for CDS. The Federal Reserve supports CCP clearing of CDS because, if properly designed and managed, CCPs can reduce risks to market participants and to the financial system. In addition to clearing CDS through CCPs, the Federal Reserve believes that exchange trading of sufficiently standardized contracts by banks and other market participants can increase market liquidity and transparency, and thus should be encouraged. In a major step toward achieving that goal, the Federal Reserve Board, on March 4, 2009, approved the application by ICE US Trust LLC (ICE Trust) to become a member of the Federal Reserve System. ICE Trust intends to provide central counterparty services for certain credit default swap contracts. Commercial real estateFor some time, the Federal Reserve has been focused on commercial real estate (CRE) exposures. For background, as part of our on-site supervision of banking organizations in the early 2000s, we began to observe rising CRE concentrations. Given the central role that CRE lending played in the banking problems of the late 1980s and early 1990s, we led an interagency effort to issue supervisory guidance on CRE concentrations. In the 2006 guidance on CRE, we emphasized our concern that some institutions' strategic- and capital-planning processes did not adequately acknowledge the risks from their CRE concentrations. We stated that stress testing and similar exercises were necessary for institutions to identify the impact of potential CRE shocks on earnings and capital, especially the impact from credit concentrations. Because weaker housing markets and deteriorating economic conditions have clearly impaired the quality of CRE loans at supervised banking organizations, we have redoubled our supervisory efforts in regard to this segment. These efforts include monitoring carefully the impact that declining collateral values may have on CRE exposures as well as assessing the extent to which banks have been complying with the interagency CRE guidance. We found, through horizontal reviews and other examinations, that some institutions would benefit from additional and better stress testing and could improve their understanding of how concentrations--both single-name and sectoral/geographical concentrations--can impact capital levels during shocks. We have also implemented additional examiner training so that our supervisory staff is equipped to deal with more serious CRE problems at banking organizations as they arise, and have enhanced our outreach to key real estate market participants and obtained additional market data sources to help support our supervisory activities. As a result of our supervisory work, risk management practices related to CRE are improving, including risk identification and measurement. To sum up our efforts to improve banks' risk management, we are looking at all of the areas mentioned above--both on an individual and collective basis--as well as other areas to ensure that all institutions have their risk management practices at satisfactory levels. More generally, where we have not seen appropriate progress, we are aggressively downgrading supervisory ratings and using our enforcement tools. Supervisory Lessons LearnedHaving just described many of the steps being taken by Federal Reserve supervisors to address risk management deficiencies in the banking industry, I would now like to turn briefly to our internal efforts to improve our own supervisory practices. The current crisis has helped us to recognize areas in which we, like the banking industry, can improve. Since last year, Vice Chairman Kohn has led a System-wide effort to identify lessons learned and to develop recommendations for potential improvements to supervisory practices. To benefit from multiple perspectives in these efforts, this internal process is drawing on staff from around the System. For example, we have formed System-wide groups, led by Board members and Reserve Bank Presidents, to address the identified issues in areas such as policies and guidance, the execution of supervisory responsibilities, and structure and governance. Each group is reviewing identified lessons learned, assessing the effectiveness of recent initiatives to rectify issues, and developing additional recommendations. We will leverage these group recommendations to arrive at an overall set of enhancements that will be implemented in concert. As you know, we are also meeting with members of the Congress and other government bodies, including the Government Accountability Office, to consult on lessons learned and to hear additional suggestions for improving our practices. One immediate example of enhancements relates to System-wide efforts for forward-looking risk identification efforts. Building on previous System-wide efforts to provide perspectives on existing and emerging risks, the Federal Reserve has recently augmented its process to disseminate risk information to all the Reserve Banks. That process is one way we are ensuring that risks are identified in a consistent manner across the System by leveraging the collective insights of Federal Reserve supervisory staff. We are also using our internal risk reporting to help establish supervisory priorities, contribute to examination planning and scoping, and track issues for proper correction. Additionally, we are reviewing staffing levels and expertise so that we have the appropriate resources, including for proper risk identification, to address not just the challenges of the current environment but also those over the longer term. We have concluded that there is opportunity to improve our communication of supervisory and regulatory policies, guidance, and expectations to those we regulate. This includes more frequently updating our rules and regulations and more quickly issuing guidance as new risks and concerns are identified. For instance, we are reviewing the area of capital adequacy, including treatment of market risk exposures as well as exposures related to securitizations and counterparty credit risk. We are taking extra steps to ensure that as potential areas of risk are identified or new issues emerge, policies and guidance address those areas in an appropriate and timely manner. And we will increase our efforts to ensure that, for global banks, our policy and guidance responses are coordinated, to the extent possible, with those developed in other countries. One of the Federal Reserve's latest enhancements related to guidance, a project begun before the onset of the crisis, was the issuance of supervisory guidance on consolidated supervision. This guidance is intended to assist our examination staff as they carry out supervision of banking institutions, particularly large, complex firms with multiple legal entities, and to provide some clarity to bankers about our areas of supervisory focus. Importantly, the guidance is designed to calibrate supervisory objectives and activities to the systemic significance of the institutions and the complexity of their regulatory structures. The guidance provides more explicit expectations for supervisory staff on the importance of understanding and validating the effectiveness of the banking organization's corporate governance, risk management, and internal controls that are in place to oversee and manage risks across the organization. Our assessment of nonbank activities is an important part of our supervisory process to understand the linkages between depository and nondepository subsidiaries, and their effects on the overall risks of the organization. In addition to issues related to general risk management at nonbank subsidiaries, the consolidated supervision guidance addresses potential issues related to consumer compliance. In this regard, in 2007 and 2008 the Board collaborated with other U.S. and state government agencies to launch a cooperative pilot project aimed at expanding consumer protection compliance reviews at selected nondepository lenders with significant subprime mortgage operations. This interagency initiative has clarified jurisdictional issues and improved information-sharing among the participating agencies, along with furthering its overarching goal of preventing abusive and fraudulent lending while ensuring that consumers retain access to beneficial credit. As stated earlier, there were numerous cases in which the U.S. banking agencies developed policies and guidance for emerging risks and issues that warranted the industry's attention, such as in the areas of nontraditional mortgages, home equity lending, and complex structured financial transactions. It is important that regulatory policies and guidance continue to be applied to firms in ways that allow for different business models and that do not squelch innovation. However, when bankers are particularly confident, when the industry and others are especially vocal about the costs of regulatory burden and international competitiveness, and when supervisors cannot yet cite recognized losses or writedowns, we must have even firmer resolve to hold firms accountable for prudent risk management practices. It is particularly important, in such cases, that our supervisory communications are very forceful and clear, directed at senior management and boards of directors so that matters are given proper attention and resolved to our satisfaction. With respect to consumer protection matters, we have an even greater understanding that reviews of consumer compliance records of nonbank subsidiaries of bank holding companies can aid in confirming the level of risk that these entities assume, and that they assist in identifying appropriate supervisory action. Our consumer compliance division is currently developing a program to further the work that was begun in the interagency pilot discussed earlier. In addition to these points, it is important to note that we have learned lessons and taken action on important aspects of our consumer protection program, which I believe others from the Federal Reserve have discussed with the Congress. In addition, we must further enhance our ability to develop clear and timely analysis of the interconnections among both regulated and unregulated institutions, and among institutions and markets, and the potential for these linkages and interrelationships to adversely affect banking organizations and the financial system. In many ways, the Federal Reserve is well positioned to meet this challenge. In this regard, the current crisis has, in our view, demonstrated the ways in which the Federal Reserve's consolidated supervision role closely complements our other central bank responsibilities, including the objectives of fostering financial stability and deterring or managing financial crises. The information, expertise, and powers derived from our supervisory authority enhance the Federal Reserve's ability to help reduce the likelihood of financial crises, and to work with the Treasury Department and other U.S. and foreign authorities to manage such crises should they occur. Indeed, the enhanced consolidated supervision guidance that the Federal Reserve issued in 2008 explicitly outlines the process by which we will use information obtained in the course of supervising financial institutions--as well as information and analysis obtained through relationships with other supervisors and other sources--to identify potential vulnerabilities across financial institutions. It will also help us identify areas of supervisory focus that might further the Federal Reserve's knowledge of markets and counterparties and their linkages to banking organizations and the potential implications for financial stability. A final supervisory lesson applies to the structure of the U.S. regulatory system, an issue that the Congress, the Federal Reserve, and others have already raised. While we have strong, cooperative relationships with other relevant bank supervisors and functional regulators, there are obvious gaps and operational challenges in the regulation and supervision of the overall U.S. financial system. This is an issue that the Federal Reserve has been studying for some time, and we look forward to providing support to the Congress and the Administration as they consider regulatory reform. In a recent speech, Chairman Bernanke introduced some ideas to improve the oversight of the U.S. financial system, including the oversight of nonbank entities. He stated that no matter what the future regulatory structure in the United States, there should be strong consolidated supervision of all systemically important banking and nonbanking financial institutions. Finally, Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank you and the subcommittee for holding this second hearing on risk management--a crucially important issue in understanding the failures that have contributed to the current crisis. Our actions, with the support of the Congress, will help strengthen institutions' risk management practices and the supervisory and regulatory process itself--which should, in turn, greatly strengthen the banking system and the broader economy as we recover from the current difficulties. I look forward to answering your questions. Footnotes 1.Senior Supervisors Group (2008). "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence (373 KB PDF)," March 6.Return to text 2.President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)," March 13; Financial Stability Forum (2008), "Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience (399 KB PDF)," April 7.Return to text 3.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal financial regulatory agencies issue statement in support of the "Making Home Affordable" loan modification program," press release, March 4.Return to text
No content found
No content found
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public website,http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement/, as they occur.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public website,http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement/, as they occur.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Independent Community Bankers of America's National Convention and Techworld, Phoenix, Arizona When I addressed this convention three years ago, with all of five weeks under my belt as Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, I opened my remarks with three observations: that community banks played a critical role in the U.S. economy, that community banks were generally doing well, and that community banks faced a changing business environment that posed important challenges. I am struck that all three observations, at least to some degree, still hold true today. Community banks continue to play a critical role in our economy and, in many cases, have an opportunity to step in and make sound profitable loans, where some competitors have pulled back. Relatively speaking at least, community banks are doing better as a group than other segments of our financial system, but at the same time they are far from immune to current conditions. And, surely, it is still true that the business environment poses important challenges to community banks. In fact, I think it is safe to say that few of us in the convention hall three years ago envisioned the financial and economic environment we now confront. Envisioning the conditions we will face three years from now is equally difficult, but it is my hope and expectation that those conditions will be significantly brighter. This morning, I'd like to spend some time reviewing the Federal Reserve's response to the financial crisis of the past 18 months, as well as the current challenges--and opportunities--facing community banks. In addition, I'll discuss two important steps that policymakers can and should take to improve the financial regulatory system that likely are of particular interest to you. The first step is the need to address the very real problem caused by institutions that are too big--or too interconnected--to fail in a disorderly manner. The second involves ways of making the system less procyclical, so that the financial system is less susceptible to exuberant booms and disastrous busts. In discussing the road back to financial stability and economic prosperity, I want to leave you with the idea that, yes, this is indeed a time of challenge for community bankers, as it is for all Americans, but it also is a time of opportunity. Federal Reserve Actions to Address the Financial CrisisThe depth and complexity of the strains that have gripped financial markets and institutions since the summer of 2007 have led the Federal Reserve to take innovative and extraordinary actions aimed at restoring stability to markets and supporting the flow of credit to businesses and households. Most directly, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has eased monetary policy aggressively. From the second half of 2007 to the spring of 2008, the Committee reduced its target for the federal funds rate from 5-1/4 percent to 2 percent. And, as the financial turbulence intensified last fall and the economic outlook deteriorated, the Committee responded by cutting the target for the federal funds rate to near zero by the end of last year. As a result, a number of interest rates, especially shorter-term rates, have declined significantly, offsetting, at least to some degree, the effects of the financial turmoil on the cost of credit. However, as community bankers are no doubt aware, that offset has been incomplete. Widening credit spreads, more-restrictive lending standards, and credit market dysfunction are working against the monetary easing and leading to tighter financial conditions overall. To address these problems, the Federal Reserve has employed a range of additional tools. These tools can be divided into three sets. The first set is closely tied to the central bank's traditional role of provider of short-term liquidity to sound financial institutions. Over the course of the crisis, the Fed has sought to ensure that financial institutions--including banks of all sizes as well as primary dealers--have had adequate access to short-term credit.1We substantially reduced the spread of the primary credit rate over the target federal funds rate and increased the maximum maturity of primary credit loans to 90 days; we have also been conducting regular auctions of discount window credit for terms of up to 84 days. In fulfilling this traditional lending function, we have helped ease conditions in interbank funding markets, thus increasing the willingness of banks to extend loans and thereby easing credit conditions for the households and businesses that depend on banks. Despite our provision of liquidity to banks and broker-dealers, a number of critical nonbank financial markets--such as the commercial paper market and the market for asset-backed securities--deteriorated significantly. Under normal circumstances, these markets are important sources of credit for American businesses and their customers. Thus, we developed a second set of policy tools to provide liquidity directly to borrowers and investors in key credit markets. Notably, we have introduced facilities to purchase highly rated commercial paper at a term of three months and to provide backup liquidity for money market mutual funds. In addition, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury have jointly established a facility--the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, or TALF--that lends against AAA-rated asset-backed securities collateralized by recently originated student loans, auto loans, credit card loans, and loans guaranteed by the Small Business Administration. This program just got under way; the first subscription for funding under the program was completed yesterday, with the funds to be disbursed next week. Over time, we expect to expand this facility to include loans against other types of newly issued AAA-rated asset-backed securities, such as commercial mortgage-backed securities and private-label residential mortgage-backed securities. If this program works as planned, it should make new consumer, business, and mortgage loans more available, at lower cost. The Federal Reserve's third set of tools for supporting the credit markets involves the purchase of longer-term securities for the Fed's portfolio. As we announced this week, we are purchasing up to $300 billion in Treasury debt, $200 billion of the debt of government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), and up to $1.25 trillion of mortgage-backed securities guaranteed by the GSEs and federal agencies this year. These purchases are intended to improve conditions in private credit markets. In particular, they are helping to reduce the interest rates that the GSEs require on the mortgages that they purchase or securitize, thereby lowering the rate at which lenders, including community banks, can fund new mortgages. The Federal Reserve continuously assesses the effectiveness of its credit-related tools. So far, we have generally been encouraged by the market responses, including the decline in mortgage interest rates I mentioned. In addition, our commercial paper facility has helped American businesses finance their payrolls and other operational obligations by significantly lowering rates on the paper and opening access to financing at terms longer than a few days. Our actions to stabilize the money market mutual fund industry, together with other government programs, have also shown some success--the sharp withdrawals from funds in September on balance have given way to modest inflows. These credit-easing programs, along with actions taken by the Treasury and other government entities, are crucial determinants of the timing and strength of the economic recovery. However, although low interest rates and ongoing fiscal stimulus will help, we cannot have a vigorous economic recovery unless we succeed in restoring a reasonable degree of financial stability. Conditions and Outlook for Community BanksAs you well know, community banks have been adversely affected by the turmoil in the financial system. As a group, community banks--which I define to include commercial banks with assets of $1 billion or less--have seen their financial performance and condition deteriorate substantially since the middle of 2007. Nevertheless, as I will discuss, the longer-term outlook for community banks is positive in light of their unique competitive advantages. Looking first at current conditions, higher loan loss provisions and significant realized losses on investment securities--related in many cases to impairment of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac equity holdings--substantially eroded the profitability of community banks in 2008. Community banks reported net income of just $4.6 billion, less than one-half of the level of 2007. In the fourth quarter, almost one in every three community banks reported a loss, and overall they reported a small net loss of about $150 million. Community banks entered the crisis with strong capital, and, despite weakening earnings, the vast majority--well over 95 percent--remained well capitalized at year-end 2008 under Prompt Corrective Action standards. Nevertheless, the ratio of nonperforming assets to total assets rose to its highest level since 1992 as residential mortgage and construction loans continued to deteriorate. And given the near-term economic outlook, loan quality at many community banks may decline further. I know that bankers--including community bankers--have expressed concern over some of the "mixed messages" they perceive are coming from the federal banking agencies in the current environment--particularly admonitions to continue lending at the same time that institutions are being urged to maintain adequate capital and prudent lending standards. We are sensitive to this issue, which is why last November the agencies jointly issued the "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers."2In that statement, we noted that continuing to lend in this environment is not inconsistent with maintaining good risk management and high underwriting standards. For example, we emphasized that, while rectifying past shortcomings in underwriting standards and other aspects of risk management, banks can and should continue to provide loans to creditworthy customers. We have directed our examiners to be mindful of the procyclical effects of excessive credit tightening and to encourage banks to make economically viable loans, provided such lending is based on realistic asset valuations and a balanced assessment of borrowers' repayment capacities. Across the Federal Reserve System, we have implemented training and outreach to underscore that direction. In recent years, I and others from the Federal Reserve have underscored the importance of community banks to the U.S. financial system and economy. I continue to believe that firmly. Community banks serve businesses and consumers throughout the country, in both rural and urban areas. They are a leading provider of credit to small businesses, a key source of job creation in this country. In the decades leading up to the current crisis, the nature of lending had changed dramatically, with greater industry consolidation, increased economies of scale and scope, and a larger portion of credit being supplied by nonbanks. While such changes challenged community bankers, your institutions have remained vitally important. Indeed, during the current crisis, some data show recent increases in loan and deposit balances at community banks, while such balances are generally flat or even decreasing at the largest banks. The various efforts that the Federal Reserve has taken to provide backup liquidity to financial firms and to improve the functioning of financial markets have, I believe, helped all segments of the financial system, including the community banking sector, and the economy more generally. Helping community banks also helps the local communities that they serve. One important way that community banks may assist their communities is by working with at-risk homeowners to avoid preventable foreclosures. Foreclosures can result in clusters of vacant properties, which in turn can foster crime, stretch municipal resources at a time of weakening revenue, and lead to lower house prices throughout the neighborhood.These are some of the reasons why the Federal Reserve, along with the other U.S. banking agencies, has encouraged banks to participate in the Making Home Affordable loan modification program established by the Treasury. While continuing challenges remain, opportunities also exist for community banks. In some instances, community banks are able to step in at crucial moments when local businesses or consumers have been unable to find credit elsewhere. Indeed, as some banks have chosen to cut back on lending to conserve capital and liquidity, community banks in strong financial condition may find that they can gain creditworthy customers even in today's economic environment. Such community banks also may find opportunities to reclaim customers and business from nonbank lenders who have drawn back as the securitization markets have encountered difficulties. Community banks are able to respond promptly in such cases because of their in-depth knowledge of their markets, their locally focused management teams and boards, and their commitment to tailoring unique credit products for individual borrowers and businesses. Addressing the "Too Big to Fail" ProblemMany of you likely are frustrated, and rightfully so, by the impact that the financial crisis and economic downturn has had on your banks, as well as on the reputation of bankers more generally. You may well have built your reputations and institutions through responsible lending and community-focused operations, but nonetheless, you now find yourselves facing higher deposit insurance assessments and increasing public skepticism about the behavior of bankers--outcomes that you perceive were largely caused by the actions of larger financial institutions. Many of you managed your businesses prudently and shunned more exotic instruments and activities. And many of your customers--households and businesses--avoided excesses and are able to meet their financial commitments on a timely basis. No doubt this frustration has been heightened by the problems caused by financial firms that are too big or too interconnected to fail. Indeed, the too-big-to-fail issue has emerged as an enormous problem, both for policymakers and for financial institutions generally. Creditors of a firm perceived as too big to fail have less incentive to monitor and restrict the firm's risk-taking through adjustments to the price at which they lend money to the firm. If left unaddressed, this weakening of market discipline creates an unlevel playing field for smaller institutions, which may not be able to raise funds as cheaply, even if their individual risk profiles are better, or at least no worse, than those of their larger competitors. The erosion in market discipline distorts market behavior and can give firms an incentive to grow--either internally or through acquisitions--in order to be perceived as too big to fail. Government rescues to prevent the failure of major financial institutions also have required large amounts of public resources. These actions have involved extremely unpleasant and difficult choices, but given the interconnected nature of our financial system and the potentially devastating effects on confidence, financial markets, and the broader economy that would likely arise from the disorderly failure of a major financial firm in the current environment, I do not think we have had a realistic alternative to preventing such failures. That said, these episodes have shown clearly that the problem of too-big-to-fail is extremely serious. To address this issue, which should be a top priority for financial reform, policymakers will need to act on several fronts. First, supervisors--as we are already doing--must vigorously address the weaknesses at major financial institutions with regard to capital adequacy, liquidity management, and risk management. Firms whose failure would pose a systemic risk must receive especially close supervisory oversight and be held to the highest prudential standards. Aside from its direct benefits for the safety and soundness of these large institutions, such an approach also would help offset financial firms' incentive to grow until they are perceived to be too big to fail. Second, supervisors must pay close attention to compensation practices that can create mismatches between the rewards and risks borne by institutions or their managers. As the Federal Reserve and other banking agencies have noted, poorly designed compensation policies can create perverse incentives that can ultimately jeopardize the health of the banking organization. Management compensation policies should be aligned with the long-term prudential interests of the institution, be tied to the risks being borne by the organization, provide appropriate incentives for safe and sound behavior, and avoid short-term payments for transactions with long-term horizons.3 Third, as the recent financial crisis has highlighted, risks to the financial system may arise not only in the banking sector, but also from financial firms that traditionally have been outside the regulatory and supervisory framework applied to banking organizations. Under federal law, all banking organizations--regardless of size--are subject to consolidated supervision for safety and soundness purposes. At a minimum, policymakers must ensure that a similar statutory framework is put in place for all systemically important financial firms organized as holding companies. The agencies responsible for implementing this framework also must vigorously exercise their authority to help ensure the safety and soundness of nonbank firms whose failure could threaten the stability of the financial system. Broad-based application of the principle of consolidated supervision would also serve to eliminate gaps in oversight that would otherwise allow risk-taking to migrate from more-regulated to less-regulated sectors. Fourth, continued strong and concerted efforts are needed to improve the financial infrastructure--or "plumbing"--that supports the trading, payments, clearing, and settlement activities that are so critical to the functioning of the financial system. I have described elsewhere the various steps that the Federal Reserve is taking in coordination with other supervisors and market participants to improve the resiliency of over-the-counter derivative markets and the market for triparty repurchase agreements.4Improvements in these areas should reduce the likelihood that the failure of any individual institution would have substantial spillover effects on other financial institutions or the broader markets, and thereby make it less likely that the government would need to intervene. Finally, an important element of addressing the too-big-to-fail problem is the development of an improved resolution regime in the United States that permits the orderly resolution of a systemically important nonbank financial firm. We have such a regime for insured depository institutions, but it is clear we need something similar for systemically important nonbank financial entities. Improved resolution procedures for these firms would help reduce the too-big-to-fail problem by giving the government the option of safely winding down a systemically important firm rather than keeping it operating. Reducing Procyclicality in the Financial SystemIn the current environment, financial institutions of all sizes are trying to meet the needs of creditworthy borrowers while at the same time maintaining sufficient capital and other resources to weather the ongoing crisis. Capital rules, accounting policies, and other regulatory standards should not make this job even more difficult by encouraging excessively procyclical behavior by financial institutions--that is, behavior that causes financial institutions to tighten credit in downturns and ease credit in booms more than is justified by changes in the creditworthiness of borrowers. No one questions the underlying objectives of capital rules and accounting standards, which are to ensure the safety and soundness of financial institutions and to accurately and transparently disclose an institution's financial condition, respectively. However, some aspects of existing capital rules and accounting standards may unduly magnify the ups and downs in the financial system and the economy. For example, the capital rules require banks to maintain capital ratios that meet or exceed fixed minimum standards.Because banks typically find raising capital to be difficult in economic downturns or periods of financial stress, their best means of boosting regulatory capital ratios during difficult periods may be to reduce new lending, perhaps more so than is justified by the credit environment. Moreover, as many institutions and auditors will attest, determining the appropriate valuation of illiquid or idiosyncratic assets can be very challenging, especially in highly strained market conditions. The economic downturn also has renewed the debate concerning the appropriate levels of loan loss reserves over the cycle. Institutions themselves often try to offset the potential for procyclicality in capital levels by maintaining strong capital buffers to absorb swings in regulatory capital requirements. This type of action is in line with supervisory expectations that call for banking organizations to be able to assess their overall capital needs and hold capital commensurate with their individual risk profiles--beyond complying with minimum regulatory capital requirements. Most community bankers understand this point. Your institutions generally hold capital in excess of minimum regulatory requirements--sometimes well in excess. Nonetheless, the issues surrounding procyclicality are not easy, and their consideration will require a careful balancing of important public policy interests. Policymakers should review existing capital rules and accounting standards to determine whether these rules and standards could be modified to reduce their potential to have unduly procyclical effects without weakening their ability to achieve their fundamental objectives. I'm pleased to note that the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Forum already have work under way to address excessive procyclicality in capital regulations, and that the Financial Accounting Standards Board is issuing new guidance that relates to mark-to-market accounting in inactive markets and other-than-temporary impairments. ConclusionI want to conclude by encouraging you as community bankers to operate prudently in the current environment, but not to let fear drive your decisions. You should all continue to exercise good risk management--including strong underwriting for individual exposures and proper management of credit concentrations in your portfolios. You should also be certain that any deterioration in asset quality and borrowers' conditions are accurately identified, measured, and managed. And you should take steps to maintain a strong financial condition with sufficient capital and liquidity levels as preparation for any future economic and financial uncertainty. By doing so, you can ensure that your institutions can continue to provide a steady and consistent source of credit to businesses and borrowers for years to come. If community banks are prudent but opportunistic in extending credit to strong borrowers, they will help the economy recover while benefiting from that recovery themselves. Footnotes 1.Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The New York Fed's Open Market Desk engages in trades on behalf of the Federal Reserve System to implement monetary policy.Return to text 2.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers," joint press release, November 12.Return to text 3.See "Interagency Statement," note 2.Return to text 4.Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "Financial Reform to Address Systemic Risk," speech delivered at the Council of Foreign Relations, Washington, D.C., March 10.Return to text
IntroductionSound economic performance requires both financial stability and monetary stability. As the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve has critical responsibilities in both areas. The Congress created the Federal Reserve in 1913 in large part in response to the periodic panics and crises that plagued the U.S. financial system in the 19th and early 20th centuries. Over nearly a century, in the service of its original mandate as well as its monetary and regulatory responsibilities, the Federal Reserve has developed wide-ranging institutional expertise regarding financial markets and institutions, foreign as well as domestic. The Federal Reserve also has the unique ability to serve as the lender of last resort, a vital function in crises. For these reasons, it is natural and desirable that the Federal Reserve should play a central role, in cooperation with the Department of the Treasury and other agencies, in preventing and managing financial crises. While the Federal Reserve has traditionally collaborated with other agencies in efforts to preserve financial stability, it alone is responsible for maintaining monetary stability. The monetary policy-making arm of the Federal Reserve, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), determines monetary conditions in the United States, subject to its congressional mandate to foster maximum sustainable employment and stable prices. The Federal Reserve's independence with regard to monetary policy is critical for ensuring that monetary policy decisions are made with regard only to the long-term economic welfare of the nation. This joint statement reflects the common views of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve on the appropriate roles of the Federal Reserve and the Treasury during the current financial crisis and in the future and on the steps necessary to ensure that both financial and monetary stability will be achieved. The Treasury and the Federal Reserve agree on the following broad points: 1. Treasury-Federal Reserve cooperation in improving the functioning of credit markets and fostering financial stabilityThe Federal Reserve's expertise and powers are indispensable for preventing and managing financial crises. The programs it has initiated since the onset of this crisis have played a critical role in helping to contain the damage to the broader economy. As long as unusual and exigent circumstances persist, the Federal Reserve will continue to use all its tools working closely and cooperatively with the Treasury and other agencies as needed to improve the functioning of credit markets, help prevent the failure of institutions that could cause systemic damage, and to foster the stabilization and repair of the financial system. 2. The Federal Reserve to avoid credit risk and credit allocationThe Federal Reserve's lender-of-last-resort responsibilities involve lending against collateral, secured to the satisfaction of the responsible Federal Reserve Bank. Actions taken by the Federal Reserve should also aim to improve financial or credit conditions broadly, not to allocate credit to narrowly-defined sectors or classes of borrowers. Government decisions to influence the allocation of credit are the province of the fiscal authorities. 3. Need to preserve monetary stabilityActions that the Federal Reserve takes, during this period of unusual and exigent circumstances, in the pursuit of financial stability, such as loans or securities purchases that influence the size of its balance sheet, must not constrain the exercise of monetary policy as needed to foster maximum sustainable employment and price stability. Treasury has in place a special financing mechanism called the Supplementary Financing Program, which helps the Federal Reserve manage its balance sheet. In addition, the Treasury and the Federal Reserve are seeking legislative action to provide additional tools the Federal Reserve can use to sterilize the effects of its lending or securities purchases on the supply of bank reserves. 4. Need for a comprehensive resolution regime for systemically critical financial institutionsThe Treasury and the Federal Reserve remain fully committed to preventing the disorderly failure of systemically critical financial institutions. To reduce the risk of future crises, the Treasury and the Federal Reserve will work with the Congress to develop a regime that will allow the U.S. government to address effectively at an early stage the potential failure of any systemically critical financial institution. As part of the framework set forth, the legislation should spell out to the extent possible the expected role of the Federal Reserve and other U.S. government agencies in such resolutions. In the longer term and as its authorities permit, the Treasury will seek to remove from the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, or to liquidate, the so-called Maiden Lane facilities made by the Federal Reserve as part of efforts to stabilize systemically critical financial institutions.
IntroductionSound economic performance requires both financial stability and monetary stability. As the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve has critical responsibilities in both areas. The Congress created the Federal Reserve in 1913 in large part in response to the periodic panics and crises that plagued the U.S. financial system in the 19th and early 20th centuries. Over nearly a century, in the service of its original mandate as well as its monetary and regulatory responsibilities, the Federal Reserve has developed wide-ranging institutional expertise regarding financial markets and institutions, foreign as well as domestic. The Federal Reserve also has the unique ability to serve as the lender of last resort, a vital function in crises. For these reasons, it is natural and desirable that the Federal Reserve should play a central role, in cooperation with the Department of the Treasury and other agencies, in preventing and managing financial crises. While the Federal Reserve has traditionally collaborated with other agencies in efforts to preserve financial stability, it alone is responsible for maintaining monetary stability. The monetary policy-making arm of the Federal Reserve, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), determines monetary conditions in the United States, subject to its congressional mandate to foster maximum sustainable employment and stable prices. The Federal Reserve's independence with regard to monetary policy is critical for ensuring that monetary policy decisions are made with regard only to the long-term economic welfare of the nation. This joint statement reflects the common views of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve on the appropriate roles of the Federal Reserve and the Treasury during the current financial crisis and in the future and on the steps necessary to ensure that both financial and monetary stability will be achieved. The Treasury and the Federal Reserve agree on the following broad points: 1. Treasury-Federal Reserve cooperation in improving the functioning of credit markets and fostering financial stabilityThe Federal Reserve's expertise and powers are indispensable for preventing and managing financial crises. The programs it has initiated since the onset of this crisis have played a critical role in helping to contain the damage to the broader economy. As long as unusual and exigent circumstances persist, the Federal Reserve will continue to use all its tools working closely and cooperatively with the Treasury and other agencies as needed to improve the functioning of credit markets, help prevent the failure of institutions that could cause systemic damage, and to foster the stabilization and repair of the financial system. 2. The Federal Reserve to avoid credit risk and credit allocationThe Federal Reserve's lender-of-last-resort responsibilities involve lending against collateral, secured to the satisfaction of the responsible Federal Reserve Bank. Actions taken by the Federal Reserve should also aim to improve financial or credit conditions broadly, not to allocate credit to narrowly-defined sectors or classes of borrowers. Government decisions to influence the allocation of credit are the province of the fiscal authorities. 3. Need to preserve monetary stabilityActions that the Federal Reserve takes, during this period of unusual and exigent circumstances, in the pursuit of financial stability, such as loans or securities purchases that influence the size of its balance sheet, must not constrain the exercise of monetary policy as needed to foster maximum sustainable employment and price stability. Treasury has in place a special financing mechanism called the Supplementary Financing Program, which helps the Federal Reserve manage its balance sheet. In addition, the Treasury and the Federal Reserve are seeking legislative action to provide additional tools the Federal Reserve can use to sterilize the effects of its lending or securities purchases on the supply of bank reserves. 4. Need for a comprehensive resolution regime for systemically critical financial institutionsThe Treasury and the Federal Reserve remain fully committed to preventing the disorderly failure of systemically critical financial institutions. To reduce the risk of future crises, the Treasury and the Federal Reserve will work with the Congress to develop a regime that will allow the U.S. government to address effectively at an early stage the potential failure of any systemically critical financial institution. As part of the framework set forth, the legislation should spell out to the extent possible the expected role of the Federal Reserve and other U.S. government agencies in such resolutions. In the longer term and as its authorities permit, the Treasury will seek to remove from the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, or to liquidate, the so-called Maiden Lane facilities made by the Federal Reserve as part of efforts to stabilize systemically critical financial institutions.
In carrying out the Financial Stability Plan, the Department of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board are announcing the launch of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF), a component of the Consumer and Business Lending Initiative (CBLI). The TALF has the potential to generate up to $1 trillion of lending for businesses and households. The TALF is designed to catalyze the securitization markets by providing financing to investors to support their purchases of certain AAA-rated asset-backed securities (ABS). These markets have historically been a critical component of lending in our financial system, but they have been virtually shuttered since the worsening of the financial crisis in October. By reopening these markets, the TALF will assist lenders in meeting the borrowing needs of consumers and small businesses, helping to stimulate the broader economy. Under today's announcement, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York will lend up to $200 billion to eligible owners of certain AAA-rated ABS backed by newly and recently originated auto loans, credit card loans, student loans, and SBA-guaranteed small business loans. Issuers and investors in the private sector are expected to begin arranging and marketing new securitizations of recently generated loans, and subscriptions for funding in March will be accepted on March 17, 2009. On March 25, 2009, those new securitizations will be funded by the program, creating new lending capacity for additional future loans. The program will hold monthly fundings through December 2009 or longer if the Federal Reserve Board chooses to extend the facility. Today the Board also released revised terms and conditions for the facility and a revised set of frequently asked questions. The revisions include a reduction in the interest rates and collateral haircuts for loans secured by asset-backed securities guaranteed by the Small Business Administration or backed by government-guaranteed student loans. The modifications are warranted by the minimal credit risk on these assets owing to the government guarantees, and, by making the terms of the TALF loans more attractive, they should encourage greater flows of credit to small businesses and students. Additional details of the TALF and the CBLI can be found athttp://www.financialstability.gov/. Further information on the Federal Reserve's credit and liquidity programs is available athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst.htm. The Treasury Department also released a new white paper outlining efforts to unlock credit markets. On February 10, 2009, the Board and Treasury announced an expansion of TALF to include new asset categories that could generate up to $1 trillion in new lending. Teams from the Treasury Department and Federal Reserve are analyzing the appropriate terms and conditions for accepting commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) and are evaluating a number of other types of AAA-rated newly issued ABS for possible acceptance under the expanded program. The expanded program will remain focused on securities that will have the greatest macroeconomic impact and can most efficiently be added to the TALF at a low and manageable risk to the government. The Federal Reserve and Treasury currently anticipate that ABS backed by rental, commercial, and government vehicle fleet leases, and ABS backed by small ticket equipment, heavy equipment, and agricultural equipment loans and leases will be eligible for the April funding of the TALF. Other types of securities under consideration include private-label residential mortgage-backed securities, collateralized loan and debt obligations, and other ABS not included in the initial rollout such as ABS backed by non-auto floorplan loans and ABS backed by mortgage-servicer advances. As is the case for the current categories of newly originated loans, the TALF will combine public financing with private capital to encourage the private securitization of loans in the asset classes eligible in the expanded program. Increased TALF lending and other actions to stabilize the financial system have the potential to greatly expand the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. In order for the Federal Reserve to conduct monetary policy over time in a way consistent with maximum sustainable employment and price stability, it must be able to manage its balance sheet, and in particular, to control the amount of reserves that the Federal Reserve provides to the banking system. The amount of reserves is the key determinant of the interest rate that the Federal Reserve uses to pursue its monetary policy objectives. Treasury and the Federal Reserve will seek legislation to give the Federal Reserve the additional tools it will need to enable it to manage the level of reserves while providing the funding necessary for the TALF and for other key credit-easing programs. Key Dates for the TALFSchedule for First Funding with Initial Eligible Assets Schedule for Second Funding TALF Frequently Asked Questions TALF Terms and Conditions TALF White Paper (30 KB PDF) Related Press ReleaseFederal Reserve Bank of New York announces March 17 TALF Operation
In carrying out the Financial Stability Plan, the Department of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board are announcing the launch of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF), a component of the Consumer and Business Lending Initiative (CBLI). The TALF has the potential to generate up to $1 trillion of lending for businesses and households. The TALF is designed to catalyze the securitization markets by providing financing to investors to support their purchases of certain AAA-rated asset-backed securities (ABS). These markets have historically been a critical component of lending in our financial system, but they have been virtually shuttered since the worsening of the financial crisis in October. By reopening these markets, the TALF will assist lenders in meeting the borrowing needs of consumers and small businesses, helping to stimulate the broader economy. Under today's announcement, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York will lend up to $200 billion to eligible owners of certain AAA-rated ABS backed by newly and recently originated auto loans, credit card loans, student loans, and SBA-guaranteed small business loans. Issuers and investors in the private sector are expected to begin arranging and marketing new securitizations of recently generated loans, and subscriptions for funding in March will be accepted on March 17, 2009. On March 25, 2009, those new securitizations will be funded by the program, creating new lending capacity for additional future loans. The program will hold monthly fundings through December 2009 or longer if the Federal Reserve Board chooses to extend the facility. Today the Board also released revised terms and conditions for the facility and a revised set of frequently asked questions. The revisions include a reduction in the interest rates and collateral haircuts for loans secured by asset-backed securities guaranteed by the Small Business Administration or backed by government-guaranteed student loans. The modifications are warranted by the minimal credit risk on these assets owing to the government guarantees, and, by making the terms of the TALF loans more attractive, they should encourage greater flows of credit to small businesses and students. Additional details of the TALF and the CBLI can be found athttp://www.financialstability.gov/. Further information on the Federal Reserve's credit and liquidity programs is available athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst.htm. The Treasury Department also released a new white paper outlining efforts to unlock credit markets. On February 10, 2009, the Board and Treasury announced an expansion of TALF to include new asset categories that could generate up to $1 trillion in new lending. Teams from the Treasury Department and Federal Reserve are analyzing the appropriate terms and conditions for accepting commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) and are evaluating a number of other types of AAA-rated newly issued ABS for possible acceptance under the expanded program. The expanded program will remain focused on securities that will have the greatest macroeconomic impact and can most efficiently be added to the TALF at a low and manageable risk to the government. The Federal Reserve and Treasury currently anticipate that ABS backed by rental, commercial, and government vehicle fleet leases, and ABS backed by small ticket equipment, heavy equipment, and agricultural equipment loans and leases will be eligible for the April funding of the TALF. Other types of securities under consideration include private-label residential mortgage-backed securities, collateralized loan and debt obligations, and other ABS not included in the initial rollout such as ABS backed by non-auto floorplan loans and ABS backed by mortgage-servicer advances. As is the case for the current categories of newly originated loans, the TALF will combine public financing with private capital to encourage the private securitization of loans in the asset classes eligible in the expanded program. Increased TALF lending and other actions to stabilize the financial system have the potential to greatly expand the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. In order for the Federal Reserve to conduct monetary policy over time in a way consistent with maximum sustainable employment and price stability, it must be able to manage its balance sheet, and in particular, to control the amount of reserves that the Federal Reserve provides to the banking system. The amount of reserves is the key determinant of the interest rate that the Federal Reserve uses to pursue its monetary policy objectives. Treasury and the Federal Reserve will seek legislation to give the Federal Reserve the additional tools it will need to enable it to manage the level of reserves while providing the funding necessary for the TALF and for other key credit-easing programs. Key Dates for the TALFSchedule for First Funding with Initial Eligible Assets Schedule for Second Funding TALF Frequently Asked Questions TALF Terms and Conditions TALF White Paper (30 KB PDF) Related Press ReleaseFederal Reserve Bank of New York announces March 17 TALF Operation
Washington,D.C.--The U.S. Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve Board today announced a restructuring of the government's assistance to AIG in order to stabilize this systemically important company in a manner that best protects the U.S. taxpayer. Specifically, the government's restructuring is designed to enhance the company's capital and liquidity in order to facilitate the orderly completion of the company's global divestiture program. The company continues to face significant challenges, driven by the rapid deterioration in certain financial markets in the last two months of the year and continued turbulence in the markets generally. The additional resources will help stabilize the company, and in doing so help to stabilize the financial system. As significantly, the restructuring components of the government's assistance begin to separate the major non-core businesses of AIG, as well as strengthen the company's finances. The long-term solution for the company, its customers, the U.S. taxpayer, and the financial system is the orderly restructuring and refocusing of the firm. This will take time and possibly further government support, if markets do not stabilize and improve. Given the systemic risk AIG continues to pose and the fragility of markets today, the potential cost to the economy and the taxpayer of government inaction would be extremely high. AIG provides insurance protection to more than 100,000 entities, including small businesses, municipalities, 401(k) plans, and Fortune 500 companies who together employ over 100 million Americans. AIG has over 30 million policyholders in the U.S. and is a major source of retirement insurance for, among others, teachers and non-profit organizations. The company also is a significant counterparty to a number of major financial institutions. AIG operates in over 130 countries with over 400 regulators and the company and its regulated and unregulated subsidiaries are subject to very different resolution frameworks across their broad and diverse operations without an overarching resolution mechanism. Within the options available, the restructuring plan offers a multi-part approach which brings forward the ultimate resolution of the company, has received support from key stakeholders and the rating agencies, and provides the best possible protection for taxpayers in connection with this commitment of resources. The steps announced today provide tangible evidence of the U.S. government's commitment to the orderly restructuring of AIG over time in the face of continuing market dislocations and economic deterioration. Orderly restructuring is essential to AIG's repayment of the support it has received from U.S. taxpayers and to preserving financial stability. The U.S. government is committed to continuing to work with AIG to maintain its ability to meet its obligations as they come due. Treasury has stated that public ownership of financial institutions is not a policy goal and, to the extent public ownership is an outcome of Treasury actions, as it has been with AIG, it will work to replace government resources with those from the private sector to create a more focused, restructured, and viable economic entity as rapidly as possible. This restructuring is aimed at accelerating this process. Key steps of the restructuring plan include: Preferred EquityThe U.S. Treasury will exchange its existing $40 billion cumulative perpetual preferred shares for new preferred shares with revised terms that more closely resemble common equity and thus improve the quality of AIG's equity and its financial leverage. The new terms will provide for non-cumulative dividends and limit AIG's ability to redeem the preferred stock except with the proceeds from the issuance of equity capital. Equity Capital CommitmentThe Treasury Department will create a new equity capital facility, which allows AIG to draw down up to $30 billion as needed over time in exchange for non-cumulative preferred stock to the U.S. Treasury. This facility will further strengthen AIG's capital levels and improve its leverage. Federal Reserve Revolving Credit FacilityThe Federal Reserve will take several actions relating to the $60 billion Revolving Credit Facility for AIG established by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (New York Fed) in September 2008, to further the goals described above. Repayment by Preferred Stock InterestsThe Revolving Credit Facility will be reduced in exchange for preferred interests in two special purpose vehicles created to hold all of the outstanding common stock of American Life Insurance Company (ALICO) and American International Assurance Company Ltd. (AIA), two life insurance holding company subsidiaries of AIG. AIG will retain control of ALICO and AIA, though the New York Fed will have certain governance rights to protect its interests. The valuation for the New York Fed's preferred stock interests, which may be up to approximately $26 billion, will be a percentage of the fair market value of ALICO and AIA based on valuations acceptable to the New York Fed. Securitization of Life Insurance Cash FlowsThe New York Fed is authorized to make new loans undersection 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Actof up to an aggregate amount of approximately $8.5 billion to special purpose vehicles (SPVs) established by domestic life insurance subsidiaries of AIG. The SPVs would repay the loans from the net cash flows they receive from designated blocks of existing life insurance policies held by the parent insurance companies. The proceeds of the New York Fed loans would pay down an equivalent amount of outstanding debt under the Revolving Credit Facility. The amounts lent, the size of the haircuts taken by the New York Fed, and other terms of the loans would be determined based on valuations acceptable to the New York Fed. Restructuring of Other TermsAfter the transactions described above, the total amount available under the Facility will be reduced from $60 billion to no less than $25 billion. In addition, the interest rate on the Facility, which is three-month LIBOR plus 300 basis points, will be modified by removing the existing floor (3.5 percent) on the LIBOR rate. The Facility will continue to be secured by a lien on a substantial portion of AIG's assets, including the businesses AIG plans to retain. The other material terms of the Facility remain unchanged. Issuance of Preferred StockAs required by the credit agreement governing the Revolving Credit Facility, AIG has agreed to issue on March 4, 2009, shares of convertible preferred stock representing an approximately 77.9% equity interest in AIG to an independent trust for the sole benefit of the United States Treasury. AIG must be in compliance with the executive compensation and corporate governance requirements of Section 111 of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act, including the most stringent limitations on executive compensation as required under the newest amendments to the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act. Additionally, AIG must continue to maintain and enforce newly adopted restrictions put in place by the new management on corporate expenses and lobbying as well as corporate governance requirements.
Washington,D.C.--The U.S. Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve Board today announced a restructuring of the government's assistance to AIG in order to stabilize this systemically important company in a manner that best protects the U.S. taxpayer. Specifically, the government's restructuring is designed to enhance the company's capital and liquidity in order to facilitate the orderly completion of the company's global divestiture program. The company continues to face significant challenges, driven by the rapid deterioration in certain financial markets in the last two months of the year and continued turbulence in the markets generally. The additional resources will help stabilize the company, and in doing so help to stabilize the financial system. As significantly, the restructuring components of the government's assistance begin to separate the major non-core businesses of AIG, as well as strengthen the company's finances. The long-term solution for the company, its customers, the U.S. taxpayer, and the financial system is the orderly restructuring and refocusing of the firm. This will take time and possibly further government support, if markets do not stabilize and improve. Given the systemic risk AIG continues to pose and the fragility of markets today, the potential cost to the economy and the taxpayer of government inaction would be extremely high. AIG provides insurance protection to more than 100,000 entities, including small businesses, municipalities, 401(k) plans, and Fortune 500 companies who together employ over 100 million Americans. AIG has over 30 million policyholders in the U.S. and is a major source of retirement insurance for, among others, teachers and non-profit organizations. The company also is a significant counterparty to a number of major financial institutions. AIG operates in over 130 countries with over 400 regulators and the company and its regulated and unregulated subsidiaries are subject to very different resolution frameworks across their broad and diverse operations without an overarching resolution mechanism. Within the options available, the restructuring plan offers a multi-part approach which brings forward the ultimate resolution of the company, has received support from key stakeholders and the rating agencies, and provides the best possible protection for taxpayers in connection with this commitment of resources. The steps announced today provide tangible evidence of the U.S. government's commitment to the orderly restructuring of AIG over time in the face of continuing market dislocations and economic deterioration. Orderly restructuring is essential to AIG's repayment of the support it has received from U.S. taxpayers and to preserving financial stability. The U.S. government is committed to continuing to work with AIG to maintain its ability to meet its obligations as they come due. Treasury has stated that public ownership of financial institutions is not a policy goal and, to the extent public ownership is an outcome of Treasury actions, as it has been with AIG, it will work to replace government resources with those from the private sector to create a more focused, restructured, and viable economic entity as rapidly as possible. This restructuring is aimed at accelerating this process. Key steps of the restructuring plan include: Preferred EquityThe U.S. Treasury will exchange its existing $40 billion cumulative perpetual preferred shares for new preferred shares with revised terms that more closely resemble common equity and thus improve the quality of AIG's equity and its financial leverage. The new terms will provide for non-cumulative dividends and limit AIG's ability to redeem the preferred stock except with the proceeds from the issuance of equity capital. Equity Capital CommitmentThe Treasury Department will create a new equity capital facility, which allows AIG to draw down up to $30 billion as needed over time in exchange for non-cumulative preferred stock to the U.S. Treasury. This facility will further strengthen AIG's capital levels and improve its leverage. Federal Reserve Revolving Credit FacilityThe Federal Reserve will take several actions relating to the $60 billion Revolving Credit Facility for AIG established by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (New York Fed) in September 2008, to further the goals described above. Repayment by Preferred Stock InterestsThe Revolving Credit Facility will be reduced in exchange for preferred interests in two special purpose vehicles created to hold all of the outstanding common stock of American Life Insurance Company (ALICO) and American International Assurance Company Ltd. (AIA), two life insurance holding company subsidiaries of AIG. AIG will retain control of ALICO and AIA, though the New York Fed will have certain governance rights to protect its interests. The valuation for the New York Fed's preferred stock interests, which may be up to approximately $26 billion, will be a percentage of the fair market value of ALICO and AIA based on valuations acceptable to the New York Fed. Securitization of Life Insurance Cash FlowsThe New York Fed is authorized to make new loans undersection 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Actof up to an aggregate amount of approximately $8.5 billion to special purpose vehicles (SPVs) established by domestic life insurance subsidiaries of AIG. The SPVs would repay the loans from the net cash flows they receive from designated blocks of existing life insurance policies held by the parent insurance companies. The proceeds of the New York Fed loans would pay down an equivalent amount of outstanding debt under the Revolving Credit Facility. The amounts lent, the size of the haircuts taken by the New York Fed, and other terms of the loans would be determined based on valuations acceptable to the New York Fed. Restructuring of Other TermsAfter the transactions described above, the total amount available under the Facility will be reduced from $60 billion to no less than $25 billion. In addition, the interest rate on the Facility, which is three-month LIBOR plus 300 basis points, will be modified by removing the existing floor (3.5 percent) on the LIBOR rate. The Facility will continue to be secured by a lien on a substantial portion of AIG's assets, including the businesses AIG plans to retain. The other material terms of the Facility remain unchanged. Issuance of Preferred StockAs required by the credit agreement governing the Revolving Credit Facility, AIG has agreed to issue on March 4, 2009, shares of convertible preferred stock representing an approximately 77.9% equity interest in AIG to an independent trust for the sole benefit of the United States Treasury. AIG must be in compliance with the executive compensation and corporate governance requirements of Section 111 of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act, including the most stringent limitations on executive compensation as required under the newest amendments to the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act. Additionally, AIG must continue to maintain and enforce newly adopted restrictions put in place by the new management on corporate expenses and lobbying as well as corporate governance requirements.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between BancMidwest Corporation, Saint Paul, Minnesota, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between BancMidwest Corporation, Saint Paul, Minnesota, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among BankEast Corporation, a registered bank holding company, BankEast, a state chartered member bank, both of Knoxville, Tennessee, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among BankEast Corporation, a registered bank holding company, BankEast, a state chartered member bank, both of Knoxville, Tennessee, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Columbia Commercial Bancorp, Hillsboro, Oregon, a registered bank holding company, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, and the Oregon Department of Consumer and Business Services, Division of Finance and Securities. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Columbia Commercial Bancorp, Hillsboro, Oregon, a registered bank holding company, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, and the Oregon Department of Consumer and Business Services, Division of Finance and Securities. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among First State Bank of Red Bud, Red Bud, Illinois, a state member bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation, Division of Banking, Springfield, Illinois. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among First State Bank of Red Bud, Red Bud, Illinois, a state member bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation, Division of Banking, Springfield, Illinois. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between FNB Holding Company, West Des Moines, Iowa, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between FNB Holding Company, West Des Moines, Iowa, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Omni Financial Services, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Omni Financial Services, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Pine City Bancorporation, Inc., Pine City, Minnesota, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Pine City Bancorporation, Inc., Pine City, Minnesota, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Premier Bancshares, Inc., Jefferson City, Missouri, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Premier Bancshares, Inc., Jefferson City, Missouri, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the New York State Banking Department on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Socit Gnrale, Paris, France; the bank's branch in New York, New York; the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; and the New York State Banking Department. The Written Agreement addresses Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money-laundering compliance policies and practices at Socit Gnrale's New York branch. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the New York State Banking Department on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Socit Gnrale, Paris, France; the bank's branch in New York, New York; the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; and the New York State Banking Department. The Written Agreement addresses Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money-laundering compliance policies and practices at Socit Gnrale's New York branch. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among SolutionsBank Corporation, a registered bank holding company, SolutionsBank, a state chartered member bank, both of Overland Park, Kansas, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, and the Kansas Office of State Bank Commissioner. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among SolutionsBank Corporation, a registered bank holding company, SolutionsBank, a state chartered member bank, both of Overland Park, Kansas, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, and the Kansas Office of State Bank Commissioner. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Spring Grove Investments, Inc., Spring Grove, Minnesota, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Spring Grove Investments, Inc., Spring Grove, Minnesota, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Thunder Bancorp, Inc., a registered bank holding company, Thunder Bank, a state chartered member bank, both of Sylvan Grove, Kansas, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Thunder Bancorp, Inc., a registered bank holding company, Thunder Bank, a state chartered member bank, both of Sylvan Grove, Kansas, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.