The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the proposal by Centennial Bank, Conway, Arkansas, to acquire assets and assume liabilities of Gulf State Community Bank, Carrabelle, Florida. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the approval of fee schedules, effective January 3, 2011, for payment services the Federal Reserve Banks provide to depository institutions (priced services). The Board has also approved maintaining the current earnings credit rate on clearing balances. The Reserve Banks project that they will recover 102.0 percent of their priced services costs in 2011. The Reserve Banks expect to recover all of their actual and imputed expenses, and earn a profit that is above their targeted return on equity. Overall, the price level for Federal Reserve priced services will decrease about 3 percent in 2011 from 2010. Because an increasing proportion of checks collected through the Reserve Banks will be presented electronically, the effective fees paid to collect checks using the Reserve Banks' Check 21 services are expected to decline, on average, 14 percent. The average fee paid by depository institutions to return a check electronically will decline 20 percent. In addition, the fees for the Reserve Banks' FedACH®service, Fedwire®Funds and National Settlement Services, and Fedwire®Securities Service will increase approximately 3 percent. The 2011 fee schedule for each of the priced services, except the check service, is included in the attached Federal Register notice. Fee schedules for all priced services will be available on the Federal Reserve Banks' financial services website atwww.frbservices.org. In addition, the Board approved the 2011 private-sector adjustment factor (PSAF) for Reserve Bank priced services of $39.5 million. The PSAF is an allowance for income taxes and other imputed expenses that would have been paid and profits that would have been earned if the Reserve Banks' priced services were provided by a private business. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires that the Federal Reserve establish fees to recover the costs of providing priced services, including the PSAF, over the long run, to promote competition between the Reserve Banks and private-sector service providers. The Board's notice is attached. Federal Registernotice:HTML|254 KB PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: 1stBrookfield, Inc. (46 KB PDF), Brookfield, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated October 28, 2010 Hometown of Homestead Banking Company (44 KB PDF), Homestead, FloridaWritten Agreement dated November 1, 2010 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: America's Community Bank (87 KB PDF), Blue Springs, MissouriWritten Agreement dated November 17, 2010 Cadence Financial Corporation (64 KB PDF), Starkville, MississippiWritten Agreement dated November 17, 2010 Orient Bancorporation and Bank of the Orient (129 KB PDF), San Francisco, CaliforniaWritten Agreement dated November 16, 2010Viking Financial Services Corporation (59 KB PDF), Seattle, WashingtonWritten Agreement dated November 19, 2010 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Bank of Choice Holding Company (68 KB PDF), Greeley, ColoradoWritten Agreement dated November 2, 2010 Cascade Financial Corporation (64 KB PDF), Everett, WashingtonWritten Agreement dated November 4, 2010 Crete Bancorporation, Inc. (52 KB PDF), Crete, IllinoisWritten Agreement date November 1, 2010 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Farmers State Bank (158 KB PDF), Victor, MontanaWritten Agreement dated November 12, 2010 Legacy Bank (44 KB PDF), Milwaukee, WisconsinPrompt Corrective Action Directive dated November 16, 2010 Progressive Growth Corp. (44 KB PDF), Gaylord, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated November 15, 2010 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: FCB Financial Corp. (62 KB PDF), Savannah, GeorgiaWritten Agreement dated November 12, 2010 First South Bancorp, Inc. (44 KB PDF), Spartanburg, South CarolinaWritten Agreement dated November 23, 2010 HarVest Bancorp, Inc. (49 KB PDF), Gaithersburg, MarylandWritten Agreement dated November 22, 2010 Southport Financial Corporation (51 KB PDF), Kenosha, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated November 24, 2010 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Fentura Financial, Inc. (57 KB PDF), Fenton, MichiganWritten Agreement dated November 4, 2010 First Personal Financial Corp. (49 KB PDF), Orland Park, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated November 1, 2010 Valley Community Bancorp, Inc. (48 KB PDF), St. Charles, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated November 1, 2010 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Sixth European Central Bank Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt, Germany The last time I was here at the European Central Bank (ECB), almost exactly two years ago, I sat on a distinguished panel much like this one to help mark the 10th anniversary of the euro. Even as we celebrated the remarkable achievements of the founders of the common currency, however, the global economy stood near the precipice. Financial markets were volatile and illiquid, and the viability of some of the world's leading financial institutions had been called into question. With asset prices falling and the flow of credit to the nonfinancial sector constricted, most of the world's economies had entered what would prove to be a sharp and protracted economic downturn. By the time of that meeting, the world's central banks had already taken significant steps to stabilize financial markets and to mitigate the worst effects of the recession, and they would go on to do much more. Very broadly, the responses of central banks to the crisis fell into two classes. First, central banks undertook a range of initiatives to restore normal functioning to financial markets and to strengthen the banking system. They expanded existing lending facilities and created new facilities to provide liquidity to the financial sector. Key examples include the ECB's one-year long-term refinancing operations, the Federal Reserve's auctions of discount window credit (via the Term Auction Facility), and the Bank of Japan's more recent extension of its liquidity supply operations. To help satisfy banks' funding needs in multiple currencies, central banks established liquidity swap lines that allowed them to draw each other's currencies and lend those funds to financial institutions in their jurisdictions; the Federal Reserve ultimately established swap lines with 14 other central banks. Central banks also worked to stabilize financial markets that were important conduits of credit to the nonfinancial sector. For example, the Federal Reserve launched facilities to help stabilize the commercial paper market and the market for asset-backed securities, through which flow much of the funding for student, auto, credit card, and small business loans as well as for commercial mortgages. In addition, the Federal Reserve, the ECB, the Bank of England, the Swiss National Bank, and other central banks played important roles in stabilizing and strengthening their respective banking systems. In particular, central banks helped develop and oversee stress tests that assessed banks' vulnerabilities and capital needs. These tests proved instrumental in reducing investors' uncertainty about banks' assets and prospective losses, bolstering confidence in the banking system, and facilitating banks' raising of private capital. Central banks are also playing an important ongoing role in the development of new international capital and liquidity standards for the banking system that will help protect against future crises. Second, beyond necessary measures to stabilize financial markets and banking systems, central banks moved proactively to ease monetary policy to help support their economies. Initially, monetary policy was eased through the conventional means of cuts in short-term policy rates, including a coordinated rate cut in October 2008 by the Federal Reserve, the ECB, and other leading central banks. However, as policy rates approached the zero lower bound, central banks eased policy by additional means. For example, some central banks, including the Federal Reserve, sought to reduce longer-term interest rates by communicating that policy rates were likely to remain low for some time. A prominent example of the use of central bank communication to further ease policy was the Bank of Canada's conditional commitment to keep rates near zero until the end of the second quarter of 2010.1To provide additional monetary accommodation, several central banks--among them the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, the ECB, and the Bank of Japan--purchased significant quantities of financial assets, including government debt, mortgage-backed securities, or covered bonds, depending on the central bank. Asset purchases seem to have been effective in easing financial conditions; for example, the evidence suggests that such purchases significantly lowered longer-term interest rates in both the United States and the United Kingdom.2 Although the efforts of central banks to stabilize the financial system and provide monetary accommodation helped set the stage for recovery, economic growth rates in the advanced economies have been relatively weak. Of course, the economic outlook varies importantly by country and region, and the policy responses to these developments among central banks have differed accordingly. In the United States, we have seen a slowing of the pace of expansion since earlier this year. The unemployment rate has remained close to 10 percent since mid-2009, with a substantial fraction of the unemployed out of work for six months or longer. Moreover, inflation has been declining and is currently quite low, with measures of underlying inflation running close to 1 percent. Although we project that economic growth will pick up and unemployment decline somewhat in the coming year, progress thus far has been disappointingly slow. In this environment, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) judged that additional monetary policy accommodation was needed to support the economic recovery and help ensure that inflation, over time, is at desired levels. Accordingly, the FOMC announced earlier this month its intention to purchase an additional $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011, a pace of about $75 billion per month. The Committee also will maintain its current policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings in longer-term Treasury securities. Financial conditions eased notably in anticipation of the Committee's announcement, suggesting that this policy will be effective in promoting recovery. As has been the case with more conventional monetary policy in the past, this policy action will be regularly reviewed in light of the evolving economic outlook and the Committee's assessment of the effects of its policies on the economy. I draw several lessons from our collective experience in dealing with the crisis. (My list is by no means exhaustive.) The first lesson is that, in a world in which the consequences of financial crises can be devastating, fostering financial stability is a critical part of overall macroeconomic management. Accordingly, central banks and other financial regulators must be vigilant in monitoring financial markets and institutions for threats to systemic stability and diligent in taking steps to address such threats. Supervision of individual financial institutions, macroprudential monitoring, and monetary policy are mutually reinforcing undertakings, with active involvement in one sphere providing crucial information and expertise for the others. Indeed, at the Federal Reserve, we have restructured our financial supervisory functions so that staff members with expertise in a range of areas--including economics, financial markets, and supervision--work closely together in evaluating potential risks. Second, the past two years have demonstrated the value of policy flexibility and openness to new approaches. During the crisis, central banks were creative and innovative, developing programs that played a significant role in easing financial stress and supporting economic activity. As the global financial system and national economies become increasingly complex and interdependent, novel policy challenges will continue to require innovative policy responses. Third, as was the focus of my remarks two years ago, in addressing financial crises, international cooperation can be very helpful; indeed, given the global integration of financial markets, such cooperation is essential. Central bankers worked closely together throughout the crisis and continue to do so. Our frequent contact, whether in bilateral discussions or in international meetings, permits us to share our thinking, compare analyses, and stay informed of developments around the world. It also enables us to move quickly when shared problems call for swift joint responses, such as the coordinated rate cuts and the creation of liquidity swap lines during the crisis. These actions and others we've taken over the past few years underscore our resolve to work together to address our common economic challenges. ReferencesChehal, Puneet, and Bharat Trehan (2009)."Talking about Tomorrow's Monetary Policy Today,"FRBSF Economic Letter 2009-35. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November 9. D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (2010)."Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases,"Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-52. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2010)."Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?"Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 441. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March. Hamilton, James D., and Jing (Cynthia) Wu (2010)."The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment," (548 KB PDF)working paper. San Diego: University of California, San Diego, August (revised November). He, Zhongfang (2010)."Evaluating the Effect of the Bank of Canada's Conditional Commitment Policy," (281 KB PDF)Bank of Canada Discussion Paper 2010-11. Ottawa: Bank of Canada, August. Joyce, Michael, Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2010)."The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing," (748 KB PDF)Working Paper 393. London: Bank of England, July (revised August). 1. Recent work at the Bank of Canada (see He, 2010) suggests that the bank's forward guidance may have pushed back expectations of when policy accommodation would be withdrawn. For a differing view, see Chehal and Trehan (2009).Return to text 2. For the United States, see Gagnon and others (2010), D'Amico and King (2010), and Hamilton and Wu (2010); for the United Kingdom, see Joyce and others (2010).Return to text
Bentley University won the seventh annual national College Fed Challenge on Tuesday. The team from Waltham, Massachusetts represented the First Federal Reserve District and included Christina J. Harstad, Satyajeet Jadhavrao, Pranay Kumar Jain, Peter Jurik, David Norrish, Victoria Tran, and faculty advisors David Gulley and Aaron Jackson. The finals were held in the Boardroom at the Board of Governors as the capstone to district competitions in which more than 100 teams competed throughout the country. The other national finalists were: second place, Lafayette College; third place, Northwestern University; fourth place, Rutgers University at Newark; and fifth place, Virginia Commonwealth University. The College Fed Challenge is a team competition for undergraduate students. Teams play the role of members of the Federal Open Market Committee, the Federal Reserve's monetary policymaking body. The competition encourages students to learn about the U.S. economy, monetary policymaking, and the role of the Federal Reserve System in the economy. The competition is also aimed at fostering students' interests in economics and finance as fields for advanced study and careers. Competing teams give 20-minute presentations and make a monetary policy recommendation or decision. They are judged on economic analysis, responses to questions, teamwork, and presentation. College teams compete in their local Reserve Bank Districts, and top teams move on to the finals in Washington, D.C.
A new online resource from the Federal Reserve provides practical answers to questions about credit reports, credit scores, and the importance of protecting personal credit histories. TheConsumer's Guide to Credit Reports and Credit Scoresdescribes the content of a credit report, explains how a credit score is used, and discusses the role of credit bureaus in collecting and disseminating this information. Mortgage lenders, banks, insurers, utilities, employers, and other businesses may obtain credit reports from credit bureaus to assess how an individual manages their financial responsibilities. Consumers need to know what's in their credit report and understand how negative information, such as late payments or a bankruptcy filing, might affect a lender's decision to grant credit. The guide answers questions ranging from "What is a credit score?" to "How can I get a free copy of my credit report?" to "How long does negative information stay on my credit report?" It contains tips to help consumers improve their credit scores and provides step-by-step instructions for correcting an error in a credit report. TheConsumer's Guide to Credit Reports and Credit Scorescan be found atwww.federalreserve.gov/creditreports. It is one of several online Federal Reserve publications, such as5 Tips for Improving Your Credit Scoreand5 Tips for Getting the Most from Your Credit Card.Many of these publications are available inSpanish.
On November 29, 2010, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $5 billion in 28-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Bids at the stop-out rate were pro-rated at 71.83 percent. Resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 except that all awards below $10,000 were rounded up to $10,000. The awarded deposits will settle on December 2, 2010, and will mature on December 30, 2010. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded deposits.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday established the Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research and appointed Board economist J. Nellie Liang as its director. The office will bring together economists, banking supervisors, markets experts, and others in the Federal Reserve who will be dedicated to supporting the Board's financial stability responsibilities. The office will develop and coordinate staff efforts to identify and analyze potential risks to the financial system and the broader economy, including through the monitoring of asset prices, leverage, financial flows, and other market risk indicators; follow developments at key institutions; and analyze policies to promote financial stability. It will also support the supervision of large financial institutions and the Board's participation on the Financial Stability Oversight Council. "The Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research brings together a skilled group of people with a wide range of expertise to focus solely on financial stability," Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke said. "The financial stability team will play an important role in implementing the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, in our oversight of systemically important financial institutions, and in our overall surveillance of the financial markets and the economy. I am pleased that such a strong economist and leader as Nellie is leading this group." Liang joined the Board in 1986, acting most recently as a senior associate director in the Division of Research and Statistics. In that role, she has led a group of economists focused on the intersection of economics and finance, including oversight of capital markets, financial institutions, consumer finance, and financial flows. Liang was a key participant in crafting the Federal Reserve's response to the financial crisis and helped lead the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, or bank stress tests, which helped increase public confidence in the banking system in 2009. Liang has a Ph.D. in economics from the University of Maryland and an undergraduate degree in economics from the University of Notre Dame.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday issued guidelines for evaluating proposals by large bank holding companies (BHCs) to undertake capital actions in 2011, such as increasing dividend payments or repurchasing or redeeming stock. The criteria provide a common, conservative approach to ensure that BHCs hold adequate capital to maintain ready access to funding, continue operations, and continue to serve as credit intermediaries, even under adverse conditions. The criteria for evaluating capital distributions are outlined in a revised temporary addendum to Supervision and Regulation letter 09-4, "Dividend Increases and Other Capital Distributions for the 19 Supervisory Capital Assessment Program Firms." The guidelines state that any capital distribution plan will be evaluated on the basis of a number of criteria, with particular emphasis on: The Federal Reserve expects to respond to capital distribution requests beginning in the first quarter. The Federal Reserve will evaluate requests for planned capital actions in the context of its broader process for assessing capital adequacy at the largest BHCs. As part of the regular supervisory process, the Federal Reserve is requesting that large U.S. BHCs submit comprehensive capital plans by early next year, regardless of whether a capital action is planned. The capital plan review is the latest step in the Federal Reserve's efforts to enhance supervision of banking organizations. As recognized by the Dodd-Frank Act and demonstrated by the Federal Reserve-led Supervisory Capital Assessment Program in 2009, regular, horizontal reviews across groups of firms provide regulators with both firm-specific and industry-wide perspectives of various issues and trends. The Federal Reserve plans to undertake these capital plan reviews on a regular basis and will consult with primary federal bank regulators. SR Letter 09-4
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday requested comment on a proposed rule to implement provisions of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act that give banking firms a defined period of time to conform their activities and investments to the so-called Volcker Rule. The Volcker Rule generally prohibits banking entities from engaging in proprietary trading in securities, derivatives, or certain other financial instruments, and from investing in, sponsoring, or having certain relationships with a hedge fund or private equity fund. The statute generally provides banking entities two years to bring their activities and investments into compliance with the Volcker Rule, and allows the Board to extend this conformance period for specified periods under certain conditions. The Dodd-Frank Act requires that the Board issue rules implementing the Volcker Rule's conformance period. In developing the proposed rule, the Board consulted with the Department of the Treasury, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Comments on the proposal must be submitted within 45 days after publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
On Monday, November 29, 2010, the Federal Reserve will offer $5 billion in 28-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of theTerm Deposit Facility. Competitive bids submitted at the stop-out rate will be pro-rated and will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000. Non-Competitive bids are allowed in this auction. All non-competitive bids will be automatically awarded in full at the stop-out rate of the competitive auction. The minimum amount for a non-competitive bid is $10,000; the maximum amount is $5,000,000 and should be submitted in increments of $10,000. Non-Competitive bids must be submitted between 10:00 a.m. ET and 2:00 p.m. ET on the auction date. Submission of Bids Participants must submit bids by accessing theTerm Deposit Facility applicationbetween the opening time and the closing time on the auction date. Notification Summary auction results will be published on theBoard of Governors’ websiteat approximately 12:00 p.m. (noon) ET on the notification date. Soon after, results will be posted on the Term Deposit Facility Resource Center page of theCentral Bank Central website. Participant awards will be posted to the Term Deposit Facility application at approximately 12:00 p.m. ET on the notification date, and participants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September confirms that the pace of recovery in output and employment continues to be slow. Household spending is increasing gradually, but remains constrained by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit. Business spending on equipment and software is rising, though less rapidly than earlier in the year, while investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak. Employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing starts continue to be depressed. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable, but measures of underlying inflation have trended lower in recent quarters. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. Currently, the unemployment rate is elevated, and measures of underlying inflation are somewhat low, relative to levels that the Committee judges to be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual mandate. Although the Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability, progress toward its objectives has been disappointingly slow. To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to expand its holdings of securities. The Committee will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings. In addition, the Committee intends to purchase a further $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011, a pace of about $75 billion per month. The Committee will regularly review the pace of its securities purchases and the overall size of the asset-purchase program in light of incoming information and will adjust the program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; James Bullard; Elizabeth A. Duke; Sandra Pianalto; Sarah Bloom Raskin; Eric S. Rosengren; Daniel K. Tarullo; Kevin M. Warsh; and Janet L. Yellen. Voting against the policy was Thomas M. Hoenig. Mr. Hoenig believed the risks of additional securities purchases outweighed the benefits. Mr. Hoenig also was concerned that this continued high level of monetary accommodation increased the risks of future financial imbalances and, over time, would cause an increase in long-term inflation expectations that could destabilize the economy. Statement from Federal Reserve Bank of New York
In light of the Thanksgiving holiday, the minutes of the November 2-3 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and a summary of participants' economic projections will be released at 2 p.m. EST on Tuesday, November 23, one day earlier than normal. The minutes of each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision. Summaries of economic projections are compiled approximately quarterly and released with the minutes of the FOMC meeting at which they were discussed.
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke Before the Financial Services Subcommittee on Housing and Community Opportunity, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairwoman Waters, Ranking Member Capito and members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to appear today to discuss issues related to mortgage loan servicing and the mishandling of documentation in foreclosure proceedings. The Federal Reserve is focused on a range of issues related to mortgage lending, such as loan underwriting and origination practices, loan servicing, loan modification, neighborhood stabilization and foreclosure. We take all of these matters seriously and are quite concerned about reported irregularities in foreclosure practices. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Federal Reserve are conducting an in-depth review of practices at the largest mortgage servicing operations. The interagency examination and review focuses on foreclosure practices generally, but with an emphasis on the breakdowns that led to inaccurate affidavits and other questionable legal documents being used in the foreclosure process. The regulators expect the initial on-site portion of our work to be completed this year and currently plan to publish a summary overview of industry-wide practices in early 2011. At that time we will have more information about the extent and significance of these very troubling practices, as well as what must be done to prevent them from occurring in the future. Losing a home is a tragic event for families and the communities in which they live. It is imperative that mortgage lenders and servicers provide borrowers every opportunity to modify the loan and retain their homes or, if that is not possible and foreclosure becomes necessary, that they give borrowers all the protection afforded by following due process as required by law. The issues raised as foreclosure improprieties came to light have cast a pall of uncertainty across the entire housing market. The Federal Reserve is actively working to accurately understand and size the threat to determine the appropriate response. Any response must ensure that actions taken with respect to borrowers and their homes are valid and in accordance with the law; at the same time, those actions should help remove uncertainty and restore smooth functioning to housing and financial markets. Although it is difficult to determine the incremental effect of further procedural delays in foreclosures, delays and uncertainty resulting from flaws in the foreclosure process have the potential to delay recovery in housing markets and to undermine confidence in our financial and legal systems. In my testimony I will discuss the potential risks to consumers, financial institutions, housing markets, and the broader economy regarding failures to follow proper procedures. I will cover in more detail our interagency reviews of servicer performance and potential remedies if procedures are not being followed. And I will return to the important role of loan modifications in reducing the number of foreclosures to be processed. Risks to ConsumersConsumers and consumer counselors have been quite vocal in their frustration over unreturned phone calls, lost documents and changing decision criteria that have plagued the loan modification process. In light of such experiences, evidence of improper procedures in foreclosure cases causes consumers, at a minimum, to further mistrust the loan servicing process. At worst, it can result in improper loss of a home or premature eviction from that home. For individual borrowers, uncertainty about the prospect or timing of foreclosure makes everyday decisions difficult. Borrowers who are uncertain about their ability to keep their homes have little incentive to invest in or maintain those homes, resulting in damage to neighborhoods and lowering the value of surrounding properties. And, with wide-spread stories of foreclosure improprieties, families in the process of buying a home or considering the purchase of a home have become concerned about the validity of their titles. Others who have purchased homes in foreclosure have had their closings delayed while documents are reviewed. Consumers have already fallen victim to foreclosure rescue scams as charlatans posing as mortgage counselors claimed to be able to obtain mortgage modifications for a fee. In light of new stories of mortgage abuse, new incarnations of those scams are sure to proliferate. Risks to Financial Institutions and the Financial SystemFinancial institutions face a number of risks if inadequate controls result in faulty foreclosure documents or failure to follow legal procedures. Recent events have shown that even the possibility of problems can lead to costly delays and reviews. In cases where actual problems are found, regulators will require lenders and servicers to correct not only the faulty documents themselves but the faulty systems that allowed them to occur. Institutions with widespread problems may be subject to fines and fees in addition to the costs associated with correcting the errors. Cost associated with foreclosure documentation problems, including "robo-signing" (discussed in more detail later), are not the only potential liabilities facing financial institutions. Investors in mortgage-backed securities and purchasers of unsecuritized "whole loans" have begun to explore and in some cases assert contractual and securities law claims against the parties that originated the loans, sold the loans, underwrote securities offerings, or had other roles in the process. The essence of these claims is that the mortgages in the securitization pools or that had been sold as unsecuritized whole loans did not conform to the representations made about their quality—specifically, that the loan applications contained misrepresentations or the underwriting was not in conformance with stated underwriting guidelines. With respect to the contract claims, this potential liability is usually called "put back" risk, because many of the relevant agreements permit the buyer of the loans to put the loans back to the seller (or other party that makes representations). That is, the buyers can demand that the seller repurchase the loans at par if defects are found in the loan underwriting contrary to representations and warranties in the pooling and servicing agreement that created the securitization trust or the whole loan mortgage purchasing agreement. At the time of the put-back, the loan has usually gone into default, sparking a review of the original loan application file. The defaulted loan, given current market conditions, is typically worth substantially less than par, thus the put-back transfers any potential loss from the buyer back to the seller. Although the representations and warranties in the various agreements vary considerably, they frequently require that the defect materially and adversely affect the value of the loan before put-back rights can be exercised. There are also pending claims by some that underwriters and sponsors of securitizations failed to comply with the Federal securities laws covering offering documents and registration statements. These suits specifically reference descriptions of the risks to investors, the quality of assets in the securitization, the order in which investors would be paid or other factors. Most of these lawsuits are in the early stages, and it is difficult to ascertain the probability that investors will be able to shift a substantial portion of the losses on defaulted mortgages, specifically, or mortgage-backed securities back to the parties that sold the loans or underwrote the offerings. Nevertheless, the Federal Reserve has been conducting a detailed evaluation of put-back risk to financial institutions. Losses due to put-backs are not new; buyers, insurers of loans (private mortgage insurers), and guarantors of securitizations (GSEs) of defaulted mortgages have been seeking to put back defective loans since well before the mortgage crisis began. This practice has accelerated during the current mortgage crisis. Financial institutions have been resolving these claims throughout the crisis. However, just as holders and guarantors of mortgages and mortgage-backed securities are pressing their claims, financial institutions are vigorously defending against many of the claims that seek to impose substantial liability on them. We are gathering information to ensure that the institutions we supervise have adequately assessed these risks and have accounted for them properly. Risk to Mortgage Market and HousingIn addition to the potential harm to consumers, financial institutions and the financial system, the Federal Reserve is evaluating the potential macroeconomic effects of foreclosure documentation problems to the mortgage and housing markets. The number of foreclosures initiated on residential properties has soared from about 1 million in 2006, the year that house prices peaked, to 2.8 million last year. Over the first half of this year, we have seen a further 1.2 million foreclosure filings, and an additional 2.4 million homes were somewhere in the foreclosure pipeline at the end of June. All told, we expect about 2.25 million foreclosure filings this year and again next year, and about 2 million more in 2012. While our outlook is for filings to decline in coming years, they will remain extremely high by historical standards. Currently, almost 5 million mortgage loans are 90 days or more past due or in foreclosure. The Federal Reserve believes that the best way to assist struggling borrowers is with a mortgage modification that allows borrowers to retain their homes with an affordable mortgage payment. Foreclosures are costly to all parties and, more broadly, to our economy. Lenders and investors incur financial losses arising from the litigation expenses associated with the foreclosure process and the loss on the defaulted mortgage when the foreclosed property sells at a "fire sale" price for substantially less than the loan balance. Local governments must contend with lower property tax revenue and the ramifications of neglected properties that may threaten public safety. Additionally, neighbors and neighborhoods suffer potential spillover effects from foreclosure sales because foreclosures may reduce the attractiveness of the neighborhood or may signal to potential buyers a forthcoming decline in neighborhood quality. Problems with foreclosure documentation procedure could lead to further delays in an already lengthy foreclosure process. Recent estimates suggest that the average time to foreclosure in the United States has already increased from 251 days in January 2008 to more than 440 days in 2010. While a mortgage modification is always preferable to foreclosure, when a sustainable loan modification is not possible, long and uncertain delays in the foreclosure process can be harmful to neighborhoods and the housing market more generally. Vacant properties may fall into disrepair or be vandalized. Even when borrowers continue to live in their homes, those unable to make their mortgage payments may not have the resources or the incentive to adequately maintain their properties. In the end, an overhang of homes awaiting foreclosure is unhealthy for the housing market and can delay its recovery as well as that of the broader economy. In addition, the lack of certainty and price discovery created by the glut of foreclosures has further weakened property values and has contributed to a slowing in the recovery of the housing market more generally.The most important action policymakers can take to address the rising foreclosures and the lack of mortgage activity is to craft policies that encourage market participants to act in a particular manner that will allow the economy to achieve a sustainable recovery. Over the course of the past two years, the Federal Reserve has taken forceful action in response to the financial crisis to help improve financial market conditions and to promote the flow of credit to households and businesses. More specifically, our purchases of long-term mortgage-backed securities, government agency debt, and Treasury securities served to reduce mortgage rates which in turn allowed mortgage holders to refinance into lower payments and made home loans more affordable for new purchasers. Foreclosure ProcessBefore I turn to specific examination procedures underway, it might be helpful to review the foreclosure process and the role of investors and loan servicers. Foreclosure is a legal process initiated to terminate a borrower's interest in a property and is permitted only when the borrower has defaulted on the debt obligation for a specified period. To the extent a loan is secured by the property, the process allows the lender to sell the property and apply the proceeds in full or partial satisfaction of the borrower's unpaid debt. Foreclosure requirements are generally established by state law, and each state has its own statutes, rules, and court decisions pertaining to foreclosures. For this reason, a financial institution needs to understand the foreclosure procedures and documentation practices for each state in which it operates. Some 23 states, known as judicial foreclosure states, require foreclosures to be reviewed and approved by a court in advance. Nonjudicial foreclosure states have varying waiting periods and documentation, filing, and notice requirements after a default occurs before a foreclosure sale may take place. In judicial foreclosure states, homeowners can challenge the foreclosure either by appearing in and defending the action already brought by the lender or by filing for bankruptcy. In nonjudicial foreclosure states, to challenge the foreclosure, the homeowner must take the initiative to file suit in state court to enjoin the foreclosure or file for bankruptcy. Almost half of all of the states have statutes that allow the borrower to cure a default by paying any amount already due, plus any allowable costs and fees, prior to the foreclosure sale without having to pay off the entire principal amount of the mortgage loan. Mortgage servicers are a critical link between borrowers and mortgage holders as they maintain the official accounting of all amounts paid and owed by borrowers. In addition, servicers handle loan default management, including negotiating repayment of loss mitigation plans with borrowers. In the event that loan modification efforts are not successful, the servicer would initiate foreclosure, often as the agent for third parties, such as securitization trusts. In this regard, servicers have responsibilities to investors holding residential mortgage-backed securities. These securities are held by a broad range of investors including state pension funds and retirement systems. Servicers also have responsibilities to borrowers to maintain accurate and complete records of payments received, amounts advanced, notifications made to borrowers, and any mortgage modification discussions. Foreclosure documentation typically requires an assertion that the agent bringing forth the action has the legal right to foreclose and that the loan is in default. The document filing would contain details of the transaction and the amounts owed. Problems associated with so-called robo-signing of documents include documents signed by individuals who do not have personal knowledge of the facts being asserted, documents signed by individuals who are not properly authorized to make such claims or assertions, notarized signatures on documents that were not executed in the presence of a notary or that have other violations of proper notary procedures, and documents that contain inaccurate amounts, dates, or other facts. Lenders and servicers are responsible for ensuring that the person who signs a document is duly authorized and has appropriate knowledge obtained from a review of the case. In addition, servicers and lenders are responsible for ensuring the accuracy of records and the facts recited in the documents. State law and local real estate recording requirements govern recordation of real estate and mortgage title transfers. Given the multiple transfers of mortgage loans over time, concerns have been raised about investors' or servicers' right to foreclose. Although state-by-state practices vary considerably, generally the note holder has the right to initiate foreclosure if an original note can be produced and the current holder's ownership is able to be verified in some fashion. If there is no controversy concerning ownership of the note, but rather an inability to locate original documents, processes usually exist that allow for a foreclosure to proceed, albeit at some cost and delay. If there is some question of ownership, the investor or servicer may be required to produce evidence of ownership before a foreclosure can proceed. Matters regarding real estate titles and foreclosures are generally governed by state law, and the 50 state attorneys general have undertaken a joint review of lenders and servicers and the reported problems in foreclosures. In addition, numerous federal agencies have launched investigations, including examinations in process by the federal financial regulators. Interagency ExaminationsThe Federal Reserve has supervisory and regulatory authority for bank holding companies, approximately 800 state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System (state member banks), and certain other financial institutions and activities. We work with other federal and state supervisory authorities to ensure the safety and soundness of the banking industry, foster the stability of the financial system, and provide for fair and equitable treatment of consumers in their financial transactions. As the consolidated supervisor of bank holding companies, including financial holding companies, the Federal Reserve conducts inspections of those institutions. The Federal Reserve is involved in both regulation, which involves establishing the rules within which banking organizations must operate, and supervision, which entails ensuring that banking organizations abide by those rules and remain, overall, in safe and sound condition. As I indicated at the beginning of my statement, the OCC, the OTS, the FDIC, and the Federal Reserve are in the process of conducting interagency targeted examinations of the foreclosure policies and practices of the financial institutions that control a majority of outstanding mortgage loans. The agencies expect to conclude the on-site portion of our examination process by the end of this year and plan to review the findings immediately thereafter. We want to ensure that our analysis is comprehensive and provides a basis for development of remedial actions. Currently, the banking agencies plan to publicly release a summary report highlighting the industry-wide findings in early 2011. In our examinations, the agencies are reviewing firms' policies, procedures, and internal controls related to foreclosure practices and are sampling loan files to test the effectiveness of those policies, procedures and internal controls. We are prepared to take supervisory action where necessary and appropriate to hold institutions accountable for poor practices. Specifically, we are examining the firms' internal governance processes related to: (1) foreclosure policies and procedures; (2) organizational structure, approval process, and staffing levels; (3) vendor management of outside law firms; (4) quality control processes and internal audit; and (5) foreclosure workflow process and loan documentation procedures. We have also solicited information from consumer organizations to help us better direct our actions to detect problems at specific servicers and to determine whether systematic weaknesses are leading to improper foreclosures. For additional insights into foreclosure processes, we have sent a self-assessment questionnaire to other Federal Reserve-regulated institutions that have mortgage servicing activity but were not part of the interagency horizontal examination effort. The staff will analyze the responses from the firms and determine what follow-up work is required to validate the information they provide. The Federal Reserve requires supervised institutions to have sufficient corporate governance and maintain adequate risk-management programs to ensure the institution's safety and soundness, as well to comply with consumer protection laws and regulations. Institutions with identified weaknesses will be directed to take remedial actions. Any remedial action mandated by the Federal Reserve will be consistent with the goals and objectives of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 to promote best practices and financial stability. Supporting Loan ModificationsNotwithstanding the right of lenders to pursue foreclosure, the Federal Reserve encourages mortgage servicers to first pursue a sustainable loan modification for the borrower. To ensure that modification requests are handled appropriately, we have leveraged the information from our consumer complaint investigation process. As a result of complaints received from consumers and members of the Congress on behalf of their constituents, in October 2009 the Federal Reserve began a review of the loan modification practices of loan servicers for which we have supervisory responsibility. These reviews include on-site examinations that began in the second quarter of this year and are still underway. The Federal Reserve has emphasized the importance of using loan modifications as a means to avoid unnecessary foreclosures and continues to encourage effective loan modifications. Prudent modifications that are consistent with safe and sound lending practices are generally in the long-term best interest of both financial institutions and borrowers. We have sponsored numerous modification fairs and events to bring lenders and borrowers face-to-face to explore alternatives to foreclosure. In addition to promoting loan modifications, the Federal Reserve has actively supported efforts to help communities that have been hard hit by vacancies and foreclosures. Federal Reserve staff members in our research, community development, and supervision and regulation divisions are collaborating to encourage foreclosure prevention at the local level and promote neighborhood stabilization initiatives. Further, Federal Reserve staff members are conducting empirical research on mortgage- and foreclosure-related topics, and they are reaching out to industry and consumer experts as well. A key initiative developed under the leadership of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago has been the Mortgage Outreach and Research Effort (MORE). MORE involves all 12 Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors in a collaboration that pools resources and combines expertise to inform and engage policymakers, community organizations, financial institutions, and the public at large. In September 2010, MORE sponsored a discussion among experts and policymakers on effective strategies for stabilizing neighborhoods weakened by real estate owned by financial institutions and vacant properties. This meeting also included a publication developed by the Board and the Boston and Cleveland Federal Reserve banks that featured analysis and promising practices from leading practitioners and applied researchers.1Another important resource published this year by MORE summarizes key actions that the Federal Reserve has taken to address the foreclosure crisis.2 In addition to encouraging loan modifications by other holders of mortgage loans, the Federal Reserve has worked with servicers of mortgages it acquired in actions taken to stabilize the financial system. On January 30, 2009, the Board of Governors adopted a policy requiring the pursuit of mortgage modifications prior to initiating foreclosure on loans held in the Federal Reserve System. ConclusionIn summary, the Federal Reserve has been actively working to mitigate the harm to consumers and markets caused by problems in mortgage loan origination, securitization, and loan foreclosures. We are participating in interagency examinations of the foreclosure processes and controls in the financial institutions that control the majority of the nation's mortgages. We are conducting examinations of lenders' and servicers' loan modification efforts. In response to the fallout from the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve has helped stabilize the mortgage market and improve financial conditions more broadly, thus promoting economic recovery. As the foreclosure crisis has intensified, Federal Reserve staff in our research, community development, and supervision and regulation divisions have actively collaborated to support foreclosure prevention at the local level and promote neighborhood stabilization initiatives. These efforts reflect a continuation of actions undertaken by the Federal Reserve System since the start of the financial crisis. We remain committed to the goal of stabilized financial markets that promote economic recovery. Thank you for holding this important hearing today, and I would be happy to answer any questions that you may have. 1. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and others (2010),REO Vacant Properties: Strategies for Neighborhood Stabilization (5 MB PDF))Return to text 2. Federal Reserve System, Mortgage Outreach and Research Efforts (MORE) Initiative (2010),Addressing the Impact of the Foreclosure Crisis: Federal Reserve Mortgage Outreach and Research Efforts (5.5 MB PDF)(Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago)Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings on October 18 and November 1, 2010. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Tuesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on November 2-3, 2010 and of the conference call held on October 15, 2010. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the November 2-3, 2010 meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. Summaries of economic projections are released on an approximately quarterly schedule. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeOctober 15 andNovember 2-3, 2010:340 KB PDF|HTML
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the George Washington University Center for Law, Economics, and Finance Conference on the Dodd-Frank Act, Washington, D.C. Thank you very much for your invitation to speak at this second annual symposium on financial regulatory reform. Before addressing that topic, I want to say a word about the mortgage foreclosure documentation imbroglio, the latest chapter in the recent sad history of mortgage finance in this country. The Need to Increase Mortgage ModificationsAs you know, inquiries into the extent of, and culpability for, these problems are currently being conducted by banking regulators, other federal agencies, and state attorneys general. Regardless of the findings that emerge, and the steps that servicers and others may take to correct their mistakes, this episode has again drawn attention to what can only be described as a perverse set of incentives for homeowners with underwater mortgages. Homeowners who try to get a modification of the terms of their mortgages are all too frequently subject to delay and disappointment. On the other hand, those who simply stop paying their mortgages have found that they can often stay in their homes for a year or more, rent free, before the foreclosure process moves ahead. This simply is not a good outcome from any broad perspective--not for the revival of housing markets, not for the banks and investors that hold the delinquent mortgages, and in the longer run, not even for the homeowners themselves, who will ultimately have to move out, taking with them a dark cloud over their creditworthiness. Several possible explanations have been suggested for this untoward state of affairs--the lack of servicer capacity to execute modifications, purported financial incentives for servicers to foreclose rather than modify, what until recently appeared to be easier execution of foreclosures relative to modifications, limits on the authority of securitization trustees, and conflicts between primary and secondary lien holders. Whatever the merits and relative weights of these various explanations, the social costs of this situation are huge. It just cannot be the case that foreclosure is preferable to modification--including reductions of principal--for a significant proportion of mortgages where the deadweight costs of foreclosure, including a distressed sale discount, are so high. While some banks and other industry participants have stepped forward to increase the rate of modifications relative to foreclosures, many have not done enough. I would hope that both servicers and ultimate holders of the mortgages will take this occasion not just to correct documentation flaws and to contest who should bear the losses of mortgages gone bad, but to invigorate the modification process. Next Steps Down the Reform RoadI note that while last year's conference was called "Regulatory Reform at the Crossroads," this year's event is entitled "The Dodd-Frank Act and the Road Ahead for Financial Regulatory Reform." The metaphor of a long road ahead following key decisions in Dodd-Frank is an apt one for the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies that will, over the next 15 to 20 months, complete implementation of that bill through scores of regulations. The metaphor also applies to elaboration and domestic implementation of the framework for Basel III that was agreed to internationally in September. Though we may no longer face a major crossroads, the federal banking agencies will certainly encounter numerous forks in the road we are travelling. Choices will be presented during implementation of certain Dodd-Frank provisions that set a general direction for change, but do not mandate a precise route. Others will be encountered as we continue the Basel III exercise, to which I will return in a moment. Still other choices will doubtless be required as all the member agencies of the new Financial Stability Oversight Council evaluate and, potentially, respond to developments in financial markets. Finally, at least one big crossroad still lies ahead--a decision on the future of the government-sponsored housing finance agencies. We are, of course, in the middle of the Dodd-Frank implementation process. Thus, while I recognize there is enormous interest in where the Federal Reserve and other rule-writing agencies may be headed, I cannot say much about the substance of the regulations that will eventually be proposed and adopted. Indeed, I think it would be inconsistent with the very purpose of administrative law requirements for me to come to my own conclusions, much less opine publicly on them, before we have made our proposals and evaluated all the comments. What I can say is that, in implementing Dodd-Frank, the Board of Governors will be guided by the same norms of statutory construction that a court would apply. Most importantly, where Congressional intentions are clear from the language of the statute, we must faithfully execute those intentions. Of course, there are a good many provisions that do not admit of a single interpretation, and the implementation of those provisions will require the exercise of discretion by the Federal Reserve or other regulatory agencies. I can also say that we are following a transparent and inclusive process that goes well beyond the classic notice and comment requirements for agencies adopting regulations. As to transparency: At the Federal Reserve, we are entering into the public record a summary of all communications with non-government groups or individuals regarding matters subject to a potential or proposed rulemaking under Dodd-Frank. As to inclusiveness: We have joined with the other banking agencies in sponsoring a series of joint forums to solicit views from industry, academics, and others on some key issues relevant to Dodd-Frank implementation. We are also hearing views on regulatory implementation at meetings that cover a broad range of topics, such as at our last Consumer Advisory Council session. Reforming Minimum Capital RequirementsAlthough they had long used bank capital ratios as a supervisory tool, U.S. bank regulators did not impose explicit minimum capital requirements until the 1980s. The proximate reason for this change was regulatory concern over the decline in capital ratios of the largest banks--a concern reinforced by Congress, as it saw some of those large banks facing enormous losses on their loans to foreign sovereigns. This U.S. regulatory innovation was effectively internationalized a few years later in the original Basel Accord. At the same time, regulators came to regard capital requirements as a supple prudential tool. As activity and affiliation restrictions were loosened in the United States, capital requirements seemed a promising way to protect the public's interest in the stability of financial institutions that had access to the Federal Reserve's discount window and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insurance. Capital requirements promised to provide a buffer against bank losses fromanyactivities in which the bank or its affiliates might engage, a consideration of equal or greater relevance in countries with universal banking models. Some support also developed for the proposition that minimum capital levels could, by maintaining a material equity value for the bank, serve as a disincentive for excessive risk-taking by management and shareholders. In the ensuing quarter century, the attention of banking regulators around the world had been heavily oriented toward elaborating capital requirements to reflect more precisely the particular risks faced by a financial institution. Capital requirements had, to a considerable extent, become the dominant prudential regulatory tool. The financial crisis showed that the concentrated, almost all-consuming regulatory focus on refining bank capital requirements in Basel II had come at the expense of attention to other risks in the financial system. In particular, there was insufficient appreciation of the implications of the growth in size, leverage, and maturity transformation levels of the shadow banking system for the balance sheets of commercial banks and for overall financial stability. The limitations of capital requirements as a regulatory tool, such as the frequent lag between declines in asset values and reductions in bank capital, were also confirmed by experience during the crisis. But it was also evident that capital requirements had simply been set too low in general, and with respect to particular assets. One of the most obvious examples was the capital requirement for asset-backed securities in the trading books of banks. The requirement was based on returns over a 10-day holding period, used a one-year observation period that had been characterized by unusually low price volatility, and neglected the credit risks inherent in these traded instruments. It was also apparent that at least some of the instruments that qualified as "Tier 1 capital" for regulatory purposes were not reliable buffers against losses, at least not on a going concern basis. It is instructive that during the height of the crisis, counterparties and other market actors looked almost exclusively to the amount of tangible common equity held by financial institutions in evaluating the creditworthiness and overall stability of those institutions--they essentially ignored the Tier 1 and total risk-based capital ratios in regulatory requirements. In the fall of 2008, there was widespread doubt in markets that the common equity of some of our largest institutions was sufficient to withstand the losses that those firms appeared to be facing. This doubt made investors and counterparties increasingly reluctant to deal with these firms, contributing to the severe liquidity strains that characterized financial markets at the time. It is obvious that the post-crisis regulatory system will not be as dependent on capital requirements as the pre-crisis regime. Dodd-Frank itself is testimony to this fact, as are a number of changes already made by banking agencies. There will be increased emphasis on market discipline, liquidity regulation, activities restrictions, and more effective supervision. But the crisis reinforces the point that robust capital requirements should continue to be a central component of the financial regulatory system. The U.S. banking agencies, and most of our counterparts from countries represented in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, made strengthening the capital regime a high priority in the latest financial reform agenda. Basel III makes a number of important changes to address deficiencies in the pre-crisis capital rules: First,reflecting both intuitive good sense and market realities during the crisis, Basel III creates a new minimum common equity capital requirement. Moreover, the agreement provides a definition of common equity that will prevent firms or national regulators from including in the calculation of common equity certain assets that could dilute its loss-absorbing character. Second,the minimum common equity ratio will be set at 4.5% of risk-weighted assets, with an additional requirement for a 2.5% "conservation buffer." The minimum ratio should be understood as defining the amount of common equity needed for a firm to be regarded as a viable financial intermediary. The conservation buffer is a new feature of capital regulation, intended specifically to reflect the losses that a firm may suffer during periods of financial stress. Thus the concept behind the two-level requirement is that a banking organization should be able to withstand losses associated with systemic stress and still be a viable financial intermediary. This concept is comparable to the approach we adopted during the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) in early 2009. There, you may recall, we used a special stress test to provide a rough estimate of losses that the large banking organizations could face in an adverse scenario and asked that they hold capital sufficient to absorb those losses and still be above common equity levels that would maintain the firms as viable intermediaries. There is no direct way to calculate how much equity is needed to assure markets that a banking organization is viable. In our internal analysis at the Federal Reserve in preparation for the Basel Committee deliberations, we analyzed distributions of actual losses suffered by larger institutions over the last several decades, on the assumption that an institution that could withstand such losses at a high confidence level would be regarded as a viable going concern. For the conservation buffer, we looked at actual pre-SCAP losses incurred by large banking firms during the recent stress period and SCAP estimates of additional losses associated with the recent stress period. Both these determinations required considerable judgment, and thus we developed ranges, rather than point estimates, for the levels we thought reasonable. In particular, government capital injections and debt guarantees in the fall of 2008 complicated the estimation of losses that might have been incurred in the absence of too-big-to-fail support. The ratios agreed to in Basel were at the lower end of, though still within, the ranges we had calculated. The practical effect of the two-level approach is that banks under stress may let their common equity ratio drop below the 7% level that is the sum of the minimum and buffer requirements. However, restrictions on capital distributions will result, which will become progressively more stringent as the common equity ratio drops closer to the 4.5% minimum. The buffer is thus designed to forestall banks from continuing to pay dividends even as they come under stress, a practice observed in some institutions during the financial crisis. Realistically, both regulators and markets will expect firms generally to maintain their common equity ratios above 7%. Third,Basel III makes extensive changes to the risk weights assigned to a financial institution's traded assets and counterparty exposures. As I mentioned earlier, the market-risk requirements of the pre-crisis capital regime were woefully inadequate. In many instances, they simply did not reflect the actual risk assumed by an institution. They also created an invitation to arbitrage credit risks by turning them into traded assets with lower risk weights. It is also noteworthy that the changes in risk weights incorporate some elements of a macroprudential perspective as, for example, in higher capital requirements on equity investments in other financial firms and credit exposures to large financial firms Fourth, Basel III provides for a minimum leverage ratio, roughly similar to requirements already applicable under national law in the United States and Canada. While the terms of this leverage requirement have been agreed to, there will be a supervisory monitoring period and then a parallel run to assess its impact, particularly in countries with no history of such a requirement, and to provide for adjustments if warranted. Finally, Basel III has a rather lengthy and complicated transition period, with the new requirements to be phased in between January 1, 2013, and January 1, 2019. We favored a significant transition period, so as to allow firms flexibility in adjusting to the new regime through such means as running off higher risk-weighted assets, adjusting their business models gradually, or using retained earnings to add any new capital that might be required under the new rules. To be honest, however, we did not think the transition period needed to stretch over eight years. In fact, it appears that most U.S. banking entities expect to meet the new requirements considerably sooner. However, the lengthy transition period was an important inducement for some countries to agree to the new, much stronger standards. With the agreements reached in July and September at meetings of the Governors and Heads of Supervision (GHOS) in Basel, the structure and basic elements of Basel III are clear. Details are still being worked out by the Basel Committee. Then, of course, the U.S. banking agencies will need to implement Basel III through domestic capital regulations. Basel III is not a perfect agreement, of course. There are things we would have done differently if we were writing a capital regulation on our own. There will surely be some technical challenges in implementing it. It does not really address some pre-crisis problems in capital regulation such as pro-cyclicality. But it is a major step forward for capital regulation. It will raise minimum requirements substantially, ensure that regulatory capital is truly loss absorbing, and discourage some of the risky activities for which the pre-crisis regime required far too little capital. Basel III was also a major step forward in international cooperation. In all candor, as recently as this past spring I was concerned that we might be unable to agree in Basel on such key issues as a distinct common equity requirement. However, under the strong leadership of Nout Wellink in the Basel Committee and Jean-Claude Trichet in the GHOS, we concluded a good agreement in timely fashion. I believe that another factor in turning things around was that, unlike at some times in the past, the U.S. banking agencies spoke with a single, unified voice in Basel. Obviously, the benefits of Basel III for financial stability will be realized only if they are implemented rigorously. In this regard, it is important to draw a distinction between, on the one hand, implementation in the sense of enacting national regulations that incorporate the Basel standards and, on the other, implementation in the sense that firms are actually holding the amounts of capital called for by the internationally agreed rules. The Basel Committee must be able to monitor effectively implementation of, and compliance with, these new capital standards. A number of market analysts have noted that, even under current market risk capital rules, there is considerable apparent variation in the risk-weightings apparently applied by different banks. We are urging the Committee to explore mechanisms for ensuring that these strengthened capital standards lead to a consistency in application, as well as in the provisions of relevant domestic regulations. Along these lines, we have heard complaints from a few other countries that Basel II is not yet operative for our large, internationally active banking organizations in the United States. As we have explained, despite the substantial resources devoted by both banking organizations and supervisors to the tasks of developing and validating the Advanced Internal Ratings-Based Approach in those institutions, we continue to encounter significant difficulties. The suggestion that U.S. banking organizations have thereby gained a competitive advantage is misplaced, however. For one thing, we required significant capital increases as part of the SCAP and the Troubled Asset Relief Program repayment processes last year. Also, we note that the required capital levels for some foreign banks adopting Basel II apparentlydeclinedfrom Basel I levels. In-depth oversight by the Basel Committee of implementation and compliance would allow supervisors from all member countries better to understand issues such as these. I suspect it would also result in supervisors learning from one another and thus improving the quality of large institution capital regulation globally. Although, fortunately, Basel III does not present nearly the degree of technical challenge posed by the advanced approach of Basel II, there will still be a good bit of opaqueness in how some of its components are implemented and thus a continuing need for significant monitoring by the Basel Committee. One piece of unfinished business on the international capital regulatory agenda arises from the agreement by the GHOS in September that systemically important financial institutions should have loss absorbing capacity beyond the Basel III requirements. This international position parallels the Dodd-Frank requirement that the Federal Reserve apply capital requirements to large, interconnected financial institutions that are more stringent than those applied to other banks. We think it serves U.S. interests to develop our plans for implementing our domestic statutory obligation in tandem with our participation in this international process, so as to maximize the chances of convergence of international standards and our own practice. Work on this issue in the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board will continue well into next year. Dividend PolicyBefore closing, I want to address requests for renewed or increased dividends by our large bank holding companies, an issue in which there has been substantial recent interest. During the crisis, dividends were eventually suspended or reduced to minimal levels by all the banking organizations covered by the SCAP. As the financial system has stabilized, some firms have indicated an interest in resuming or increasing dividends, or repurchasing shares. We have been concerned with the safety and soundness implications of resuming or increasing capital distributions in the absence of a strong, forward-looking demonstration that the capital position of a firm would be protected even under stressed conditions. Until Basel III was completed and Dodd-Frank enacted, it was obviously difficult for any firm to make that kind of demonstration, since its future capital needs and potential business model changes were obviously unknown. While there continues to be a relatively high degree of uncertainty about near- to medium-term economic prospects, the basic questions surrounding capital and regulatory reform have now been answered. We anticipate that some firms with high capital levels that have been retaining solid earnings for several quarters will be interested in increasing or resuming dividends. In response to these anticipated requests, we will soon be issuing supervisory guidelines applicable to such requests from the largest holding companies for the first quarter of next year. Although the details of these guidelines are still being finalized, I can say that our approach to considering such requests will be a conservative one. We will expect firms to submit convincing capital plans that demonstrate their ability to absorb losses over the next two years under an adverse economic scenario that we will specify, and still remain amply capitalized. We also expect that firms will have a sound estimate of any significant risks that may not be captured by the stress testing, such as potential mortgage putback exposures, and the capacity to absorb any consequent losses. The firms will also be asked to show how, even with their proposed capital distributions, they will readily and comfortably meet the Basel III requirements as they come into effect, as well as to accommodate any business model changes that might be necessitated by Dodd-Frank. ConclusionThe final set of major Dodd-Frank regulations will not be completed until early 2012. A year from now we will be in the midst of a regulatory process implementing Basel III, and there will likely be an active debate over the future of the government-sponsored enterprises. So I see little risk that the third annual conference on financial regulatory reform at George Washington Law School will be entitled "The End of the Road." Maybe, just maybe, I have given you a title for the fourth. Then again, maybe not.
Governor Sarah Bloom Raskin At the National Consumer Law Center's Consumer Rights Litigation Conference, Boston, Massachusetts Good afternoon. I would like to thank the National Consumer Law Center (NCLC) for inviting me to speak here at the Consumer Rights Litigation Conference. I'm particularly pleased to share my thoughts with you in my first public speech since joining the Federal Reserve Board of Governors last month. These are challenging times for policymakers because they areprofoundlychallenging times for millions of Americans. Many families have suffered significant declines in their net worth over the past several years, especially as the value of their homes and other assets has plummeted. Many households have faced job losses or large reductions in the number of hours worked, events that have reduced family income and well-being. Retirees are feeling heightened anxiety as companies and local and state governments debate measures to restrict retiree pensions. The ability of households to borrow has also shrunk as underwriting standards have tightened, placing more weight on existing debt obligations of consumers. For households trying to navigate these difficulties, the work that many of you do to directly help consumers deal with the legal dimensions of their financial lives is of great importance. I commend you for your ongoing and persistent contributions to stabilizing family and community life in our country. One aspect of the financial crisis that touches directly on your work is foreclosure. As you well know--and in fact you were among the first to predict the problem--millions of homeowners have gone through foreclosure in recent years; many more will go through it in the near future; and countless others are struggling to keep their payments current even as the housing market and the overall economy make it hard to do so. The number of foreclosures initiated on residential properties has soared from about one million in 2006, the year that house prices peaked, to 2.8 million last year. There were 1.2 million foreclosure filings in just the first half of this year. In addition, right now nearly five million loans are somewhere in the foreclosure process, or are 90 days or more past due and hence at serious risk for a foreclosure filing. Our projections remain very grim for the foreseeable future: All told, we expect about two and one-quarter million foreclosure filings this year and again next year, and about two million more in 2012. While these numbers are down from their peak in 2009, they remain extremely high by historical standards and represent a trauma in the lives of millions of people affected. The most recent alarming development in the foreclosure process that has caught public attention involves improper activities by mortgage servicers. But let's remember that, for years, housing counselors and advocates nationwide have documented patterns of fraudulent and abusive mortgage servicing practices. Current attention is focused on so-called "robo-signers," individuals who appear to have attested to the validity of documents in a number of foreclosure filings so large as to suggest that something may be amiss in the recording process. This development is troubling on its own, but it also shines a harsh spotlight on other longstanding procedural flaws in mortgage servicing. Many may view these procedural flaws as trivial, technical, or inconsequential, but I consider them to be part of a deeper, systemic problem and am gravely concerned. During my time as Commissioner of Financial Regulation for the State of Maryland, I encountered a Pandora's Box of predatory tactics that included: Theoretically, it is possible that the robo-signer controversy may turn out to be a short-term technical problem that can be addressed through additional verifications and, when necessary, re-processing of critical documents. Nevertheless, I believe that serious and sustained reform is needed to address the larger problems in mortgage servicing. The mortgage servicing industry as we know it is a relatively recent invention, and, undoubtedly, it has never before been tested in a national housing crisis of this magnitude. As the continuing surge in foreclosures suggests, mortgage servicers simply are not doing enough to provide sustainable alternatives to foreclosure. This may be due to the fact that the vast bulk of loan servicing today is done by large servicers, which are either subsidiaries of depository institutions, affiliates of depository institutions, or independent companies focused primarily or exclusively on loan servicing. Before securitization became commonplace, it was much more likely for a mortgage to be serviced by the same entity that had originated the loan. This simple approach ensured that lenders knew immediately if a homeowner was having payment problems, and could take action to mitigate possible losses. A fair bit of this kind of "portfolio servicing" still takes place, but as the residential real estate market shifted from an originate-to-hold model to an originate-to-distribute model, an industry of independent third-party entities emerged to service the loans on behalf of the securitization trusts. These trusts, as a requirement for their tax-preferred status, were supposed to be passive, with the management of individual loans left to the servicer. These servicing arrangements are now commonplace in the industry: In fact, the system has matured rapidly and experienced considerable consolidation over the past twenty years. The benefits to consolidation include significant economies of scale in the collection and disbursal of routine payments. But the kind of time-consuming, involved work that is now needed in the loss mitigation area was not contemplated at anything like this kind of scale, and the payment structures between the servicers and investors may not always be sufficient to support large-scale loan workout activity. Unfortunately, as we are seeing now, there are also dramatically significant drawbacks to this model. Third-party servicers earn money through annual servicing fees, a myriad of other fees, and on float interest, and they maximize profits by keeping their costs down, streamlining processes wherever possible, and by buying servicing rights on pools of loans that they hope will require little hands-on work. Again, for routine payment processing this all leads to economies of scale, and the industry has consolidated significantly in recent years as a result. But the services needed in the current housing crisis are not one-size-fits-all. Loan servicers likely never anticipated the drastic need for the kind of time-consuming, detailed work that is now required in the loss mitigation area, and the payment structures between the servicers and investors are not sufficient to support large-scale loan workout activity. As it turns out, the structural incentives that influence servicer actions, especially when they are servicing loans for a third party, now run counter to the interests of homeowners and investors. While an investor's financial interests are tied more or less directly to the performance of a loan, the interests of a third-party servicer are tied to it only indirectly, at best. The servicer makes money, to oversimplify a bit, by maximizing fees earned and minimizing expenses while performing the actions spelled out in its contract with the investor. In the case, for instance, of a homeowner struggling to make payments, a foreclosure almost always costs the investor money, but may actually earn money for the servicer in the form of fees. Proactive measures to avoid foreclosure and minimize cost to the investor, on the other hand, may be good for the homeowner, but involve costs that could very well lead to a net loss to the servicer. In the case of a temporary forbearance for a homeowner, for example, the investor and homeowner both could win--if the forbearance allows the homeowner to get back on their feet and avoid foreclosure--but the servicer could well lose money. In the case of a permanent modification, the investor and homeowner could both be considerably better off relative to foreclosure, but the servicer could again lose money. Why might a servicer lose money in an instance that could be win-win for the borrower and investor? It's because of the amount of work needed, the structure for reimbursing costs to the servicer, and other costs incurred by the servicer on delinquent, but not yet foreclosed upon, borrowers. Loss mitigation options, such as forbearance and loan modification, require individualized case work. Thus, the servicer needs to invest in additional resources, including trained personnel who can deal with often complex one-off transactions. In the case of a private-label security, many of the costs of this work may not be reimbursed by the trust. Other costs result from even temporary forbearance, such as the servicer's requirement, in most cases, to advance principal and interest to the investor every month, even though it has not received payment from the borrower. Even in the case of a servicer who has every best intention of doing "the right thing," the bottom-line incentives are largely misaligned with everyone else involved in the transaction, and most certainly the homeowners themselves. We don't know yet what the end results will be for homeowners. But the best third-party servicers would have to be diligent and willing to absorb relative losses when the standard business model for the industry would seem to put a thumb on the scale in favor of foreclosure. The most urgent needs of the servicing world today require a sufficient number of personnel with the adequate mix of training, tools, and judgment to deal with problem loans on a large scale--in other words, activities with few economies of scale. The skill set of personnel hired and trained for routine work--efficiency and accuracy in following rules, and little discretion in decisionmaking--is likely a poor match for loss mitigation activities that require constant creativity and case-by-case judgment. Therefore, simply transferring work from one part of a company to another does not achieve much without significant investments in training and retraining. Servicers have been publicly pledging for several years to increase their servicing capacity, and many have. Unfortunately, there is plenty of evidence to suggest that many servicers' workforces lack the knowledge and capacity to deal with the immensity of the mortgage crisis. In order to do their jobs well servicers need strong internal procedures and controls. Recent events suggest that servicers may be lacking in this regard, to the detriment of consumers, and, quite possibly, to the detriment of the investors to whom they are contractually obligated to maximize revenue. I recognize that many servicers have stepped up and diligently tried to improve their work; I applaud and encourage them. However, lingering problems remain and I suspect that these may be due to deferred maintenance and investment on a significant scale. In boom times, servicers had the luxury of building out relatively lean systems that efficiently processed the more routine aspects of the business, but they do not appear to have planned for the infrastructure that would be needed during a serious down cycle. As you know, consumers hold the losing end of this stick. More seriously, recurring issues that have dogged some elements of the servicing industry go beyond misaligned incentives to simple bad business practices. One recurring problem that has triggered litigation involves the servicer's handling of fees. When a servicer does not properly carry out its primary duty of collecting and appropriately allocating mortgage payments, it can cost homeowners money and, in the most extreme cases, cause a homeowner to be pushed into premature default. Some servicers obtain unwarranted or unauthorized fees from borrowers after engaging in unfair collection practices, or through other conduct that causes borrower default, such as misapplied payments, padded costs, erroneous charges, late fees, and so on. Too many accounts of shoddy operating procedures--lost paperwork, slow response times, and sloppy recordkeeping--cast a dark shadow on this part of the industry that links mortgage borrowers and lenders. The broad grant of delegated authority that servicers enjoy under pooling and servicing agreements (PSAs), combined with an effective lack of choice on the part of consumers, creates an environment ripe for abuse. Moreover, the inability of some servicers to maintain complete and accurate records, and to transfer servicing rights cleanly, causes additional uncertainties and vulnerabilities. The impact of poor business practices can linger on even after the foreclosure sale. In managing foreclosed properties in lenders' inventories, servicers may be motivated by timeliness measures in PSAs to induce the former homeowner or bona fide tenant to vacate before they are legally required to do so, sometimes under the threat of eviction. Once the properties are vacant, servicers exercise great discretion in deciding whether or not to repair foreclosed property based on the likelihood that the servicer's advances are recoverable from the sale proceeds. With real estate owned (REO) inventories projected to reach one million by the end of 2010, servicer actions will heavily influence the effectiveness of neighborhood stabilization efforts at a time of persistent decline in home values and in fragile markets already weakened by a glut of vacant and abandoned properties, particularly in low-wealth communities. Finally, we face a cluster of problems surrounding loan modification. Servicers' significant concerns about the U.S. Treasury's Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP) are well-known. That said, we do not know enough about how well servicers are complying with the requirements of that program, or whether all of the HAMP modifications that should be made are indeed being made. Many servicers, in fact, currently report that the bulk of their loan modifications are being done outside of HAMP. Again, we do not know enough about what those modifications look like or how they are being structured. Prior to HAMP, many servicers were creating modifications that themselves were problematic. For example, high percentages of the pre-HAMP modifications provided no payment relief to borrowers and, not surprisingly, then exhibited high re-default rates. Servicers may not be doing everything they can do to ensure that loss mitigation activities, including HAMP and non-HAMP modifications, are responsible and sustainable and subject to strong internal controls. So the problems that have been grabbing headlines in recent weeks are neither new nor amenable to quick fixes. While there may be some specific practices--"robo-signing" among them--that are possible to isolate and eliminate, chronic, uncured problems continue to plague this industry. There is a long track record of actions and cases brought by attorneys general, which some of you in this room have no doubt litigated, demonstrating the harm done to consumers by sloppy or unscrupulous practices. Because consumers cannot choose to hire or fire their servicers (other than by paying off the loan), the industry lacks the level of market discipline imposed in other industries by the working of consumer choice. For this reason, if servicers do not actively maintain adequate and trained staff and do not establish and heed internal controls, if investors do not monitor their servicers' behavior, if regulators do not conduct meaningful examinations, if courts do not stand guard against unfair practices, both substantive and procedural, then it will be much less likely that a well-functioning housing market will reemerge from this crisis. Because the very structure of the loan servicing industry as it currently operates inevitably leads to misaligned incentives and a propensity to defer costly investments, a more significant re-thinking of the basic business model must also be undertaken if we are to avoid repeating prior mistakes. I realize that I'm painting a rather gloomy picture. But be assured that I do believe that we can make real progress on the ground through coordinated public and private action. Let me conclude by talking a little bit about what the Federal Reserve and others are doing to address these issues. Although foreclosure practices have traditionally been--and rightfully should remain--a domain of the states, the Federal Reserve has been expanding its expertise in working with the industry--first, in a review of non-bank subsidiaries in conjunction with other state and federal regulators, and, currently, with a review of loan modification practices by certain servicers. As the current servicing issues began to emerge more clearly, the Federal Reserve and other federal banking agencies initiated an in-depth review of practices at the largest mortgage servicing operations. The review focuses on foreclosure practices generally, but with a concentration on the breakdowns that seem to have led to inaccurate affidavits and other questionable legal documents being used in the foreclosure process. When the interagency review is completed, we will have more information about the extent and significance of these very troubling practices, as well as an understanding of what must be done to prevent them in the future. We have also solicited information and input from other knowledgeable sources, including NCLC, to help us better direct our actions to detect possible systematic problems at specific servicers or within the industry at large. Preliminarily, we have directed certain firms to complete thorough self-assessments of the policies and procedures they use for determining whether to foreclose on a residential mortgage loan, and, in those cases where foreclosure is authorized, an examination of the processes they used to comply with relevant federal and state laws. We have directed these firms not just to address their stated policies and procedures, but to assess how they actually work in practice. At the same time, examiners from the banking agencies will be on-site to review individual loan files, evaluate controls over the selection and management of third-party service providers, and carefully test the assertions that the institutions make in their self-assessments. Institutions will be directed to correct any deficiencies that they discover in their self-assessments or that come to light in the on-site examination process. As a general matter, the Federal Reserve reviews the compliance procedures of the banking organizations that we supervise as part of the examination process. However, federal examiners typically are not experts in the application of each state's laws, especially in an area as complex as mortgage foreclosure procedures. So, federal examiners need to coordinate with their state examiner counterparts who should have a stronger understanding of their state foreclosure laws. For federally chartered institutions, the Federal Reserve requires that the banks we supervise have adequate compliance risk management programs that are being followed. Given the potential ramifications for consumers, the housing market, and the economy as a whole, I believe it's fair to say that every relevant arm of the federal government is taking the underlying dynamics of the mortgage foreclosure crisis very seriously. I also hold out hope that the multi-state work engaged in by the 50 state attorneys general will prove to be a vehicle for resolving the underlying problems. The coordination and expertise at the state level in these matters is an essential corrective. To the extent that legal settlements are structured in such a way as to generate a broader underlying reform of servicing processes, it will be more likely that we can assure consumers that they will not encounter other mortgage harms moving forward. The complex challenges faced by the loan servicing industry right now are emblematic of the problems that emerge in any industry when incentives are fundamentally misaligned, and when the race for short-term profit overwhelms sustainable, long-term goals and practices. Responsible parties within the industry are no doubt already scrambling to fix some of the problems that have surfaced. However, because so much is riding on getting these systems right, and because consumers have such little measure of individual choice or recourse, reliance on pledges from market participants will not be enough. Many of you have been doing your part for years to point out problems in the industry and to give consumers some protection and redress when wronged. The public sector too is stepping up its efforts to monitor firms' actions and systems. Until a better business model is developed that eliminates the business incentives that can potentially harm consumers, there will be a need for close regulatory scrutiny of these issues and for appropriate enforcement action that addresses them. Thank you.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Sixth European Central Bank Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt, Germany The global economy is now well into its second year of recovery from the deep recession triggered by the most devastating financial crisis since the Great Depression. In the most intense phase of the crisis, as a financial conflagration threatened to engulf the global economy, policymakers in both advanced and emerging market economies found themselves confronting common challenges. Amid this shared sense of urgency, national policy responses were forceful, timely, and mutually reinforcing. This policy collaboration was essential in averting a much deeper global economic contraction and providing a foundation for renewed stability and growth. In recent months, however, that sense of common purpose has waned. Tensions among nations over economic policies have emerged and intensified, potentially threatening our ability to find global solutions to global problems. One source of these tensions has been the bifurcated nature of the global economic recovery: Some economies have fully recouped their losses while others have lagged behind. But at a deeper level, the tensions arise from the lack of an agreed-upon framework to ensure that national policies take appropriate account of interdependencies across countries and the interests of the international system as a whole. Accordingly, the essential challenge for policymakers around the world is to work together to achieve a mutually beneficial outcome--namely, a robust global economic expansion that is balanced, sustainable, and less prone to crises. The Two-Speed Global RecoveryInternational policy cooperation is especially difficult now because of the two-speed nature of the global recovery. Specifically, as shown infigure 1, since the recovery began, economic growth in the emerging market economies (the dashed blue line) has far outstripped growth in the advanced economies (the solid red line). These differences are partially attributable to longer-term differences in growth potential between the two groups of countries, but to a significant extent they also reflect the relatively weak pace of recovery thus far in the advanced economies. This point is illustrated byfigure 2, which shows the levels, as opposed to the growth rates, of real gross domestic product (GDP) for the two groups of countries. As you can see, generally speaking, output in the advanced economies has not returned to the levels prevailing before the crisis, and real GDP in these economies remains far below the levels implied by pre-crisis trends. In contrast, economic activity in the emerging market economies has not only fully made up the losses induced by the global recession, but is also rapidly approaching its pre-crisis trend. To cite some illustrative numbers, if we were to extend forward from the end of 2007 the 10-year trends in output for the two groups of countries, we would find that the level of output in the advanced economies is currently about 8 percent below its longer-term trend, whereas economic activity in the emerging markets is only about 1-1/2 percent below the corresponding (but much steeper) trend line for that group of countries. Indeed, for some emerging market economies, the crisis appears to have left little lasting imprint on growth. Notably, since the beginning of 2005, real output has risen more than 70 percent in China and about 55 percent in India. In the United States, the recession officially ended in mid-2009, and--as shown infigure 3--real GDP growth was reasonably strong in the fourth quarter of 2009 and the first quarter of this year. However, much of that growth appears to have stemmed from transitory factors, including inventory adjustments and fiscal stimulus. Since the second quarter of this year, GDP growth has moderated to around 2 percent at an annual rate, less than the Federal Reserve's estimates of U.S. potential growth and insufficient to meaningfully reduce unemployment. And indeed, asfigure 4shows, the U.S. unemployment rate (the solid black line) has stagnated for about eighteen months near 10 percent of the labor force, up from about 5 percent before the crisis; the increase of 5 percentage points in the U.S. unemployment rate is roughly double that seen in the euro area, the United Kingdom, Japan, or Canada. Of some 8.4 million U.S. jobs lost between the peak of the expansion and the end of 2009, only about 900,000 have been restored thus far. Of course, the jobs gap is presumably even larger if one takes into account the natural increase in the size of the working age population over the past three years. Of particular concern is the substantial increase in the share of unemployed workers who have been without work for six months or more (the dashed red line in figure 4). Long-term unemployment not only imposes extreme hardship on jobless people and their families, but, by eroding these workers' skills and weakening their attachment to the labor force, it may also convert what might otherwise be temporary cyclical unemployment into much more intractable long-term structural unemployment. In addition, persistently high unemployment, through its adverse effects on household income and confidence, could threaten the strength and sustainability of the recovery. Low rates of resource utilization in the United States are creating disinflationary pressures. As shown infigure 5, various measures of underlying inflation have been trending downward and are currently around 1 percent, which is below the rate of 2 percent or a bit less that most Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants judge as being most consistent with the Federal Reserve's policy objectives in the long run.1With inflation expectations stable, and with levels of resource slack expected to remain high, inflation trends are expected to be quite subdued for some time. Monetary Policy in the United StatesBecause the genesis of the financial crisis was in the United States and other advanced economies, the much weaker recovery in those economies compared with that in the emerging markets may not be entirely unexpected (although, given their traditional vulnerability to crises, the resilience of the emerging market economies over the past few years is both notable and encouraging). What is clear is that the different cyclical positions of the advanced and emerging market economies call for different policy settings. Although the details of the outlook vary among jurisdictions, most advanced economies still need accommodative policies to continue to lay the groundwork for a strong, durable recovery. Insufficiently supportive policies in the advanced economies could undermine the recovery not only in those economies, but for the world as a whole. In contrast, emerging market economies increasingly face the challenge of maintaining robust growth while avoiding overheating, which may in some cases involve the measured withdrawal of policy stimulus. Let me address the case of the United States specifically. As I described, the U.S. unemployment rate is high and, given the slow pace of economic growth, likely to remain so for some time. Indeed, although I expect that growth will pick up and unemployment will decline somewhat next year, we cannot rule out the possibility that unemployment might rise further in the near term, creating added risks for the recovery. Inflation has declined noticeably since the business cycle peak, and further disinflation could hinder the recovery. In particular, with shorter-term nominal interest rates close to zero, declines in actual and expected inflation imply both higher realized and expected real interest rates, creating further drags on growth.2In light of the significant risks to the economic recovery, to the health of the labor market, and to price stability, the FOMC decided that additional policy support was warranted. The Federal Reserve's policy target for the federal funds rate has been near zero since December 2008, so another means of providing monetary accommodation has been necessary since that time. Accordingly, the FOMC purchased Treasury and agency-backed securities on a large scale from December 2008 through March 2010, a policy that appears to have been quite successful in helping to stabilize the economy and support the recovery during that period. Following up on this earlier success, the Committee announced this month that it would purchase additional Treasury securities. In taking that action, the Committee seeks to support the economic recovery, promote a faster pace of job creation, and reduce the risk of a further decline in inflation that would prove damaging to the recovery. Although securities purchases are a different tool for conducting monetary policy than the more familiar approach of managing the overnight interest rate, the goals and transmission mechanisms are very similar. In particular, securities purchases by the central bank affect the economy primarily by lowering interest rates on securities of longer maturities, just as conventional monetary policy, by affecting the expected path of short-term rates, also influences longer-term rates. Lower longer-term rates in turn lead to more accommodative financial conditions, which support household and business spending. As I noted, the evidence suggests that asset purchases can be an effective tool; indeed, financial conditions eased notably in anticipation of the Federal Reserve's policy announcement. Incidentally, in my view, the use of the term "quantitative easing" to refer to the Federal Reserve's policies is inappropriate. Quantitative easing typically refers to policies that seek to have effects by changing the quantity of bank reserves, a channel which seems relatively weak, at least in the U.S. context. In contrast, securities purchases work by affecting the yields on the acquired securities and, via substitution effects in investors' portfolios, on a wider range of assets. This policy tool will be used in a manner that is measured and responsive to economic conditions. In particular, the Committee stated that it would review its asset-purchase program regularly in light of incoming information and would adjust the program as needed to meet its objectives. Importantly, the Committee remains unwaveringly committed to price stability and does not seek inflation above the level of 2 percent or a bit less that most FOMC participants see as consistent with the Federal Reserve's mandate. In that regard, it bears emphasizing that the Federal Reserve has worked hard to ensure that it will not have any problems exiting from this program at the appropriate time. The Fed's power to pay interest on banks' reserves held at the Federal Reserve will allow it to manage short-term interest rates effectively and thus to tighten policy when needed, even if bank reserves remain high. Moreover, the Fed has invested considerable effort in developing tools that will allow it to drain or immobilize bank reserves as needed to facilitate the smooth withdrawal of policy accommodation when conditions warrant. If necessary, the Committee could also tighten policy by redeeming or selling securities. The foreign exchange value of the dollar has fluctuated considerably during the course of the crisis, driven by a range of factors. A significant portion of these fluctuations has reflected changes in investor risk aversion, with the dollar tending to appreciate when risk aversion is high. In particular, much of the decline over the summer in the foreign exchange value of the dollar reflected an unwinding of the increase in the dollar's value in the spring associated with the European sovereign debt crisis. The dollar's role as a safe haven during periods of market stress stems in no small part from the underlying strength and stability that the U.S. economy has exhibited over the years. Fully aware of the important role that the dollar plays in the international monetary and financial system, the Committee believes that the best way to continue to deliver the strong economic fundamentals that underpin the value of the dollar, as well as to support the global recovery, is through policies that lead to a resumption of robust growth in a context of price stability in the United States. In sum, on its current economic trajectory the United States runs the risk of seeing millions of workers unemployed or underemployed for many years. As a society, we should find that outcome unacceptable. Monetary policy is working in support of both economic recovery and price stability, but there are limits to what can be achieved by the central bank alone. The Federal Reserve is nonpartisan and does not make recommendations regarding specific tax and spending programs. However, in general terms, a fiscal program that combines near-term measures to enhance growth with strong, confidence-inducing steps to reduce longer-term structural deficits would be an important complement to the policies of the Federal Reserve. Global Policy Challenges and TensionsThe two-speed nature of the global recovery implies that different policy stances are appropriate for different groups of countries. As I have noted, advanced economies generally need accommodative policies to sustain economic growth. In the emerging market economies, by contrast, strong growth and incipient concerns about inflation have led to somewhat tighter policies. Unfortunately, the differences in the cyclical positions and policy stances of the advanced and emerging market economies have intensified the challenges for policymakers around the globe. Notably, in recent months, some officials in emerging market economies and elsewhere have argued that accommodative monetary policies in the advanced economies, especially the United States, have been producing negative spillover effects on their economies. In particular, they are concerned that advanced economy policies are inducing excessive capital inflows to the emerging market economies, inflows that in turn put unwelcome upward pressure on emerging market currencies and threaten to create asset price bubbles. As is evident infigure 6, net private capital flows to a selection of emerging market economies (based on national balance of payments data) have rebounded from the large outflows experienced during the worst of the crisis. Overall, by this broad measure, such inflows through the second quarter of this year were not any larger than in the year before the crisis, but they were nonetheless substantial. A narrower but timelier measure of demand for emerging market assets--net inflows to equity and bond funds investing in emerging markets, shown infigure 7--suggests that inflows of capital to emerging market economies have indeed picked up in recent months. To a large degree, these capital flows have been driven by perceived return differentials that favor emerging markets, resulting from factors such as stronger expected growth--both in the short term and in the longer run--and higher interest rates, which reflect differences in policy settings as well as other forces. As figures 6 and 7 show, even before the crisis, fast-growing emerging market economies were attractive destinations for cross-border investment. However, beyond these fundamental factors, an important driver of the rapid capital inflows to some emerging markets is incomplete adjustment of exchange rates in those economies, which leads investors to anticipate additional returns arising from expected exchange rate appreciation. The exchange rate adjustment is incomplete, in part, because the authorities in some emerging market economies have intervened in foreign exchange markets to prevent or slow the appreciation of their currencies. The degree of intervention is illustrated for selected emerging market economies infigure 8. The vertical axis of this graph shows the percent change in the real effective exchange rate in the 12 months through September. The horizontal axis shows the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves as a share of GDP over the same period. The relationship evident in the graph suggests that the economies that have most heavily intervened in foreign exchange markets have succeeded in limiting the appreciation of their currencies. The graph also illustrates that some emerging market economies have intervened at very high levels and others relatively little. Judging from the changes in the real effective exchange rate, the emerging market economies that have largely let market forces determine their exchange rates have seen their competitiveness reduced relative to those emerging market economies that have intervened more aggressively. It is striking that, amid all the concerns about renewed private capital inflows to the emerging market economies, total capital, on net, is still flowing from relatively labor-abundant emerging market economies to capital-abundant advanced economies. In particular, the current account deficit of the United States implies that it experienced net capital inflows exceeding 3 percent of GDP in the first half of this year. A key driver of this "uphill" flow of capital is official reserve accumulation in the emerging market economies that exceeds private capital inflows to these economies. The total holdings of foreign exchange reserves by selected major emerging market economies, shown infigure 9, have risen sharply since the crisis and now surpass $5 trillion‑‑about six times their level a decade ago. China holds about half of the total reserves of these selected economies, slightly more than $2.6 trillion. It is instructive to contrast this situation with what would happen in an international system in which exchange rates were allowed to fully reflect market fundamentals. In the current context, advanced economies would pursue accommodative monetary policies as needed to foster recovery and to guard against unwanted disinflation. At the same time, emerging market economies would tighten their own monetary policies to the degree needed to prevent overheating and inflation. The resulting increase in emerging market interest rates relative to those in the advanced economies would naturally lead to increased capital flows from advanced to emerging economies and, consequently, to currency appreciation in emerging market economies. This currency appreciation would in turn tend to reduce net exports and current account surpluses in the emerging markets, thus helping cool these rapidly growing economies while adding to demand in the advanced economies. Moreover, currency appreciation would help shift a greater proportion of domestic output toward satisfying domestic needs in emerging markets. The net result would be more balanced and sustainable global economic growth. Given these advantages of a system of market-determined exchange rates, why have officials in many emerging markets leaned against appreciation of their currencies toward levels more consistent with market fundamentals? The principal answer is that currency undervaluation on the part of some countries has been part of a long-term export-led strategy for growth and development. This strategy, which allows a country's producers to operate at a greater scale and to produce a more diverse set of products than domestic demand alone might sustain, has been viewed as promoting economic growth and, more broadly, as making an important contribution to the development of a number of countries. However, increasingly over time, the strategy of currency undervaluation has demonstrated important drawbacks, both for the world system and for the countries using that strategy. First, as I have described, currency undervaluation inhibits necessary macroeconomic adjustments and creates challenges for policymakers in both advanced and emerging market economies. Globally, both growth and trade are unbalanced, as reflected in the two-speed recovery and in persistent current account surpluses and deficits. Neither situation is sustainable. Because a strong expansion in the emerging market economies will ultimately depend on a recovery in the more advanced economies, this pattern of two-speed growth might very well be resolved in favor of slow growth for everyone if the recovery in the advanced economies falls short. Likewise, large and persistent imbalances in current accounts represent a growing financial and economic risk. Second, the current system leads to uneven burdens of adjustment among countries, with those countries that allow substantial flexibility in their exchange rates bearing the greatest burden (for example, in having to make potentially large and rapid adjustments in the scale of export-oriented industries) and those that resist appreciation bearing the least. Third, countries that maintain undervalued currencies may themselves face important costs at the national level, including a reduced ability to use independent monetary policies to stabilize their economies and the risks associated with excessive or volatile capital inflows. The latter can be managed to some extent with a variety of tools, including various forms of capital controls, but such approaches can be difficult to implement or lead to microeconomic distortions. The high levels of reserves associated with currency undervaluation may also imply significant fiscal costs if the liabilities issued to sterilize reserves bear interest rates that exceed those on the reserve assets themselves. Perhaps most important, the ultimate purpose of economic growth is to deliver higher living standards at home; thus, eventually, the benefits of shifting productive resources to satisfying domestic needs must outweigh the development benefits of continued reliance on export-led growth. Improving the International SystemThe current international monetary system is not working as well as it should. Currency undervaluation by surplus countries is inhibiting needed international adjustment and creating spillover effects that would not exist if exchange rates better reflected market fundamentals. In addition, differences in the degree of currency flexibility impose unequal burdens of adjustment, penalizing countries with relatively flexible exchange rates. What should be done? The answers differ depending on whether one is talking about the long term or the short term. In the longer term, significantly greater flexibility in exchange rates to reflect market forces would be desirable and achievable. That flexibility would help facilitate global rebalancing and reduce the problems of policy spillovers that emerging market economies are confronting today. The further liberalization of exchange rate and capital account regimes would be most effective if it were accompanied by complementary financial and structural policies to help achieve better global balance in trade and capital flows. For example, surplus countries could speed adjustment with policies that boost domestic spending, such as strengthening the social safety net, improving retail credit markets to encourage domestic consumption, or other structural reforms. For their part, deficit countries need to do more over time to narrow the gap between investment and national saving. In the United States, putting fiscal policy on a sustainable path is a critical step toward increasing national saving in the longer term. Higher private saving would also help. And resources will need to shift into the production of export- and import-competing goods. Some of these shifts in spending and production are already occurring; for example, China is taking steps to boost domestic demand and the U.S. personal saving rate has risen sharply since 2007. In the near term, a shift of the international regime toward one in which exchange rates respond flexibly to market forces is, unfortunately, probably not practical for all economies. Some emerging market economies do not have the infrastructure to support a fully convertible, internationally traded currency and to allow unrestricted capital flows. Moreover, the internal rebalancing associated with exchange rate appreciation--that is, the shifting of resources and productive capacity from production for external markets to production for the domestic market--takes time. That said, in the short term, rebalancing economic growth between the advanced and emerging market economies should remain a common objective, as a two-speed global recovery may not be sustainable. Appropriately accommodative policies in the advanced economies help rather hinder this process. But the rebalancing of growth would also be facilitated if fast-growing countries, especially those with large current account surpluses, would take action to reduce their surpluses, while slow-growing countries, especially those with large current account deficits, take parallel actions to reduce those deficits. Some shift of demand from surplus to deficit countries, which could be compensated for if necessary by actions to strengthen domestic demand in the surplus countries, would accomplish two objectives. First, it would be a down payment toward global rebalancing of trade and current accounts, an essential outcome for long-run economic and financial stability. Second, improving the trade balances of slow-growing countries would help them grow more quickly, perhaps reducing the need for accommodative policies in those countries while enhancing the sustainability of the global recovery. Unfortunately, so long as exchange rate adjustment is incomplete and global growth prospects are markedly uneven, the problem of excessively strong capital inflows to emerging markets may persist. ConclusionAs currently constituted, the international monetary system has a structural flaw: It lacks a mechanism, market based or otherwise, to induce needed adjustments by surplus countries, which can result in persistent imbalances. This problem is not new. For example, in the somewhat different context of the gold standard in the period prior to the Great Depression, the United States and France ran large current account surpluses, accompanied by large inflows of gold. However, in defiance of the so-called rules of the game of the international gold standard, neither country allowed the higher gold reserves to feed through to their domestic money supplies and price levels, with the result that the real exchange rate in each country remained persistently undervalued. These policies created deflationary pressures in deficit countries that were losing gold, which helped bring on the Great Depression.3The gold standard was meant to ensure economic and financial stability, but failures of international coordination undermined these very goals. Although the parallels are certainly far from perfect, and I am certainly not predicting a new Depression, some of the lessons from that grim period are applicable today.4In particular, for large, systemically important countries with persistent current account surpluses, the pursuit of export-led growth cannot ultimately succeed if the implications of that strategy for global growth and stability are not taken into account. Thus, it would be desirable for the global community, over time, to devise an international monetary system that more consistently aligns the interests of individual countries with the interests of the global economy as a whole. In particular, such a system would provide more effective checks on the tendency for countries to run large and persistent external imbalances, whether surpluses or deficits. Changes to accomplish these goals will take considerable time, effort, and coordination to implement. In the meantime, without such a system in place, the countries of the world must recognize their collective responsibility for bringing about the rebalancing required to preserve global economic stability and prosperity. I hope that policymakers in all countries can work together cooperatively to achieve a stronger, more sustainable, and more balanced global economy. 1. Figure 5 shows core and trimmed-mean measures to better display the decline in underlying, or trend, inflation. Total inflation measures have been volatile in recent years but are currently a bit above 1 percent on a 12-month basis. Projections by FOMC participants have indicated that, under appropriate monetary policies, inflation as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures should converge to 2 percent or a bit less in the long run.Return to text 2. Unexpectedly high realizations of real interest rates increase the real burden of household and business debts, relative to what was anticipated when the debt contracts were signed. Higher expected real interest rates deter capital investment and other forms of spending.Return to text 3. See Ben S. Bernanke and Harold James (1991), "The Gold Standard, Deflation, and Financial Crisis in the Great Depression: An International Comparison," in R. Glenn Hubbard, ed.,Financial Markets and Financial Crises,a National Bureau of Economic Research Project Report (Chicago: University of Chicago Press); Barry Eichengreen (1992),Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-1939(New York: Oxford University Press); and Douglas A. Irwin (2010), "Did France Cause the Great Depression? (293 KB PDF)" manuscript, Dartmouth College and National Bureau of Economic Research, September.Return to text 4. See Barry Eichengreen and Peter Temin (2010), "Fetters of Gold and Paper (177 KB PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 16202 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July).Return to text
Governor Kevin Warsh At the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, New York, New York Thank you to the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association for inviting me to your annual meeting.1 The New MalaiseAfter a cyclical boost early this year, the current state of the U.S. economy is unimpressive: modest growth in output, high levels of unemployment, stagnant wages, low levels of consumer and business sentiment, and volatile financial markets. Extrapolating from recent data, many in your business and mine predict only a middling recovery in the next several years. They call it "the new normal." I call it the new malaise. The prevailing theory has it that U.S. policymakers should not deny our foregone fate. We should accept smaller improvements in output and employment and productivity over the horizon. We should not stand before you and feign optimism or profess misplaced hubris. Instead, we should resign ourselves to the new normal now upon us, and conduct policy accordingly. In particular, central bankers in advanced economies--against a backdrop of disinflation--should be comfortably permissive in the conduct of monetary policy, still more encouraging of still more accommodative central bank policies for still longer periods. That is the last best hope, they argue, to preserve the remaining vestiges of a golden age that is no more. I reject this view. I consider this emerging ethos to be dangerous and defeatist and debunked by America's own exceptional economic history. The dour economic tale being told is not inevitable. Our citizens are not unwitting victims of some unavoidable fate. The current period of subpar growth and high unemployment is real, but it need not persist. We should not lower our expectations. We should improve our policies. Broad macroeconomic policies have not changed direction in the past several years. But change they must, if we are to prosper. In my remarks, I will first venture outside the realm of monetary policy. I do this not in the hope of expanding further the remit of the Federal Reserve. To the contrary--I do this because of the heavy burdens being heaped upon monetary policy. To give monetary policy a chance to be more effective, other key macroeconomic policies--fiscal, regulatory, and trade policy--cannot be working at cross-purposes. So, let me discuss how these policies--some long-in-the-making--might be reformed to restore the purpose and promise of our prosperity. Then, I will return to the conduct of monetary policy. Sharing the BurdenWe can no longer afford to tolerate economic policies that are preoccupied with the here-and-now. Chronic short-termism in the conduct of economic policy has done much to bring us to this parlous point. Think of your businesses in the public markets--and the harm that can be done to long-term prospects--if you were to do nothing but yield to the whims of analysts and the tyranny of quarterly measures. The best of your firms most surely deliver on your promises to your stakeholders, but your strategic judgments are made with a focus on the long term. You should accept no less from your country's policymakers. By now, policymakers should be skeptical of the long-term benefits of temporary fixes-- one-off Band-Aids and short-cuts--to do the hard work of resurrecting the world's great economic power. Consider the fiscal impulse. No doubt aggregate demand fell dramatically during the recession, and its weakness continues to mark the economic landscape. Since early 2008, the fiscal authorities sought to fill the hole left by the falloff in demand through large, temporary stimulus--checks-in-the-mail to spur consumption, temporary housing rebates to raise demand, one-time cash-for-clunkers to move inventory, and temporary business tax credits to spur investment. These programs may well have boosted gross domestic product (GDP) for a quarter or two, but that is scarcely a full accounting of their effects. These stimulus programs did little, in my view, to put the economy on a stronger, more sustainable trajectory. Sound fiscal policy must do more than reacquaint consumers with old, bad habits. And sensible fiscal policymakers should set their sights higher than merely coaxing businesses to do today what they would otherwise do tomorrow. Policymakers should also take notice of the critical importance of the supply side of the economy. The supply side establishes its productive capacity. It is a function of the quality and quantity of labor and capital assembled by our companies. Recovery after a recession demands that capital and labor be reallocated. But, the reallocation of these resources to new sectors and companies has been painfully slow and unnecessarily interrupted. We are now feeling the ill effects. If policymakers fail to give the supply side of the economy more considered attention, we will find the new normalists to be right. If untreated, the cyclical becomes structural. Persistent weakness in the labor markets, in effect, permanently disqualifies more workers from a place in the labor force. The natural rate of unemployment moves higher and potential GDP falls. And substantial harm is done to our well-being, threatening to demoralize our populace who knows better. But, this need not be so. Fiscal authorities should resist the temptation to increase government expenditures continually to compensate for shortfalls of private consumption and investment. A strict economic diet of fiscal austerity has greater appeal, a kind of penance owed for the excesses of the past. But root-canal economics does not constitute, in my view, optimal economic policy. The United States would be better off with a third way: pro-growth economic policy. After all, it is stronger growth that the U.S. and world economies most urgently need. The fiscal authorities should begin this exercise by asking two questions: How big a government is desired? And how is it to be funded? We can no longer afford the answers to each of these questions to be at odds. But, the conduct of fiscal policy should not stop there. The government can fund its endeavors in ways that are growth-friendly or growth-stifling. We can no longer afford to be indifferent to the choice. The adoption of pro-growth economic policies would strengthen incentives to invest in capital and labor over the horizon. It would place the country's economic potential at the center of the policy nexus. Pro-growth policies would give us the best opportunity to bring unemployment rates down dramatically. Of course, it demands a highly mobile, educated workforce, and much work needs to be done there. But the good news is that the United States still has the most dynamic, resilient labor force in the world, and the deepest, most liquid capital markets. It is strong growth that can do more to increase government revenues. It is strong growth that can most effectively defease outsized liabilities. And it is strong growth that can pave the way for robust job creation and higher living standards. Pro-growth policies include reform of the tax code to make it simpler and more transparent, and more conducive to long-term investment. The improved regime would reduce policy uncertainty over the life of an investment in labor or capital. And it would provide for far more efficient capital allocation. Pro-growth policies also demand reform in the conduct of regulatory policy. It would provide more timely, clear, and consistent rules so that firms--financial and otherwise--could innovate in a changing economic landscape. It would allow firms to succeed or fail. It would not protect the privileged perch of incumbent firms--no matter their size or scope--at the expense of their smaller, more dynamic competitors. Regulators would be hostile to rent-seeking by the established. And hospitable to the companies whose names we do not know. Finally, the creep of trade protectionism is anathema to pro-growth policies. U.S. companies need access to foreign lands to grow exports. No less important, U.S. companies are made better by global competition. Adopting pro-growth trade policies would signal to the world that the United States is ready to resume its leading role on the world stage. So, how far does the economy find itself from our aspirations? If policies could be moved in the right direction, we could close the gap between the new malaise and the new promise. Policy need not be perfect, but it cannot be so growth-defeating. The U.S. economy is capable of much more than it is delivering. Hence, the deleveraging by our household and business sectors is not a pattern to be arrested, but good prudence to be celebrated. Larger, more liquid corporate balance sheets and higher personal saving rates are the reasonable and right responses to massive government dissaving and unpredictable government policies. The steep correction in housing markets, while painful, lays the foundation for recovery--far better than the countless programs that sought to subsidize and temporize the inevitable repricing. It is these transitions in our market economy--and the adoption of pro-growth fiscal, regulatory, and trade policies--that lay the essential groundwork for greater, more sustainable prosperity. The Conduct of Monetary PolicyThe Federal Reserve is not a repair shop for broken fiscal, trade, or regulatory policies. Given what ails us, additional monetary policy measures are, at best, poor substitutes for more powerful pro-growth policies.The Fed can lose its hard-earned credibility--and monetary policy can lose its considerable sway--if its policies overpromise or underdeliver. We should be leery of drawing inapt lessons from the crisis to the current policy conjuncture. Lender-of-last-resort authority cannot readily be converted into fighter-of-first resort power. Monetary policy can surely have great influence--most notably by establishing stable prices and appropriate financial conditions--on the real economy. By my way of thinking, the risk-reward ratio for Fed action peaks in times of crisis when it has a full toolbox and markets are functioning poorly. But when non-traditional tools are needed to loosen policy and markets are functioning more or less normally--even with output and employment below trend--the risk-reward ratio for policy action is decidedly less favorable. In my view, these risks increase with the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. As a result, we cannot and should not be as aggressive as conventional policy rules--cultivated in more benign environments--might judge appropriate. Last week, my colleagues and I on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) engaged in this debate. The FOMC announced its intent to expand the Fed's balance sheet by purchasing an additional $75 billion of long-term Treasury securities per month through the second quarter of 2011. The FOMC did not make an unconditional or open-ended commitment. And I consider the FOMC's action as necessarily limited, circumscribed, and subject to regular review. Policies should be altered if certain objectives are satisfied, purported benefits disappoint, or potential risks threaten to materialize. The goals of the Federal Reserve's policies are to promote economic recovery and to help ensure price stability, consistent with our mandate. I am less optimistic than some that additional asset purchases will have significant, durable benefits for the real economy. Of course, benefits may well be more substantial than I anticipate. Lower risk-free rates and higher equity prices--if sustained--could strengthen household and business balance sheets, and raise confidence in the strength of the economy. Modestly higher rates of inflation could increase nominal growth, and ostensibly place the economy on a stronger trajectory. But, expanding the Fed's balance sheet is not a free option. There are significant risks that bear careful monitoring by the FOMC. If the recent weakness in the dollar, run-up in commodity prices, and other forward-looking indicators are sustained and passed along into final prices, the Fed's price stability objective might no longer be a compelling policy rationale. In such a case--even with the unemployment rate still high--the FOMC would have cause to consider the path of policy. This is truer still if inflation expectations increase materially. And if the Fed's holdings work predominantly through the so-called portfolio balance channel, the cessation of purchases should not reverse any benefits attained. The Fed's increased presence in the market for long-term Treasury securities also poses nontrivial risks. The Treasury market is special. It plays a unique role in the global financial system. It is a corollary to the dollar's role as the world's reserve currency. The prices assigned to Treasury securities--the risk-free rate--are the foundation from which the price of virtually every asset in the world is calculated. As the Fed's balance sheet expands, it becomes more of a price maker than a price taker in the Treasury market. And if market participants come to doubt these prices--or their reliance on these prices proves fleeting--risk premiums across asset classes and geographies could move unexpectedly. The shock that hit the financial markets in 2008 upon the imminent failures of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac gives some indication of the harm that can be done when assets perceived to be relatively riskless turn out not to be. In the United States, the Fed's expanded participation in the long-term Treasury market also runs the more subtle risk of obfuscating price signals about total U.S. indebtedness. Long-term economic growth necessitates putting the U.S. fiscal trajectory on a sounder footing. The fiscal authorities need as clear an early warning system as possible, not a handy excuse to delay. And overseas--as a consequence of more-expansive U.S. monetary policy and distortions in the international monetary system--we see an increasing tendency by policymakers to intervene in currency markets, administer unilateral measures, institute ad hoc capital controls, and resort to protectionist policies. Extraordinary measures tend to beget extraordinary countermeasures. Second-order effects can have first-order consequences. Heightened tensions in currency and capital markets could result in a more protracted and difficult global recovery. These, too, are developments that the FOMC must monitor carefully. Responsible monetary policy in the current environment requires attention not only to near-term macroeconomic conditions, but also to corollary risks with long-term effects. Should these risks threaten to materialize, however one gauges the probabilities, I am confident that members of the FOMC will have the tools and convictions to adjust policies appropriately. ConclusionMonetary policy has done much to ease credit conditions and improve financial market functioning. And it is playing an important role in setting the conditions for the real economy to prosper. But, the Federal Reserve cannot and should not do it alone. Other policymakers must bear their burden and do their part to encourage more-robust economic growth and establish the conditions for stronger employment. 1.The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text