Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform, Washington, D.C. I am pleased to be here today at the first meeting of the National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform. The President has assigned Chairman Bowles, Chairman Simpson, and their colleagues the very substantial task of charting a path to fiscal sustainability for the United States. The deliberations of this commission are especially timely because some of the fundamental sources of long-term fiscal imbalances are no longer distant forecasts, but instead are unfolding in the here and now. The task of developing and implementing sustainable fiscal policies is daunting, but meeting this challenge is absolutely essential. History makes clear that failure to achieve fiscal sustainability will, over time, sap the nation's economic vitality, reduce our living standards, and greatly increase the risk of economic and financial instability. Long-Term Fiscal ChallengesOur nation's fiscal position has deteriorated appreciably since the onset of the recession and the financial crisis. The exceptional increase in the deficit has in large part reflected the effects of the weak economy on tax revenues and spending, along with the costs of policy actions taken to ease the recession and steady financial markets. As the economy and financial markets continue to recover, and as the actions taken to provide economic stimulus and promote financial stability are phased out, the budget deficit should narrow over the next few years. However, even after economic and financial conditions have returned to normal, in the absence of further policy actions, the federal budget appears set to remain on an unsustainable path. A variety of projections that extrapolate current policies and make plausible assumptions about the future evolution of the economy show a structural budget gap that is both large relative to the size of the economy and increasing over time. Moreover, as debt and deficits grow, so will the associated interest payments, an obligation that in turn further increases projected deficits. Unfortunately, we cannot grow our way out of this problem. No credible forecast suggests that future rates of growth of the U.S. economy will be sufficient to close these deficits without significant changes to our fiscal policies. Among the primary forces putting upward pressure on the deficit are rapidly rising health-care costs and the aging of the U.S. population. Federal spending for Medicare and Medicaid has increased substantially as a share of our national income over the past several decades, spurred both by the rising number of beneficiaries in these programs and by ongoing increases in spending per beneficiary. Under policies in place prior to the recent enactment of the health-care bill, budget projections showed that spending for Medicare and Medicaid would roughly double as a share of national income over the next two decades and would continue to rise significantly further in subsequent years. At this point, the effects of the recent legislation on federal health-care spending over the long term are uncertain, in part because they depend importantly on implementation. But we do know that continued increases in health-care costs at the rate seen in recent decades, together with the aging of the population, would put enormous pressures on the federal budget in coming years. Controlling health-care costs while still providing high-quality care to those who need it will be critical not only for budgetary reasons, but for maintaining the dynamism of the broader economy as well. The aging of the U.S. population will also strain the Social Security program, as the number of individuals expected to be working and paying taxes into the system is rising more slowly than the number of people projected to be receiving benefits. This year, there are about 5 individuals between the ages of 20 and 64 for each person aged 65 and older. By the time most of the baby boomers have retired in 2030, this ratio is projected to have declined to around 3. The projected fiscal imbalances associated with the Social Security system are notably smaller than those for federal health programs, but they still are significant and thus present an important challenge for policy. Elsewhere in the budget, noninterest spending for programs outside of Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security has comprised roughly half of total outlays over the past couple of decades. These expenditures support national defense and homeland security, education, transportation, and income-security programs, along with many other activities. The commission will have the difficult job of weighing the economic, social, and other benefits of these programs and comparing the implications of cuts in these areas against other means of closing the fiscal gap. Choices regarding Medicare, Social Security, and other spending programs cannot be made in a vacuum but must be combined with decisions about how much revenue the government will raise and how it will raise it. No laws are more basic than the laws of arithmetic: For fiscal sustainability, whatever level of spending is chosen, revenues must be sufficient to sustain that spending in the long run. At the same time, economic vitality is enhanced when taxes are not excessive and are collected through a system that is economically efficient, equitable, and transparent. At present, a broad consensus exists that the U.S. tax code does not satisfy these criteria and is in need of reform. I suspect that it is too much to ask the commission to review the tax code in detail, but a full picture of our budgetary dilemma will require attention to the strengths and weaknesses of our current system of raising revenue. The Path to Fiscal SustainabilityThe ultimate goal of the commission's efforts should be to put us on a path to fiscal sustainability. One widely accepted criterion for sustainability is that the ratio of federal debt held by the public to national income remain at least stable (or perhaps even decline) in the longer term. This goal can be achieved by bringing spending, excluding interest payments, roughly into line with revenues. Unfortunately, most projections suggest that we are far from this goal, and that without significant changes to current policy, the ratio of federal debt to national income will continue to rise sharply. Thus, the reality is that the Congress, the Administration, and the American people will have to choose among making modifications to entitlement programs such as Medicare and Social Security, restraining federal spending on everything else, accepting higher taxes, or some combination thereof. Achieving long-term fiscal sustainability will be difficult, but the costs of failing to do so could be very high. Increasing levels of government debt relative to the size of the economy can lead to higher interest rates, which inhibit capital formation and productivity growth--and might even put the current economic recovery at risk. To the extent that higher debt increases our reliance on foreign borrowing, an ever-larger share of our future income would be devoted to interest payments on federal debt held abroad. Moreover, other things being equal, increased federal debt implies higher taxes in the future to cover the associated interest costs--higher taxes that may create disincentives to work, save, hire, and invest. High levels of debt also decrease the ability of policymakers to respond to future economic and financial shocks; indeed, a loss of investor confidence in the ability of a government to achieve fiscal sustainability can itself be a source of significant economic and financial instability, as we have seen in a number of countries in recent decades. Neither experience nor economic theory clearly indicates the threshold at which government debt begins to endanger prosperity and economic stability. But given the significant costs and risks associated with a rapidly rising federal debt, our nation should soon put in place a credible plan for reducing deficits to sustainable levels over time. Doing so earlier rather than later will not only help maintain the U.S. government's credibility in financial markets, thereby holding down interest costs, but it will also ultimately prove less disruptive by avoiding abrupt shifts in policy and by giving those affected by budget changes more time to adapt. ConclusionThe path forward contains many difficult tradeoffs and choices, but postponing those choices and failing to put the nation's finances on a sustainable long-run trajectory would ultimately do great damage to our economy. I thank the members of the commission for their willingness to serve and urge them to demonstrate to the American people that serious, well-intentioned citizens can come together to craft credible and sustainable solutions to our budgetary challenges.
The Federal Reserve Board in April will begin a statistical study of household finances, the Survey of Consumer Finances, that will provide policymakers with important insight into the economic condition of all types of American families. The 2010 survey will contain a new set of questions on households' small businesses. The survey has been undertaken every three years since 1983. It is being conducted for the Board by the National Opinion Research Center (NORC), a social science research organization at the University of Chicago, through December of this year. The data collected will provide a representative picture of what Americans own--from houses and cars to stocks and bonds--how and how much they borrow and how they bank. Past study results have been important in policy discussions regarding pension and Social Security reform, tax policy, deposit insurance reform, consumer debt and a broad range of other issues. "This survey is one of the nation's primary sources of information on the financial condition of different types of households," Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben S. Bernanke said in a letter to prospective survey participants. "Our previous surveys, which date back to 1962, have helped the Federal Reserve and other parts of the government make policy decisions and have also supported a wide variety of basic research, public discussion, and education." The new questions on small businesses will address sources of funding to start and to operate the businesses, as well as limitations on borrowing that may have been experienced. A small set of related questions will gather information on the financial institutions used by the businesses. Taken together with other survey variables, they will allow a better understanding of the relationship between households' personal finances and those of their businesses. Participants in the study are chosen at random from 79 areas, including metropolitan areas and rural counties across the United States, using a scientific sampling procedure. A representative of NORC contacts each potential participant personally to explain the study and request time for an interview. "I assure you that we give the highest priority to guarding the privacy of all survey participants and the confidentiality of their answers," Chairman Bernanke said. NORC uses names and addresses only for the administration of the survey, and that identifying information will be destroyed at the close of the 2010 study. NORC is required never to give the names and addresses of participants to anyone at the Federal Reserve or anywhere else. Summary results for the 2010 study will be published in early 2012 after all data from the survey have been assessed and analyzed. The attachedletter from Chairman Bernankewas mailed to approximately 13,000 households urging their participation in the study.
A new online publication to help consumers better understand how to protect themselves against harmful gift card practices was unveiled Monday by the Federal Reserve Board. What You Need to Know: New Rules for Gift Cardsis the third publication in a series designed to explain Board regulations to consumers in an easy-to-understand format. This publication describes the types of cards that are covered under gift card rules released last month and highlights key protections, including new limits on expiration dates, requirements for clear fee disclosures, and fee restrictions. Gift cards have become a common and convenient gift alternative. The Board's new rules help ensure that consumers who give or receive gift cards are not surprised by expired cards and are protected from certain fees that reduce their value. More information on the Board's gift card rules, which go into effect August 22, 2010, can be found at:www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20100323a.htm.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced that it will hold four public hearings, beginning in July, on potential revisions to Regulation C, which implements the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act. The act requires mortgage lenders to provide detailed annual reports of their mortgage lending activity to regulators and the public. Consumers, community and consumer organizations, mortgage lenders, and other interested parties will be invited to participate in the hearings. The hearings will serve three objectives. First, the Board will gather information to evaluate whether the 2002 revisions to Regulation C, which required lenders to report mortgage pricing data, helped provide useful and accurate information about the mortgage market. Second, the hearings will provide information that will help the Board assess the need for additional data and other improvements. Finally, the hearings will help identify emerging issues in the mortgage market that may warrant additional research. The hearings will take place at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta on July 15, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco on August 5, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago on September 16, and the Federal Reserve Board in Washington, D.C. on September 24. All hearings will include panel discussions by invited speakers. Other interested parties may deliver oral statements of five minutes or less during an "open-mike" period. Written statements of any length may be submitted for the record. As more information about the agenda becomes available, it will be posted on the Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the New $100 Note Unveiling Event, U.S. Treasury Department, Washington, D.C. Thank you, Madame Treasurer. A sound currency is the bedrock of a sound economy. Therefore, the United States government must stay ahead of counterfeiters and protect the integrity of our currency. The three agencies represented here today all share this important responsibility, and today we come together to unveil the latest phase in our efforts--the new design for the $100 note. Since the U.S. notes first issued by the Treasury Department in 1862, our national currency has played an integral role in the fortunes of our country. The Federal Reserve only assumed responsibility for issuing U.S. currency following the passage of the Federal Reserve Act in 1913. As our nation's central bank, we have a wide range of responsibilities related to paper money, from ensuring an adequate supply to protecting and maintaining confidence in our currency. Together with our partners at the Treasury Department, its Bureau of Engraving and Printing, and the United States Secret Service, we continuously monitor the counterfeiting threats for each denomination, and make redesign decisions based on these threats. This job has become more complex in recent years as technology advances and U.S. dollar flows expand and increase. In just the past 25 years, the value of Federal Reserve notes in circulation has grown from $180 billion to $890 billion, an increase of almost 400 percent. And while in the past, most U.S. dollars were held domestically, today many of these notes circulate outside of our borders. In fact, we estimate that as many as two-thirds of all $100 notes circulate outside the United States. For this reason, we must ensure that the people around the world who rely on the $100 note are educated about changes that we make to its design. We will unveil the new design for the $100 note in just a few moments and the Federal Reserve will begin putting these notes into circulation on February 10, 2011. In the intervening months the Federal Reserve, together with our partners represented here today, will reach out to businesses and consumers all over the world to raise awareness about the new design and explain how to use its security features. This global public education program is crucial to the successful introduction of the new $100 note, because a well-informed public is our first and best line of defense against counterfeiting. It is important to understand that when this new-design $100 note is issued on February 10, 2011, the approximately 6.5 billion older-design $100s already in circulation will remain legal tender. U.S. currency users should know they will not have to trade in their older design notes when the new ones begin circulating. We look forward to working with you all on the successful introduction of this new $100 note. Thank you.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a consent Cease and Desist Order by and among PB Financial Group, Inc., Denver, Colorado, a registered bank holding company, Premier Bank, Denver, Colorado, a state chartered member bank, the Federal Reserve Board, and the Colorado Division of Banking. A copy of the Order is attached.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Dallas Regional Chamber, Dallas, Texas This is a momentous time. During the past two and a half years, our nation has endured the worst global financial crisis since the Great Depression, a crisis that in turn helped cause a deep recession both here and abroad. During some of the worst phases of the crisis, a new depression seemed a real possibility. Fortunately, today the financial crisis looks to be mostly behind us, and the economy seems to have stabilized and is beginning to grow again. But we are far from being out of the woods. Many Americans are still grappling with unemployment or foreclosure, or both. Cities and states are struggling to maintain essential services. And, although much of the financial system is functioning more or less normally, bank lending remains very weak, threatening the ability of small businesses to finance expansion and new hiring. In my comments today, I will briefly describe the origins of the financial crisis and economic downturn, with a particular focus on the policy response of my institution, the Federal Reserve. I will then turn to some near-term and longer-term challenges facing our country. Origins of the CrisisThe financial crisis that began in the summer of 2007 was an extraordinarily complex event with multiple causes. Its immediate trigger was a downturn in the national housing market that followed a long period of rapid construction and rising home prices. The housing slump in turn brought to light some very poor lending practices, especially for subprime mortgages extended to less-creditworthy borrowers. Relative to the global financial system, the market for subprime mortgages was quite small, probably less than 1 percent of global financial assets. How, then, did problems in this market appear to have such widespread consequences? One important reason is that the subprime mortgage market was closely linked to a broader framework for credit provision that came to be known as the shadow banking system. That broader framework, at least as it was structured during the run-up to the crisis, proved deeply flawed. The innovation underlying the shadow banking system was that it helped provide a wide range of borrowers indirect access to global credit markets. For example, originators of subprime mortgages did not typically retain the loans they made on their own books. Instead, the mortgages were packaged together in complex ways, sometimes with other types of loans, stamped with a seal of approval from one or more credit rating agencies, and sold to investors worldwide, thus‑‑it was thought--broadly dispersing the underlying risks. Credit risks were further dispersed--again, at least in theory--through the use of derivative financial instruments such as credit default swaps. Importantly, residential mortgage markets were not the only markets caught up in the boom. In part because large flows of capital into the United States drove down the returns available on many traditional long-term investments, such as Treasury bonds, investors' appetite for alternative investments--such as loans to finance corporate mergers or commercial real estate projects--increased greatly in the years leading up to the crisis. These securities too were packaged and sold through the shadow banking system. As we now know, however, neither the investors, nor the rating agencies, nor the regulators, nor even the firms that designed the securities fully appreciated the risks that those securities entailed. Nor were the risks as widely dispersed as thought: For example, many complex securities were held in off-balance-sheet vehicles financed by short-term loans. When investors lost confidence in the underlying securities and pulled their funding, many firms that sponsored the off-balance sheet vehicles found that they were bound by explicit or implicit promises to stand behind the securities. Together with other direct or indirect exposures to risky debt, these commitments left financial institutions dangerously exposed to rising losses. These risks grew rapidly in the period before the crisis, in part because the regulators--like most financial firms and investors--did not fully understand or appreciate them. But significant gaps in the regulatory framework itself also contributed to the inadequate government response. For example, firms like the insurance giant American International Group (AIG), which sold credit insurance on large quantities of risky securities, or the investment bank Lehman Brothers, which speculated heavily in these securities, were not subject by law to strong consolidated supervision by federal regulators. Moreover, none of the federal regulators had a mandate or sufficient powers to evaluate and respond to the risks posed by large financial organizations to the financial system as a whole. Thus, the stage was set for the unraveling that began in the summer of 2007 and continued throughout 2008. As house prices and the equity of homeowners fell, mortgage delinquencies and defaults soared. As I mentioned, investors--stunned by the resulting losses on mortgage-backed securities and other credit instruments they had believed to be safe--pulled back from a wide range of credit markets and financial institutions. As funding dried up, losses mounted, and confidence plummeted, a number of major financial firms, both here and abroad, came under severe pressure. In March 2008, the investment house Bear Stearns became the first major firm to come to the brink of failure, nearly collapsing before being purchased, with government assistance, by JPMorgan Chase. In August, the two largest players in the housing market, the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, were taken into conservatorship. In September, the sharply intensifying panic hit the investment bank Lehman Brothers, and soon after, AIG. Much as in a traditional run on a bank, the creditors and counterparties of these companies raced to call in loans or demand extra collateral, ratcheting up the pressure on already shaky firms. Concerted government attempts to find a buyer for Lehman proved unavailing; lacking sufficient collateral to secure a Federal Reserve loan, the company's only option was bankruptcy. In contrast to Lehman, AIG had sufficient assets to secure credit from the Federal Reserve and thus avoid imminent failure. I have said before that nothing made me angrier during the crisis than the irresponsible decisions at AIG that put our entire financial system and economy at grave risk and left the government with no good options. However, with the financial system already teetering on the brink of collapse, the disorderly failure of AIG, the world's largest insurance company, would have undoubtedly led to even greater financial chaos and a far deeper economic slump than the very severe one we have experienced. The rapidly worsening crisis soon spread beyond financial institutions into the money and capital markets more generally. Losses on Lehman's commercial paper at a prominent money market mutual fund led to a run on that fund and many others; over the subsequent weeks, fearful money-fund investors withdrew more than $400 billion. Equity prices fell precipitously, large firms and banks hoarded cash, and short-term credit became available, if at all, only at very high interest rates and for very short terms. As we now know, the financial turmoil dealt an economic body blow that spread worldwide. Businesses slashed production and payrolls, including in countries that had not thus far experienced much effect. International trade collapsed, and many nations dependent on trade experienced even sharper slides in economic activity than the United States. The Federal Reserve's Policy ResponseAs the crisis became global, the policy response became global as well. After watershed meetings in Washington of finance ministers and central bank governors on October 10-11, 2008, many countries, including the United States, announced comprehensive plans to stabilize their banking systems. They expanded deposit insurance, injected public capital into banks, guaranteed bank-issued debt, and increased access to funding from central banks.1This strong and unprecedented response--a sharp contrast to the failures of international cooperation that helped make the depression of the 1930s so devastating‑‑proved broadly effective. During the subsequent months the risk of a global financial meltdown and economic collapse receded. In support of these efforts to stabilize the financial system, and in its traditional central bank role as backstop liquidity provider, the Federal Reserve developed innovative programs to provide well-collateralized, mostly short-term credit to the financial system. Without this credit, otherwise sound financial institutions could have been forced to dump assets onto the market, further depressing prices, or even been driven into failure, intensifying the crisis. We provided this liquidity through a number of channels. To help stabilize banks of all sizes, we eased the terms of lending to banks through our regular short-term lending facility, known as the discount window, and auctioned fixed quantities of discount window credit. We also expanded access to our short-term lending to many securities firms, whose normal funding sources had been disrupted by the crisis. And we worked closely with the Treasury to develop programs that successfully ended the run on the money market mutual funds. The Federal Reserve also acted to help restore normal functioning in key financial markets. We established a backstop commercial paper facility to help address severe strains in the commercial paper market, on which many firms rely to finance their operations. To improve the availability of credit more broadly, we created a facility to support the issuance of securities backed by a range of assets including small business loans, auto loans, credit card receivables, student loans, and commercial real estate. Additionally, after heavy foreign demand for dollar funding began to disrupt money markets and squeeze credit availability in the United States, we established cooperative programs with 14 foreign central banks to allow them to provide sufficient dollar funding to help calm markets in their own jurisdictions. Importantly, these programs--most of which have been deemed no longer necessary and shut down--not only helped stabilize financial conditions and restart the flow of credit to American families and businesses, they did so at no financial cost to taxpayers and with no credit losses. Beyond its actions to help stabilize the financial system, the Federal Reserve also responded to the deepening recession with an aggressive monetary policy, in both conventional and less conventional forms. We lowered interest rates sharply, including, in October 2008, an unprecedented coordinated rate cut with five other major central banks. For the past 15 months, we have maintained our target short-term interest rate near zero. In a less conventional operation, we also purchased more than $1.7 trillion of Treasury securities and securities issued or guaranteed by the housing-related GSEs. These purchases contributed to a marked improvement in credit markets. In particular, they significantly lowered mortgage interest rates, which made housing more affordable and allowed millions of Americans to reduce their payments by refinancing. Finally, the Federal Reserve also responded to the crisis in its capacity as a bank supervisor. Last spring we led a forward-looking, simultaneous evaluation of the financial conditions and capital positions of 19 of the largest bank holding companies in the United States, with the Treasury committing to provide public capital as needed. The goal of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program--popularly called the stress test--was to ensure that these firms held sufficient capital, in both quantity and quality, to withstand worse-than-expected economic conditions over the subsequent two years and yet remain healthy and capable of lending to creditworthy borrowers.2This exercise was unprecedented in scale and scope, as well as in the range of information we made public regarding the projected losses and revenues of the tested firms, which allowed private analysts to judge for themselves the credibility of the exercise. Markets responded favorably to the release of the stress test results, and many of the tested banks were able to raise substantial amounts of capital from investors and to repay government capital. Overall, the policy actions implemented over the past two and a half years by the Federal Reserve and other agencies in the United States and abroad have helped stabilize key global financial markets: Short-term funding markets are essentially back to normal, corporate bond issuance has been strong, and stock prices have partially recovered. Bank lending remains constrained, as I will discuss in a moment, but critically, fears of financial collapse have lessened substantially. Most important, the economy has stabilized and is growing again, although we can hardly be satisfied when 1 out of every 10 U.S. workers is unemployed and family finances remain under great stress. Toward Better Financial Regulation and SupervisionAs I noted earlier, we found some of the choices that we faced during the financial crisis exceedingly distasteful. The Federal Reserve has always recognized the importance of allowing markets to work, and government oversight of financial firms will never be fully effective without the aid of strong market discipline. The decisions we took, in collaboration with the Treasury, to assist distressed firms during the height of the crisis thus ran strongly against the grain of our institution. However, as I said, our options under extremely difficult circumstances were bad and worse, as our ability to respond effectively was sharply limited by the lack of tools available to act in a crisis. In particular, the U.S. government lacked any workable means to address the potential disorderly failure of a large, systemically important firm in a way that protected the economy and taxpayers from severe collateral damage. With the crisis largely behind us, we as a country must now turn to fixing structural weaknesses in the financial system, in particular in the regulatory framework. We need tough new rules to make financial institutions safer and to constrain excessive risk-taking, and we need a regulatory framework that gives the Federal Reserve and other agencies the ability to address risks to the financial system as a whole. Critically, so that we will never again face the unpalatable choice between bailouts and a disorderly bankruptcy that threatens to bring down our financial system, we must bring an end to the belief that some financial institutions are too big to fail. To do that, we urgently need a new resolution regime for large, complex, and interconnected financial firms, similar to that already established for banks. To end too-big-to-fail, the new regime should permit regulators to close a failing firm and impose losses on shareholders and creditors; indeed, I would argue that no financial instrument counted as regulatory capital should beallowedto receive any protection from losses. At the same time, regulators must have the tools necessary to minimize the associated disruption to the financial system and the broader economy.3 The Federal Reserve strongly supports ongoing congressional efforts to reform our financial regulatory framework, but we are not waiting for new legislation to make improvements. We have been working hard to strengthen our own oversight of financial institutions and to broaden our field of vision to include potential risks to the financial system as a whole as well as risks to individual firms. For example, we have played a key part in ongoing international efforts to ensure that systemically critical financial institutions hold more and higher-quality capital and have sufficient liquid assets on hand to be able to survive a market crisis. And we are leading the international and domestic initiative to push banking organizations of all sizes to ensure their compensation practices link pay to performance and do not encourage excessive risk-taking. To make our supervision more effective and better able to identify risks to the financial system as a whole, we are also making fundamental changes to our daily operations. For example, we have adopted a more multidisciplinary approach that makes better use of the wide range of expertise and skills at the Federal Reserve‑‑in economics, financial markets, payments systems, and other specialties, as well as bank supervision. We will be doing more cross-firm comparisons to better understand differences in the practices of different firms and the risks they face, and we will be complementing on-site examinations with off-site, quantitative analyses by experts in a range of disciplines. As we improve our supervision, we will be sure not to lose sight of the diversity of our banking system. Banks of all sizes, including regional and community banks, make critical contributions to our economy; thus, we must continue our efforts to ensure the stability and vitality of smaller banks as well as larger ones. As we've been working to make our supervision more effective, we have also been taking care to ensure we do not inadvertently impede sound lending. Businesses need access to credit to maintain or expand their payrolls and make productive investments. Banks need to continue to lend to creditworthy borrowers to earn a profit and remain strong. If bankers become overly conservative in response to past lending mistakes--or if examiners force such behavior--it will hurt bankers' own long-term interests and the economy in general. For this reason, we have joined with the other federal banking agencies to issue a series of policy statements to examiners: on the importance of bank lending to creditworthy borrowers, on small business lending, and on commercial real estate loan restructuring.4We have followed up this formal guidance with training for examiners and outreach to the banking industry. Our message is a simple one: Institutions should strive to meet the needs of creditworthy borrowers, and the supervisory agencies should do all they can to help, not hinder, those efforts. We also must support sensible efforts to work with troubled borrowers to bring them back into good standing. To help us better understand what is going on in the banks we supervise and in the communities they serve, we continue to seek many views. For example, our Reserve Banks across the country are holding meetings with community bankers and others to talk about opportunities for and barriers to small business lending. Additionally, the Federal Reserve continues to demonstrate its commitment to consumer protection in financial services. We have recently overhauled the regulations governing mortgage transactions and implemented enhanced protections for credit card accounts and private student loans. We also have made new rules for overdraft protection programs and for gift cards. In addition, we have expanded our compliance program for enforcing consumer protection rules at nonbank subsidiaries of bank holding companies and foreign banking organizations. In these and other areas, we at the Federal Reserve will continue to improve how we regulate and supervise financial firms while continuing to do all in our power to identify and mitigate risks that may endanger the financial system as a whole. Economic ChallengesNotwithstanding the progress that I've noted, critical challenges--both near term and longer term--remain. We have yet to see evidence of a sustained recovery in the housing market. Mortgage delinquencies for both subprime and prime loans continue to rise as do foreclosures. The commercial real estate sector remains troubled, which is a concern for communities and for banks holding commercial real estate loans. Some of the toughest problems are in the job market. The unemployment rate has edged off its recent peak, but at 9.7 percent, it is still close to its highest level since the early 1980s. Although layoffs have eased in recent months, hiring remains very weak. More than 40 percent of the unemployed have been out of work six months or longer, nearly double the share of a year ago. I am particularly concerned about that statistic, because long spells of unemployment erode skills and lower the longer-term income and employment prospects of these workers. That said, my best guess is that economic growth, supported by the Federal Reserve's stimulative monetary policy, will be sufficient to slowly reduce the unemployment rate over the coming year. If economic conditions improve, as I expect, we should see increased optimism among consumers and greater willingness on the part of banks to lend, which in turn should aid the recovery. Meanwhile, for the near term, inflation appears to be well controlled. Productivity improvements have helped firms control costs, and little pricing power is evident. Inflation expectations, as measured in the financial markets or in surveys, appear stable. What about the longer term? The economist John Maynard Keynes said that in the long run, we are all dead.5If he were around today he might say that, in the long run, we are all on Social Security and Medicare. That brings me to two interrelated economic challenges our nation faces: meeting the economic needs of an aging population and regaining fiscal sustainability. The U.S. population will change significantly in coming decades with the combined effect of the decline in fertility rates following the baby boom and increasing longevity. As our population ages, the ratio of working-age Americans to older Americans will fall, which could hold back the long-run prospects for living standards in our country. The aging of the population also will have a major impact on the federal budget, most dramatically on the Social Security and Medicare programs, particularly if the cost of health care continues to rise at its historical rate. Thus, we must begin now to prepare for this coming demographic transition.6 The economist Herb Stein once famously said, "If something cannot go on forever, it will stop."7That adage certainly applies to our nation's fiscal situation. Inevitably, addressing the fiscal challenges posed by an aging population will require a willingness to make difficult choices. The arithmetic is, unfortunately, quite clear. To avoid large and unsustainable budget deficits, the nation will ultimately have to choose among higher taxes, modifications to entitlement programs such as Social Security and Medicare, less spending on everything else from education to defense, or some combination of the above. These choices are difficult, and it always seems easier to put them off--until the day they cannot be put off any more. But unless we as a nation demonstrate a strong commitment to fiscal responsibility, in the longer run we will have neither financial stability nor healthy economic growth. Today the economy continues to operate well below its potential, which implies that a sharp near-term reduction in our fiscal deficit is probably neither practical nor advisable. However, nothing prevents us from beginning now to develop a credible plan for meeting our long-run fiscal challenges. Indeed, a credible plan that demonstrated a commitment to achieving long-run fiscal sustainability could lead to lower interest rates and more rapid growth in the near term. Our economic challenges, both near term and longer term, are daunting indeed. Nonetheless, I remain optimistic that they can be met. History has demonstrated time and again the inherent resilience and recuperative powers of the American economy. Our country's competitive, market-based system, its flexible capital and labor markets, its tradition of entrepreneurship, and its knack for innovation have ensured that the nation's economy has surmounted difficult challenges in the past. I do not doubt that we can do so once again. Footnotes 1.In addition, a number of foreign governments--including the United Kingdom, Ireland, Germany, Belgium, France, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, and Iceland--took steps to prevent the disorderly failures of distressed financial firms.Return to text 2.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve, OCC, and FDIC Release Results of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program," press release, May 7; and Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 2009 Financial Markets Conference, Jekyll Island, Ga., May 11.Return to text 3.Because most large financial firms are multinational, the development of an effective regime will require consultation and collaboration with authorities abroad.Return to text 4.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers," joint press release, November 12; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Office of Thrift Supervision, and Conference of State Bank Supervisors (2010), "Regulators Issue Statement on Lending to Creditworthy Small Businesses," joint press release, February 5; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (2009), "Prudent Commercial Real Estate Loan Workouts," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 09-7 (October 30); and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council and Office of Thrift Supervision (2009), "Policy Statement on Prudent Commercial Real Estate Loan Workouts," joint policy statement, October 30.Return to text 5.See John Maynard Keynes (1923),A Tract on Monetary Reform(London: Macmillan and Co.), as quoted in Alison Jones, ed. (1997),Chambers Dictionary of Quotations(New York: Chambers), p. 554.Return to text 6.See Ben S. Bernanke (2006), "The Coming Demographic Transition: Will We Treat Future Generations Fairly?" speech delivered at the Washington Economic Club, Washington, October 4; and Louise Sheiner, Daniel Sichel, and Lawrence Slifman (2006), "A Primer on the Macroeconomic Implications of Population Aging," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-01 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).Return to text 7.See Herbert Stein (1997), "Herb Stein's Unfamiliar Quotations,"Slate, May 16, www.slate.com/id/2561.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, Washington, D.C. Chair Maloney, Vice Chairman Schumer, Ranking Members Brownback and Brady, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to discuss economic and financial developments. I will also make a few remarks on the fiscal situation. The Economic OutlookSupported by stimulative monetary and fiscal policies and the concerted efforts of policymakers to stabilize the financial system, a recovery in economic activity appears to have begun in the second half of last year. An important impetus to the expansion was firms' success in working down the excess inventories that had built up during the contraction, which left companies more willing to expand production. Indeed, the boost from the slower drawdown in inventories accounted for the majority of the sharp rise in real gross domestic product (GDP) in the fourth quarter of last year, during which real GDP increased at an annual rate of 5.6 percent. With inventories now much better aligned with final sales, however, and with the support from fiscal policy set to diminish in the coming year, further economic expansion will depend on continued growth in private final demand. On balance, the incoming data suggest that growth in private final demand will be sufficient to promote a moderate economic recovery in coming quarters. Consumer spending continued to increase in the first two months of this year and has now risen at an annual rate of about 2‑1/2 percent in real terms since the middle of 2009. In particular, after slowing in January and February, sales of new light motor vehicles bounced back in March as manufacturers offered a new round of incentives. Going forward, consumer spending should be aided by a gradual pickup in jobs and earnings, the recovery in household wealth from recent lows, and some improvement in credit availability. In the business sector, capital spending on equipment and software appears to have increased at a solid pace again in the first quarter. U.S. manufacturing output, which is benefiting from stronger export demand as well as the inventory adjustment I noted earlier, rose at an annual rate of 8 percent during the eight months ending in February. Also, as I will discuss further in a moment, financial conditions continue to strengthen, thus reducing an important headwind for the economy. To be sure, significant restraints on the pace of the recovery remain, including weakness in both residential and nonresidential construction and the poor fiscal condition of many state and local governments. Sales of new and existing homes dropped back in January and February, and the pace of new single-family housing starts has changed little since the middle of last year. Outlays for nonresidential construction continue to contract amid rising vacancy rates, falling property prices, and difficulties in obtaining financing. Pressures on state and local budgets, though tempered by ongoing federal support, have led to continuing declines in employment and construction spending by state and local governments. As you know, the labor market was particularly hard hit by the recession. Recently, we have seen some encouraging signs that layoffs are slowing and that employment has turned up. Manufacturing employment increased for a third month in March, and the number of temporary jobs--often a precursor of more permanent employment--has been rising since last October. New claims for unemployment insurance continue on a generally downward trend. However, if the pace of recovery is moderate, as I expect, a significant amount of time will be required to restore the 8‑1/2 million jobs that were lost during the past two years. I am particularly concerned about the fact that, in March, 44 percent of the unemployed had been without a job for six months or more. Long periods without work erode individuals' skills and hurt future employment prospects. Younger workers may be particularly adversely affected if a weak labor market prevents them from finding a first job or from gaining important work experience. On the inflation front, recent data continue to show a subdued rate of increase in consumer prices. For the three months ended in February, prices for personal consumption expenditures rose at an annual rate of 1-1/4 percent despite a further steep run-up in energy prices; core inflation, which excludes prices of food and energy, slowed to an annual rate of 1/2 percent. The moderation in inflation has been broadly based, affecting most categories of goods and services with the principal exception of some globally traded commodities and materials, including crude oil. Long-run inflation expectations appear stable; for example, expected inflation over the next 5 to 10 years, as measured by the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers was 2-3/4 percent in March, which is at the lower end of the narrow range that has prevailed for the past few years. Financial Market DevelopmentsFinancial markets have improved considerably since I last testified before this Committee in May of last year. Conditions in short-term credit markets have continued to normalize; spreads in bank funding markets and the commercial paper market have returned to near pre-crisis levels. In light of these improvements, the Federal Reserve has largely wound down the extraordinary liquidity programs that it created to support financial markets during the crisis. The only remaining program, apart from the discount window, is the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility for loans backed by new-issue commercial mortgage-backed securities, and that facility is scheduled to close at the end of June. Overall, the Federal Reserve's liquidity programs appear to have made a significant contribution to the stabilization of the financial system, and they did so at no cost to taxpayers and with no credit losses. The Federal Reserve also recently completed its purchases of $1.25 trillion of federal agency mortgage-backed securities and about $175 billion of agency debt. Purchases under these programs were phased down gradually, and to date, the transition in markets has been relatively smooth. The Federal Reserve's asset-purchase program appears to have improved market functioning and reduced interest-rate spreads not only in the mortgage market but in other longer-term debt markets as well. On net, the financial condition of banking firms has strengthened markedly during recent quarters. Last spring, the Federal Reserve and other banking regulators evaluated the nation's largest bank holding companies under the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, popularly known as the stress test, to ensure that they would have sufficient capital to remain viable and to lend to creditworthy borrowers even in a worse-than-expected economic scenario.1The release of the stress test results significantly increased market confidence in the banking system. Greater investor confidence in turn allowed the banks to raise substantial amounts of new equity capital and, in many cases, to repay government capital. The Federal Reserve and other bank regulators continue to encourage the banks to build up their capital, ensure that they have adequate liquidity, improve their risk management, and restructure their employee compensation programs to better align risk and reward. Despite their stronger financial positions, banks' lending to both households and businesses has continued to fall. The decline in large part reflects sluggish loan demand and the fact that many potential borrowers no longer qualify for credit, both results of a weak economy. The high rate of write-downs has also reduced the quantity of loans on banks' books. Banks have also been conservative in their lending policies, imposing tough lending standards and terms; this caution reflects bankers' concerns about the economic outlook and uncertainty about their own future losses and capital positions. The Federal Reserve has been working to ensure that our bank supervision does not inadvertently impede sound lending and thus slow the recovery. Achieving the appropriate balance between necessary prudence and the need to continue making sound loans to creditworthy borrowers is in the interest of banks, borrowers, and the economy as a whole. Toward this end, in cooperation with the other banking regulators, we have issued policy statements to bankers and examiners emphasizing the importance of lending to creditworthy customers, working with troubled borrowers to restructure loans, managing commercial real estate exposures appropriately, and taking a careful but balanced approach to small business lending.2We have accompanied our guidance with training programs for both Federal Reserve and state examiners, and with outreach to bankers throughout the industry. For example, we just completed a training initiative that reached about 1,000 examiners. We are also conducting a series of meetings across the country with private- and public-sector partners to gather information about the credit needs of small businesses and how those needs can best be met. We have also stepped up our information gathering, so that we can better understand factors that may be inhibiting bank lending. These efforts include a survey by examiners of banks' practices in working out loans, the results of which will serve as a baseline against which we will assess the effectiveness of our supervisory guidance. We are also obtaining additional information on small business credit conditions. For example, we assisted the National Federation of Independent Business in developing a survey to assess barriers to credit access by small businesses.3And we are using our own Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices to monitor changes in bank lending to small businesses.4 Fiscal PolicyIn addition to the near-term challenge of fostering improved economic performance and stronger labor markets, we as a nation face the difficult but essential task of achieving longer-term sustainability of the nation's fiscal position. The federal budget deficit is on track this year to be nearly as wide as the $1.4 trillion gap recorded in fiscal year 2009. To an important extent, these extremely large deficits are the result of the effects of the weak economy on revenues and outlays, along with the necessary actions that were taken to counter the recession and restore financial stability. But an important part of the deficit appears to be structural; that is, it is expected to remain even after economic and financial conditions have returned to normal. In particular, the Administration and the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) project that the deficit will recede somewhat over the next two years as the temporary stimulus measures wind down and as economic recovery leads to higher revenues. Thereafter, however, under the Administration's budget, the annual deficit is expected to remain high through 2020, in the neighborhood of 4 to 5 percent of GDP. Deficits at that level would lead the ratio of federal debt held by the public to the GDP, already expected to be greater than 70 percent at the end of fiscal 2012, to rise considerably further. The CBO baseline projection assumes that most discretionary spending grows more slowly than nominal GDP, that no expiring tax cuts are extended, and that current provisions that provide most taxpayers relief from the alternative minimum tax are not further extended. Under an alternative scenario that drops those assumptions, the deficit at the end of 2020 would be 9 percent of GDP and the federal debt would balloon to more than 100 percent of GDP.5 Although sizable deficits are unavoidable in the near term, maintaining the confidence of the public and financial markets requires that policymakers move decisively to set the federal budget on a trajectory toward sustainable fiscal balance. A credible plan for fiscal sustainability could yield substantial near-term benefits in terms of lower long-term interest rates and increased consumer and business confidence. Timely attention to these issues is important, not only for maintaining credibility, but because budgetary changes are less likely to create hardship or dislocations when the individuals affected are given adequate time to plan and adjust. In other words, addressing the country's fiscal problems will require difficult choices, but postponing them will only make them more difficult. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 1.For more on the SCAP, see Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 2009 Financial Markets Conference, Jekyll Island, Ga., May 11; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve, OCC, and FDIC release results of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program," press release, May 7; and Daniel K. Tarullo (2010), "Lessons from the Crisis Stress Tests," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Board International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Washington, March 26.Return to text2.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers," joint press release, November 12; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Office of Thrift Supervision, and Conference of State Bank Supervisors (2010), "Regulators Issue Statement on Lending to Creditworthy Small Businesses," joint press release, February 5; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (2009), "Prudent Commercial Real Estate Loan Workouts," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 09-7 (October 30); and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council and Office of Thrift Supervision (2009), "Policy Statement on Prudent Commercial Real Estate Loan Workouts (452 KB PDF)," joint policy statement, October 30.Return to text3.See William J. Dennis (2010), "Small Business Credit in a Deep Recession," National Federation of Small Business Research Foundation (Washington: NFIB, February).Return to text4.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices."Return to text5.These figures have been calculated by the Federal Reserve using the CBO's estimates of the budgetary effects of selected policy alternatives to adjust the CBO's baseline budget projection released in a recent report (see Congressional Budget Office (2010),The Budget and Economic Outlook: Fiscal Years 2010 to 2020(Washington: CBO, January). The specific alternative policies used in these calculations included the CBO's estimates of the effects of reducing troop levels in overseas military operations to 60,000 by 2015, increasing regular discretionary appropriations at the rate of growth of nominal GDP, extending all expiring tax provisions, and indexing the alternative minimum tax for inflation.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the 43rd Annual Alexander Hamilton Awards Dinner, Center for the Study of the Presidency and Congress, Washington, D.C. Good evening. It is a great pleasure to share a meal with the Center for the Study of the Presidency and Congress, and especially with the Center's fellows. Doubtless your participation in the fellowship program as undergraduate and graduate students--writing and thinking about leadership, governance, and public policy--will prove immensely valuable as you develop your own intellectual and leadership skills and embark on careers that I hope will include a period of public service. I must begin this evening by expressing my appreciation to the Center and to Ambassador Abshire for selecting me as this year's recipient of the Hamilton Award. I'm truly honored to join the ranks of such past Center honorees as Sandra Day O'Connor, Robert Rubin, Al Gore, and Gerald Ford. Thank you also, Chairman Volcker, for your very kind introduction. As you all know, the award is named after Alexander Hamilton, who of course is best known as our nation's first Secretary of the Treasury. From my perspective, at least equally important is that Hamilton, as the founder of the First Bank of the United States, was, in a sense, also our nation's first central banker. These days central banking is my line of work as well. Before that, I was an academic economist and economic historian, with a particular interest in the causes of the Great Depression. So, given my background and the Center's abiding interest in applying the lessons of history to today's critical issues, I thought that I would speak to you about the parallels--and differences--between that crisis and the more recent one, particularly regarding the responses of policymakers. I draw four relevant lessons from the financial collapse of the 1930s; I will first list these lessons, then briefly elaborate. First, economic prosperity depends on financial stability; second, policymakers must respond forcefully, creatively, and decisively to severe financial crises; third, crises that are international in scope require an international response; and fourth, unfortunately, history is never a perfect guide. The first lesson--economic prosperity depends on financial stability--seems obvious, but this connection was not always well understood. After the stock market crash of 1929, many thought a financial and economic crisis was necessary--even desirable--to wring out speculative excesses that had built up in the 1920s. Remarkably, despite the fact that the Federal Reserve had been founded to mitigate financial panics, the central bank made essentially no effort to prevent the wave of bank failures that paralyzed the financial system at the start of 1930s. Indeed, the Treasury Secretary at the time, Andrew Mellon, believed in the tonic effects of weeding out weak banks and famously advised President Herbert Hoover, "Liquidate labor, liquidate stocks, liquidate the farmers, liquidate real estate … It will purge the rottenness out of the system."1 Economists themselves have not always fully appreciated the importance of a healthy financial system for economic growth or the role of financial conditions in short-term economic dynamics. Even after the Depression, some economists found it useful to think of the financial system as a "veil," which helped allocate the returns to physical assets but did little to affect so-called real economic outcomes. In contrast, more recent work on the subject, to which I contributed, showed that the health of the financial system and the performance of the broader economy are closely interrelated, both in the short run and in the long run. Indeed, in a historical context, some of my own research on the Great Depression showed that countries such as the United States that, for institutional or other reasons, suffered severe banking problems, had significantly worse depressions than countries in which the banking system was more stable, such as Great Britain.2 The lesson has been learned. In the current episode, in contrast to the 1930s, policymakers around the world worked assiduously to stabilize the financial system. As a result, although the economic consequences of the financial crisis have been painfully severe, the world was spared an even worse cataclysm that could have rivaled or surpassed the Great Depression. That lesson brings me to the second one--policymakers must respond forcefully, creatively, and decisively to severe financial crises. Early in the Depression, policymakers' responses ran the gamut from passivity to timidity. They were insufficiently willing to challenge the orthodoxies of their day--such as the liquidationist doctrine of Mellon and others, or the rigid adherence to the variant of the gold standard adopted after World War I. A key turning point, in the United States, came with Franklin Roosevelt's commitment to bold experimentation after his inauguration in 1933. Some of his experiments failed or were counterproductive, but his decisions to declare a bank holiday upon taking office in March 1933 and to sever the link between the dollar and gold helped arrest the descent of the U.S. financial system and set off a strong, albeit incomplete, recovery. In the Depression, effective policy responses came only after three to four years of financial crisis and economic contraction. In our own time, policymakers acted sooner and with greater force than in the 1930s. For example, in October 2008, just weeks after the sharp intensification of the crisis, the Congress authorized the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) to support stabilization of the financial system. It was far from perfect legislation, but it was essential for preventing an imminent financial collapse. For its part, the Federal Open Market Committee, the monetary policymaking arm of the Federal Reserve, sharply and proactively cut its target for short-term interest rates from the fall of 2007 through 2008. After the target could go no lower, the Committee embarked on an unprecedented (for the United States) program of long-term securities purchases, recently completed, to support private credit markets, including the mortgage market. Also, in the spring of 2009, the Federal Reserve led the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, known as the bank stress test.3In some ways, its effect was similar to Roosevelt's national bank holiday. During the holiday in 1933, banks temporarily shut their doors. Examiners were dispatched to evaluate them, and banks that were declared sound reopened to renewed depositor confidence. In the 2009 stress tests, multidisciplinary teams of examiners, economists, financial experts, and other specialists calculated how much capital 19 of the nation's largest bank holding companies would need to remain healthy and continue lending during a hypothetical worse-than-expected economic scenario. The Treasury Department committed to supplying additional capital as necessary from the TARP. Critics had warned that the stress test could backfire, but as it turned out, the release of the results last May helped restore confidence in banks, and many institutions have since been able to raise capital from investors and repay the capital the government had injected. Then as now, the financial and economic crisis was global, underscoring the third lesson: International crises require an international response. Contemporary Americans' impressions of the Depression have been shaped by iconic photos of bread lines, hungry Dust Bowl migrants, and the milling crowds on Wall Street on Black Monday. We think of it as an American episode. We forget it was a truly global event. But the depth of the Depression in Germany exceeded that even of the United States, and the failure in 1931 of a large Austrian bank, Credit Anstalt, was an important trigger of a wave of bank failures that affected many countries, including the United States. Unfortunately, authorities then were ill-positioned to coordinate an effective international response, as years of bitter wrangling over World War I international debts and reparations had all but destroyed the mutual trust upon which coordination depends. In the recent episode, policymakers, bankers, and business people recognized that the world's economies and financial systems would sink or swim together. I recall talking with bankers and business people while attending an international meeting in Brazil. They told me that, in September 2008, what had been a healthy pace of business activity and lending in Brazil suddenly plummeted. They described the impact of the crisis as being like that of a "cold wind" that appeared out of nowhere. Similar stories, I am sure, can be told in many other countries. Because the world's policymakers understood the potentially devastating effect of the financial crisis for the global economy, they and we worked urgently to stabilize the situation. In October 2008, in an unprecedented display of coordination, six central banks--the Federal Reserve, European Central Bank, Bank of England, Swiss National Bank, Bank of Canada, and the central bank of Sweden--acted together to cut short-term interest rates. A few days later, after watershed meetings in Washington of finance ministers and central bank governors, many countries, including the United States, announced comprehensive plans to stabilize their banking systems. And at the Federal Reserve, because we were well aware that turmoil in dollar funding markets overseas hurts our own financial markets, we also established temporary liquidity swap lines that enabled 14 central banks around the world to calm their markets by lending dollars in their jurisdictions. I'll conclude with the cautionary fourth lesson--history is never a perfect guide. It is a principle acknowledged by the words etched on the wall of the Center's conference room, attributed to Mark Twain, "History does not repeat itself, but it can rhyme." As an example, bank runs in many countries, including the United States, were common in the Depression. In the most recent crisis, retail runs--depositors lining up in the streets--were thankfully rare because of deposit insurance and other changes in our financial system.4Although ordinary small depositors by and large did not run, we nevertheless experienced the equivalent of runs on the network of nonbank financial institutions that has come to be called the shadow banking system. In the shadow banking system, loans, instead of being held on the books of banks as was virtually always the case in the 1930s, were packaged together in complex ways and sold to investors. Many of these complex securities were held in off-balance-sheet vehicles financed by short-term funding. When the housing slump shook investors' faith in the values of the loans underlying the securities, short-term funding dried up quickly, threatening the banks and other financial institutions that explicitly or implicitly stood behind the off-balance-sheet vehicles. This was a new type of run, analogous in many ways to the bank runs of the 1930s, but in a form which was not well anticipated by financial institutions or regulators. In an additional variation on the theme of the bank run, in September 2008 money market mutual funds saw massive outflows after one prominent fund suffered losses related to the failure of Lehman Brothers. The Federal Reserve, with its discount window, was well positioned to provide liquidity to banks by making short-term, collateralized loans. (The discount window was the tool the Federal Reserve could have used, had it chosen, to stem the banking panics of the 1930s.) However, our traditional tools, developed in an earlier era, were of little use in addressing panic in the shadow banking system or in the money market mutual fund industry. So, we engaged in what I call "blue sky thinking"--generating many ideas. Most were discarded, but, crucially, some led to the development of new ways for the Federal Reserve to fulfill the traditional stabilization function of central banks. Using emergency authority last employed during the Depression, we created an array of new facilities to provide backstop liquidity to the financial system (and, as a byproduct, coined many new acronyms). Thus, we were able to help restore the flow of credit to American families and businesses by shoring up important financial markets, such as those for commercial paper and securities backed by consumer loans. Undoubtedly, researchers and scholars will devote considerable energy in the years ahead to expanding and refining the lessons this most recent crisis has provided us. I hope that some of you might contribute to that endeavor. I congratulate the Center fellows whose work is also being recognized this evening and thank you, once again, for honoring me with the Hamilton Award. Footnotes 1.See Herbert Hoover (1952),The Memoirs of Herbert Hoover, vol. 3:The Great Depression, 1929-1941(New York: Macmillan), p. 30.Return to text 2.See Ben S. Bernanke and Harold James (1991), "The Gold Standard, Deflation, and Financial Crisis in the Great Depression: An International Comparison," in R. Glenn Hubbard,Financial Markets and Financial Crises(Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER). The historical linkages between financial stability and economic performance have been explored in great detail in recent work. For example, see Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009),This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly(Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press).Return to text 3.See Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 2009 Financial Markets Conference, Jekyll Island, Ga., May 11.Return to text 4.Exceptions that come to mind are the runs on Great Britain's Northern Rock in September 2007 and California's IndyMac Bank in July 2008.Return to text
The federal financial regulatory agencies issued final guidance today to address the risks associated with funding and credit concentrations arising from correspondent relationships. A correspondent relationship occurs when a financial organization provides another financial organization with services related to deposits, lending, or other activities. The guidance highlights the need for institutions to identify, monitor, and manage correspondent concentration risk on a standalone and organization-wide basis. The guidance also reinforces the supervisory view that financial institutions should perform appropriate due diligence on all credit exposures to, and funding transactions with, other financial institutions as part of their risk management policies and procedures. The guidance does not supplant or amend applicable regulations such asLimitations on Interbank Liabilities(Regulation F).Federal Registernotice:HTML|77 KB PDF
Eight federal regulators released an Online Form Builder today that financial institutions can download and use to develop and print customized versions of a model consumer privacy notice. The Online Form Builder, based on the model form regulation published in the Federal Register on December 1, 2009, under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, is available with several options. Easy-to-follow instructions for the form builder will guide an institution to select the version of the model form that fits its practices, such as whether the institution provides an opt-out for consumers. To obtain a legal "safe harbor" and so satisfy the law's disclosure requirements, institutions must follow the instructions in the model form regulation when using the Online Form Builder. The model privacy form was developed jointly by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Trade Commission, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Office of Thrift Supervision, and Securities and Exchange Commission. The Online Form Builder is available at:Privacy Notice Instructions (18 KB PDF)Privacy Notice--Opt Out Options:With Affiliate Marketing (71 KB PDF)Without Affiliate Marketing (69 KB PDF) Privacy Notice--No Opt Out Options:With Affiliate Marketing (70 KB PDF)Without Affiliate Marketing (66 KB PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the appointment of William B. English as director of the Division of Monetary Affairs, effective July 23, 2010. English, who has served as deputy director of the division since February 2008, succeeds Brian F. Madigan, who has been appointed senior adviser to the Board, effective upon English's promotion. Madigan plans to retire later this year after more than 30 years of service with the Board, including three years as head of the division. As director, English will advise the Chairman, Board members and the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) on the conduct of monetary policy, including open market operations and the discount window. "Bill English brings impeccable professional and academic credentials and proven experience to an important position. His deep expertise will help the Federal Reserve navigate the challenges of the period ahead," said Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. English began his career at the Board in 1992 as an economist. He was appointed to the Board's official staff in 2001. During his career, he also has served as a visiting senior economist at the Bank for International Settlements and as a visiting senior economist at the President's Council of Economic Advisers. He has taught at the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business. He holds a B.A. in economics and mathematics from Yale University and a Ph.D. in economics from Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Madigan, who also serves as FOMC Secretary, joined the Board staff in 1979 as an economist. He was appointed to the official staff in 1987, promoted to associate director of the division in 1993, to deputy director in 2001, and director in 2007. He holds an A.B. from St. Joseph's College and a Ph.D. in economics from Pennsylvania State University. "The hallmarks of Brian's career have been exemplary leadership, keen insight, and incredibly hard work. I am especially grateful for his dedicated service to the Board and his country during one of the most difficult times in our nation's financial and economic history," Chairman Bernanke said.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved amendments to Regulation D (Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions) authorizing the Reserve Banks to offer term deposits to institutions that are eligible to receive earnings on their balances at Reserve Banks. These amendments incorporate public comments on the proposed amendments to Regulation D that were announced on December 28, 2009. Term deposits, which are deposits with specified maturity dates that are held by eligible institutions at Reserve Banks, will be offered through a Term Deposit Facility (TDF). Term deposits will be one of several tools that the Federal Reserve could employ to drain reserves when policymakers judge that it is appropriate to begin moving to a less accommodative stance of monetary policy. The development of the TDF is a matter of prudent planning and has no implication for the near-term conduct of monetary policy. The amendments approved by the Board are a necessary step in the implementation of the TDF. As noted in the attached Federal Register notice, the Federal Reserve anticipates that it will conduct small-value offerings of term deposits under the TDF in coming months to ensure the effective operation of the TDF and to help eligible institutions to become familiar with the term-deposit program. More detailed information about the structure and operation of the TDF, including information on the steps necessary for eligible institutions to participate in the program, will be provided later. The amendments will be effective 30 days after publication in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. Federal Registernotice:HTML|75 KB PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application by Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, Hato Rey, to acquire assets and assume liabilities of Westernbank Puerto Rico, Mayagüez, both of Puerto Rico, pursuant to the emergency provisions of the Bank Merger Act. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve System on Wednesday released the 2009 annual comparative financial statements for the combined Federal Reserve Banks, the 12 individual Federal Reserve Banks, the limited liability companies (LLCs) that were created to respond to strains in financial markets, and the Board of Governors. The individual and combined Reserve Bank financial statements and those of the consolidated LLCs and the Board are audited annually by an independent auditing firm. "I am pleased that an independent auditor has found that our financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Federal Reserve," said Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben S. Bernanke. "The information disclosed in the 2009 financial statements reaffirms our commitment to transparency and to the responsible stewardship of public resources." The annual financial statements include information about the assets held by each of the consolidated LLCs, including the composition of the LLCs' portfolios, measures of the assets' quality, and information about the assets' value and the consolidated LLCs' overall financial results. The statements also contain summaries of the associated credit and market risk for each significant holding. Total Reserve Bank assets as of December 31, 2009 were $2.235 trillion, which represents a decrease of $11 billion from the previous year. Although the level of total Reserve Bank assets did not change significantly, the composition of the balance sheet changed notably. Because of improvements in funding markets, assets related to certain financial stability activities decreased during 2009, including a $543 billion decrease in central bank liquidity swaps, a $447 billion decrease in loans to depository institutions, and a $324 billion decrease in commercial paper held in the Commercial Paper Funding Facility. These decreases were offset, in part, by a $919 billion increase in holdings of Federal agency and government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) mortgage-backed securities (MBS), which were purchased to provide support to mortgage and housing markets and to foster improved conditions in financial markets more generally, and a $471 billion increase in holdings of Treasury securities and GSE debt securities. The Reserve Banks' comprehensive income increased $17.9 billion over the previous year to $53.4 billion in the year ended December 31, 2009. The increase was primarily attributable to interest earnings on the Federal agency and GSE MBS holdings of $20.4 billion in 2009. This increase in comprehensive income was partially offset by a decrease of $3.8 billion in realized gains on the sale of Treasury securities and a decrease of $2.8 billion in interest income on loans to depository institutions. The consolidated LLCs also contributed to the increase in Reserve Banks' comprehensive income in 2009, with net earnings of $5.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2009, a $7.3 billion increase over the 2008 net loss of $1.7 billion. The Reserve Banks transferred $47.4 billion of their $53.4 billion in comprehensive income to the U.S. Treasury in 2009, a $15.7 billion or 50 percent increase from the amount transferred in 2008. The Federal Reserve System financial statements may be accessed via the Federal Reserve Board's website at:http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedfinancials.htm.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March suggests that economic activity has continued to strengthen and that the labor market is beginning to improve. Growth in household spending has picked up recently but remains constrained by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit. Business spending on equipment and software has risen significantly; however, investment in nonresidential structures is declining and employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing starts have edged up but remain at a depressed level. While bank lending continues to contract, financial market conditions remain supportive of economic growth. Although the pace of economic recovery is likely to be moderate for a time, the Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability. With substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic recovery and price stability. In light of improved functioning of financial markets, the Federal Reserve has closed all but one of the special liquidity facilities that it created to support markets during the crisis. The only remaining such program, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, is scheduled to close on June 30 for loans backed by new-issue commercial mortgage-backed securities; it closed on March 31 for loans backed by all other types of collateral. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; James Bullard; Elizabeth A. Duke; Donald L. Kohn; Sandra Pianalto; Eric S. Rosengren; Daniel K. Tarullo; and Kevin M. Warsh. Voting against the policy action was Thomas M. Hoenig, who believed that continuing to express the expectation of exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period was no longer warranted because it could lead to a build-up of future imbalances and increase risks to longer run macroeconomic and financial stability, while limiting the Committee’s flexibility to begin raising rates modestly.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the National Bankers Association Foundation Financial Literacy Summit Reception, Washington, D.C. It is a distinct pleasure to visit with the National Bankers Association Foundation this evening. I am very pleased to be among your honorees. The foundation does important work, including helping consumers make wise financial choices, connecting the "unbanked" with mainstream providers of financial services, and providing assistance and support to minority bankers and entrepreneurs. April is Financial Literacy Month, and so it is fitting that you are hosting this event. I note that you also plan to hold a Financial Literacy Summit later this year on the Howard University campus. The summit will bring scholars, bankers, community activists, and others together to brainstorm strategies for educating consumers of financial products. Many American families are struggling in the aftermath of the financial crisis, which reinforces the need for reliable and useful information to facilitate good financial choices. Helping people better understand how to borrow and save wisely and how to build personal wealth is one of the best things we can do to improve the well-being of families and communities. The foundation is making great contributions to this effort, for example, through your online library of personal finance educational materials.1 The Federal Reserve very much shares your abiding interest in helping consumers successfully navigate the financial marketplace. Our approach is two-pronged. First, we work actively to foster financial and economic education. Second, recognizing that basic financial knowledge is not sufficient to keep people safe from fraud and deceptive practices, we are committed to developing and enforcing strong rules to protect consumers. On the financial education front, examples of the Federal Reserve's many resources available to the public are As for consumer protection, the Federal Reserve continues to demonstrate its commitment in this area. We have recently issued rules pertaining to mortgages, credit cards, student loans, and overdraft protection programs, among others. I should note that in recent years we have used extensive consumer testing, both to improve financial disclosures and to highlight practices that simply cannot be understood by consumers even with the best disclosures and thus must be prohibited. We've also stepped up our consumer protection supervision and enforcement, including at the nonbank subsidiaries of bank holding companies and foreign banking organizations. Again, let me congratulate the foundation for organizing tomorrow's financial literacy summit and for all the good work that it does. I would also like to recognize and congratulate the others honored this evening--John Bryant, founder of Operation Hope; the late Jack Kemp, who served as Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and as congressman of western New York; and Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee of Texas. It is wonderful to see so many individuals and organizations working toward the common goal of helping Americans make the best choices for their financial futures. Thank you again. 1.See NBA Foundation, Inc., "Financial Literacy," webpage.Return to text 2.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Board Announces Availability of Online Credit Card Repayment Calculator," press release, April 16.Return to text 3.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Consumer Information Brochures," webpage.Return to text 4.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), "Federal Reserve Announces an Online Consumer Guide to Credit Cards," press release, February 19.Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Council of Institutional Investors Meeting, Washington, D.C. As Congress returns from recess this week, attention will turn once again to financial regulatory reform. The Federal Reserve and other financial regulators have, under existing statutory authority, already implemented some changes to prudential rules and to supervisory oversight processes. Other changes are under active consideration. Against this backdrop, and mindful that my audience is composed of institutional investors, I would like this morning to discuss the importance of more thoroughly involving markets and the public in the financial regulatory system.1 The Emerging Structure of Financial Regulatory ReformThe crisis arose against the backdrop of a regulatory system that had not adjusted to the extensive integration of traditional lending with capital market activities, which had created new sources of systemic risk. The internal information and risk-management systems of many financial firms were revealed as inadequate to the task of identifying the scope of market and credit risks, much less ensuring the soundness of those firms, in a period of severe stress. The already significant problem of institutions perceived as too-big-to-fail was further amplified by the government's actions in 2008 to prevent a complete collapse of the financial system. To succeed, proposed reforms to counteract systemic risk must address these quite fundamental deficiencies. It may be helpful to organize the reform agenda by reference to the "three pillars" of financial regulation enunciated by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision--minimum prudential requirements, supervisory oversight, and market discipline. Although the Basel Committee formulated the three-pillar approach in the context of the Basel II framework for capital requirements, this structure can also be applied to the broader set of reform measures. There seems to be a fair consensus that the first two pillars of minimum prudential requirements and supervisory oversight need to be substantially improved in the wake of the crisis, including additional requirements based on the systemic role of firms. The widespread acceptance of the need for a robust mechanism for resolving large financial institutions reflects a consensus that market discipline needs to be substantially increased in order to provide a genuine third pillar of the regulatory system. Finally, support for structural measures such as the Volcker rule, mandatory central counterparties for certain derivatives trading, and limits on the growth of large financial institutions reveals a belief that even a strengthened three-pillar approach may not be enough to ensure financial stability. These measures are, in effect, a proposed fourth regulatory pillar. The evolution of this multi-pillar approach is an understandable response to the severity of the financial crisis and ensuing recession. There are differing, though not necessarily mutually exclusive, views as to what methods will be most effective in limiting the incidence and severity of future financial crises. Thus, we should not be surprised to see a variety of regulatory measures in both agency actions and legislative reform packages. Indeed, building a regulatory system with multiple instruments has advantages, since established regulatory mechanisms each have well-documented shortcomings, and the effectiveness of new ones will necessarily be uncertain. Yet some fear that the result will be an unwieldy system that will contain too many half measures, rather than a few strong regulatory mechanisms. Others worry that the multiplicity of regulatory instruments will suppress not just behavior that is excessively risky in light of expected social returns, but also some socially desirable financial intermediation. The result would be lower potential economic growth rates. There is also concern that imposing additional forms of regulation on already supervised institutions could drive more financial activity into unregulated firms and markets. Certainly, with multiple instruments comes the need for meshing them into an effectivesystemof regulation, in which the shortcomings of each regulatory tool will be offset by other tools in what must surely be a dynamic process of adjusting to new financial products and practices. Channeling the information provided by market assessments of financial institutions and organizing opportunities for public comment on the regulatory process can play a key role in achieving a self-critical, dynamic regulatory system. Incorporating Market Discipline into the Regulatory SystemDespite years of interesting academic work on incorporating market discipline into financial regulation, it has to this point been consigned to a mostly cosmetic role. One obvious consequence of this neglect was that moral hazard grew unchecked, as expectations of government support for the financial system meant that potential losses from risky behavior‑‑even where understood by market participants--were not fully internalized by the counterparties of, and investors in, large financial institutions. But the underpricing of risk also meant that market judgments on such institutions were not as useful for regulatory purposes as they could have been. Any market signal about the absolute or relative health of a financial firm will always contain considerable noise. And market signals will be of less use if, as may be the case, some forms of risk are almost exclusively systemic, in the sense that the risk will turn into loss only in a systemic crisis. But surely, even with these qualifications, the regulatory system has much to gain from increasing market discipline in financial markets.Two possibilities have been most widely discussed. First, as already noted, there is wide support for a resolution mechanism for large financial firms that would create a third alternative to the current, unsatisfactory options of bailout or possibly destructive disorderly bankruptcy. Both the reform bill passed by the House last year and the bill to be considered on the floor of the Senate contain variations on this basic proposal. Yet the debate around resolution proposals has highlighted the challenge of crafting a workable resolution regime for large, interconnected firms. The basic design problem is that such a regime must advance the goals of both financial stability and market discipline. While these goals are usually complementary, they can at times be competing--especially in periods of high financial stress, when time consistency problems can loom large. In the midst of a crisis, governments fearful of financial upheaval can be tempted to provide assistance to supposedly uninsured creditors, even at the cost of increasing moral hazard in the post-crisis period. Despite the design difficulties, I think certain features are essential in any special resolution process. One is that any new regime should be used only in those rare circumstances where a firm's failure would have serious adverse effects on financial stability. That is, the presumption should be that generally-applicable bankruptcy law applies to nonbank financial firms--even large, interconnected ones. Another is that once the new regime is invoked, the government should have broad authority to wind down the financial firm in an orderly way. Most importantly, there should be a clear expectation that the shareholders and creditors of the failing firm will bear losses to the fullest extent consistent with preserving financial stability. To personalize things for this audience, we must ensure that if you have invested money in a large financial firm that runs aground, you will suffer losses. Shareholders of the firm ultimately are responsible for the organization's management (or mismanagement) and are supposed to be in a first-loss position upon failure of the firm. Shareholders, therefore, should pay the price for the firm's failure and should not benefit from a government-managed resolution process. To promote market discipline on the part of the creditors of large, interconnected firms, unsecured creditors of the firms must also bear losses. Here is where the potential conflict of policy goals is obvious. While losses imposed on creditors will increase market discipline in the longer term, the immediate effect could be to provoke a run on other firms with broadly similar positions or business strategies. Thus, the allocation of such losses may need to depend on the facts of the individual case. At the very least, however, subordinated debt, or other financial interests that can qualify as regulatory capital, should be fully exposed to losses. As is implicit in the foregoing discussion, a novel resolution regime will probably not acquire complete credibility until it is actually applied successfully. Other devices, such as the so-called "living will" requirement, could help, but some uncertainty will inevitably remain. For this reason, among others, it is important to ensure that other regulatory tools will help compensate for the uncertainties associated with an essentially untested mechanism. It also suggests the importance of exploring additional means to increase market discipline. A good resolution mechanism is an essential component of an effective regulatory system, but standing alone it is far from sufficient. A second proposal that has received considerable attention is to require large financial institutions to hold so-called contingent capital, which is basically debt that converts to common equity as a result of some predefined triggering event. There are actually two distinct concepts that may be characterized as "contingent" capital. The first is a requirement for a specified kind of capital instrument to be issued by the firm--one that would have debt-like characteristics in normal times but would convert to equity upon the triggering event. The other is a requirement that all instruments qualifying as Tier 2 regulatory capital convert to common equity under specified circumstances, such as a determination that the firm would otherwise be on the brink of insolvency. The market discipline effects of both variants could be considerable, since holders of certain kinds of capital instruments would know that their debt-like interests in the firm would be lost if the firm's financial situation deteriorated. However, there are also significant questions about the feasibility of both. The specification of the trigger is critical. If supervisors can trigger the conversion, investors cannot be certain as to when the government will exercise the trigger. That uncertainty would make it difficult to price a convertible capital instrument and diminish investors' willingness to hold it. Tying the trigger to the capital level of the firm runs headlong into the serious problem that capital has traditionally been a lagging indicator of the health of a firm. Using a market-based trigger could invite trading against the trigger, which, in extreme cases, could lead to a so-called death spiral for the firm's stock. Despite the work that has been done on contingent proposals, it is not yet clear if there is a viable form of contingent capital that would increase market discipline and provide additional equity capital in times of stress without raising the price of the convertible debt close to common equity levels. The appeal of the concept is such as to make further work very worthwhile but, for the moment at least, there is no proposal ready for implementation. Before closing the discussion of mechanisms to increase market discipline, I want to add a complementary thought to my earlier observation that these mechanisms are designed to ensure that investors and counterparties suffer losses. If we are committed to achieving this end--as I believe we should be--we also need to provide market participants with the information needed to make accurate assessments of a financial firm's condition. I will have more to say about disclosing supervisory information in a moment. As to disclosures bv firms themselves, the opaque nature of parts of a financial institution's balance sheet makes special disclosure requirements especially important. There is, for example, a good case to be made for enhancing the Basel II requirements for disclosures relevant to a firm's internal ratings system, consistent with the protection of genuinely proprietary information. On the other hand, there is little point‑‑and the potential for considerable unnecessary cost--in compelling disclosure of massive amounts of information that cannot be effectively assimilated by investors and counterparties. We invite suggestions from investors such as yourselves as to the kind and form of disclosures that will be most useful. Incorporating the Public Into the Regulatory SystemAs noted earlier, the financial regulatory system needs to be not only multifaceted, but also adaptive in responding to changes in financial firms and markets. A dynamic regulatory regime is most likely to be realized if it receives non-governmental perspectives on these changes. In addition to disclosing more data to investors and counterparties, exposing supervisory practices and policies to external assessment in a structured way can improve supervision. Such exposure could, for example, reduce the chances of regulators converging around a conventional wisdom that overlooks anomalous data. One means for furthering this aim was suggested by our experience with the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) last year. As you recall, the stress tests--as they have been popularly called--were a stringent, forward-looking assessment of prospective losses and revenues at the 19 largest U.S. regulated financial institutions. We took the unusual, if not unprecedented, step of releasing publicly the methodology and findings of the SCAP, including the capital needs and loss estimates for the 19 institutions. The decision to make this information public was made in the context of a systemic crisis, in which markets were hungry for information and in which the Treasury stood ready to inject capital into any of the 19 institutions that were found to need it. Even so, it was much debated within the Federal Reserve, in part because of concerns that weaker banks might be significantly harmed by the disclosures. But I think that regularizing both stress tests and the release of information relevant to them deserves serious consideration for at least two reasons. First, in line with my earlier discussion of market discipline, releasing such information could assist investors in the difficult task of valuing loan portfolios that at present are not very transparent. Second, releasing details about assumptions, methods, and conclusions would expose our supervisory approach to greater outside scrutiny and discussion. Whether the result is critique or validation of our approach, the reaction of informed investors and analysts to our assumptions and methods would be beneficial. I have previously identified several ways we might increase the transparency of our stress tests.2There are doubtless additional possibilities. There are, to be sure, countervailing concerns. In economic times more normal than those prevailing when we conducted the SCAP, market participants will not be fearing the worst and banks will not have access to government capital injections as a backstop. At such a moment, the revelation that some major banks may have capital needs under a stress scenario might be unnecessarily destabilizing, though the possibility of this kind of market reaction may be lower if such information is released frequently. Major unpleasant surprises would be less likely with frequent, detailed disclosures. In any case, I hope that interested parties will consider the merits of these possibilities and help advance the debate. There are other ways to incorporate non-governmental views into the regulatory system. We have already taken steps in this direction in conjunction with the Federal Reserve's overhaul of its approach to supervising the largest financial holding companies. As part of this effort--and with the aim of advancing both our microprudential and macroprudential goals--we have created a quantitative surveillance mechanism (QSM) to regularize the collection and analysis of relevant data. Among other things, the QSM will use market-based indicators such as stock prices, option prices, credit default swap spreads, and short-term funding costs to provide an external perspective on the condition of these institutions--one that will be formally presented to regular meetings of senior supervisory and other Federal Reserve staff. Market-based indicators of macroeconomic and financial market risks that could pose threats to the largest institutions also will be used to assess their condition. Indeed, the relatively undeveloped nature of macroprudential analytic and oversight functions argues for extensive transparency by regulators and involvement of non-regulators. If, for example, the Congress creates a council of regulators with, among other responsibilities, the task of issuing periodic financial stability reports, the public at large will have ample opportunity to comment on the council's analyses. Personally, I would go further and establish an advisory committee that would assess not just the stability report, but other macroprudential evaluations such as scenarios used in stress testing. By formalizing this activity, senior regulatory officials would be required to confront and respond to the critiques directly, an exercise that would help develop the embryonic function of macroprudential oversight. ConclusionTo conclude, I have covered a handful of specific ideas to involve markets and the public more closely in the regulatory system. My more general point is that the reform of our financial system to strengthen market discipline is both an essential change in itself and also a starting point for increasing useful information flows between markets and regulators. Market forces will operate more efficiently with information about banks that has usually remained largely hidden from investors in anything but the most aggregated form. The regulatory system will operate more effectively if the supervisory process integrates market information which should, as a result of innovations such as a resolution mechanism, be even more sensitive to the conditions of financial firms. Experience before the financial crisis suggests that institutionalizing opportunities for external voices, including dissident voices, will be an important element of macroprudential supervisory efforts. Outside critics are not always right, of course. But the best way to separate insightful and well-grounded criticisms from unfounded ones is through a rigorous discussion in which the views of outside critics, as well as those of the regulators themselves, will be subject to inquiry. Such a process may lead to uncomfortable moments for regulators, but that is a small price to pay if it can help contain financial instability in the future. 1.My remarks today reflect my own views and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text2.See Daniel K. Tarullo (2010), "Lessons from the Crisis Stress Tests," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Board International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Washington, March 26.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify about the failure of Lehman Brothers and the lessons of that failure. In these opening remarks I will address several key issues relating to that episode. The Federal Reserve was not Lehman's supervisor. Lehman was exempt from supervision by the Federal Reserve because the company did not own a commercial bank and because it was allowed by federal law to own a federally insured savings association without becoming subject to Federal Reserve supervision. The core subsidiaries of Lehman were securities broker-dealers under the supervisory jurisdiction of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which also supervised the Lehman parent company under the SEC's Consolidated Supervised Entity (CSE) program. Importantly, the CSE program was voluntary, established by the SEC in agreement with the supervised firms, without the benefits of statutory authorization. Although the Federal Reserve had no supervisory responsibilities or authorities with respect to Lehman, it began monitoring the financial condition of Lehman and the other primary dealers during the period of financial stress that led to the sale of Bear Stearns to JPMorgan Chase.1In March 2008, responding to the escalating pressures on primary dealers, the Federal Reserve used its statutory emergency lending powers to establish the Primary Dealer Credit Facility and the Term Securities Lending Facility as sources of backstop liquidity for those firms. To monitor the ability of borrowing firms to repay, the Federal Reserve, in its role as creditor, required all participants in these programs, including Lehman, to provide financial information about their companies on an ongoing basis. Two Federal Reserve employees were placed onsite at Lehman to monitor the firm's liquidity position and its financial condition generally. Beyond gathering information, however, these employees had no authority to regulate Lehman's disclosures, capital, risk management, or other business activities. During this period, Federal Reserve employees were in regular contact with their counterparts at the SEC, and in July 2008, then-Chairman Cox and I negotiated an agreement that formalized procedures for information-sharing between our two agencies. Cooperation between the Federal Reserve and the SEC was generally quite good, especially considering the stress and turmoil of the period. In particular, the Federal Reserve, with the SEC's participation, developed and conducted several stress tests of the liquidity position of Lehman and the other major primary dealers during the spring and summer of 2008. The results of these stress tests were presented jointly by the Federal Reserve and the SEC to the managements of Lehman and the other firms. Lehman's results showed significant deficiencies in available liquidity, which the management was strongly urged to correct. The Federal Reserve was not aware that Lehman was using so-called Repo 105 transactions to manage its balance sheet. Indeed, according to the bankruptcy examiner, Lehman staff did not report these transactions even to the company's board. However, knowledge of Lehman's accounting for these transactions would not have materially altered the Federal Reserve's view of the condition of the firm; the information we obtained suggested that the capital and liquidity of the firm were seriously deficient, a view that we conveyed to the company and that I believe was shared by the SEC and the Treasury Department. Lehman did succeed at raising about $6 billion in capital in June 2008, took steps to improve its liquidity position in July, and was attempting to raise additional capital in the weeks leading up to its failure. However, its efforts proved inadequate. During August and early September 2008, increasingly panicky conditions in markets put Lehman and other financial firms under severe pressure. In an attempt to devise a private-sector solution for Lehman's plight, the Federal Reserve, Treasury, and SEC brought together leaders of the major financial firms in a series of meetings at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York during the weekend of September 13-15. Despite the best efforts of all involved, a solution could not be crafted, nor could an acquisition by another company be arranged. With no other option available, Lehman declared bankruptcy. The Federal Reserve fully understood that the failure of Lehman would shake the financial system and the economy. However, the only tool available to the Federal Reserve to address the situation was its ability to provide short-term liquidity against adequate collateral; and, as I noted, Lehman already had access to our emergency credit facilities. It was clear, though, that Lehman needed both substantial capital and an open-ended guarantee of its obligations to open for business on Monday, September 15. At that time, neither the Federal Reserve nor any other agency had the authority to provide capital or an unsecured guarantee, and thus no means of preventing Lehman's failure existed. The Lehman failure provides at least two important lessons. First, we must eliminate the gaps in our financial regulatory framework that allow large, complex, interconnected firms like Lehman to operate without robust consolidated supervision. In September 2008, no government agency had sufficient authority to compel Lehman to operate in a safe and sound manner and in a way that did not pose dangers to the broader financial system. Second, to avoid having to choose in the future between bailing out a failing, systemically critical firm or allowing its disorderly bankruptcy, we need a new resolution regime, analogous to that already established for failing banks. Such a regime would both protect our economy and improve market discipline by ensuring that the failing firm's shareholders and creditors take losses and its management is replaced. Thank you. I would be glad to respond to your questions. 1.Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released its discount rate minutes from February 17 through March 15, 2010.The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Tuesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on March 16, 2010. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 16, 2010:254 KB PDF|HTML
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's website,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur. KCB Bank, Kearney, MissouriWritten Agreement dated July 2, 2008Terminated April 6, 2010
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Community Leaders Luncheon, San Francisco, California The United States has been through a severe recession--a consequence of the correction of excesses that had accumulated in the economy and financial markets. Today, I would like to take stock of where we are in that correction by discussing the outlook for the economy. To summarize in a sentence: We have worked through a lot of the problems that initiated and deepened the downturn, but not all of them, and thus the pace of the recovery is likely to be restrained. I last spoke on the economic outlook in October, and my views since then remain largely unchanged--though, I should hasten to add, not because I am too lazy to update my forecast! Rather, the data since last fall have been broadly in line with my earlier expectations and suggest that a moderate recovery is under way, accompanied by low inflation. Of course, things could well have turned out differently: Given the extraordinary events of the past few years, by now we could be experiencing a relapse into recession or, alternatively, a strong rebound. The fact that conditions evolved largely as had been expected last fall suggests that the future may, just may, be a bit less uncertain than before. Even if that is the case, considerable uncertainty about the outlook remains, and at the conclusion of my remarks I will touch on some of the implications of that uncertainty for monetary policy. Before proceeding, I should emphasize that my remarks today reflect my own views and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1 Recent DevelopmentsAfter declining for a year and a half, economic activity bottomed out in the middle of last year and subsequently turned up. A number of factors have fostered the recovery. The steps taken in the United States and abroad to stabilize financial markets and end the panic so evident in late 2008 and early 2009 helped steady the economy. In addition, extraordinary monetary and fiscal stimulus, both here and around the world, have supported the upturn. These actions helped the financial markets to turn around, and they set the stage for recovery in combination with reductions in the inventory overhangs of houses and a broad range of other goods. Real gross domestic product (GDP) expanded at an annual rate of about 4 percent in the second half of last year. The gain was especially large in the last quarter of 2009, although a sizable chunk of that increase reflected a marked slowing in the pace of inventory liquidation. The most recent data on spending and production from the first few months of this year have been encouraging and suggest that the recovery remains on track. I expect the expansion to be sustained by continued increases in private final demand, even as the temporary boost from inventories passes and the contribution of fiscal stimulus to growth likely wanes later this year. On the positive side, consumer spending has been expanding at a solid pace, supported by low interest rates, improving household wealth, recovering confidence, and fiscal stimulus. Business outlays for equipment and software appear to be rebounding appreciably, consistent with improved financial conditions and business sentiment. Exports are another bright spot. International trade tends to be highly sensitive to the business cycle, and foreign demand for U.S. products fell sharply during the global slump. But with economic conditions improving abroad, export volumes have rebounded since the middle of last year. At the same time, however, a sizable increase in imports has accompanied the upturn in our economy, and the effect of exports and imports on GDP growth has been roughly offsetting. On the negative side, some sectors of the economy remain quite weak. Home sales, which seemed for a time last year to be starting to slowly recover, have stalled recently, and housing starts are only a little above last year's low. Moreover, nonresidential building continues to contract amid rising vacancy rates, plunging property prices, and strained financing conditions. And, as I'm sure you are only too aware, difficult fiscal conditions have restrained spending by state and local governments. The latest data on employment and construction suggest that spending by state and local governments has continued to decline this year. Signs of recovery are just beginning to emerge in the labor market. Private payrolls appear to have bottomed out earlier this year and to have posted a noticeable increase in March, and the unemployment rate is down a bit from its recent high. Despite that good news, the labor market remains extremely weak. Businesses, facing considerable uncertainty and under pressure from weak sales and tight financial conditions, have been reluctant to hire even though output has begun to recover and instead have found ways to boost worker efficiency. Indeed, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector is reported to have risen almost 6 percent during 2009. But such outsized productivity gains are not likely to continue. If labor productivity growth slows to a more normal rate of increase, then further increases in demand and production should lead to additional increases in hiring. However, if economic growth remains moderate, as I anticipate, employment gains are likely to lower the unemployment rate only slowly. An ongoing concern in this recovery is whether unemployed workers may experience unusual difficulties in re-entering the workforce. The duration of unemployment has been exceptionally long in this business cycle, a development that could erode worker skills and decrease re-employment probabilities. In addition, it may take some time for those who are unemployed to move or retrain for the new jobs that the recovery will bring. For these and other reasons, part of the increase in unemployment over the past two years may be structural, and this part would tend to reverse only slowly. Even if a portion of the rise in unemployment is structural, however, most appears to be cyclical, suggesting that the economy is operating well below its productive potential. This conclusion is supported by other measures of slack, such as capacity utilization in manufacturing, and by the ongoing deceleration in wages and prices. Although headline consumer price inflation has been boosted in recent quarters by an increase in energy prices, a substantial deceleration has been observed in measures of prices that exclude such volatile elements. For example, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) excluding food and energy rose 1.3 percent over the 12 months to February, down 1/2 percentage point from a year earlier and down more than a full percentage point from the start of the recession in late 2007. Other measures of underlying inflation trends also show substantial deceleration; for example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas's trimmed mean measure of PCE inflation, which excludes the most extreme price changes in a month, was only 1.0 percent in the 12 months to February, compared with 2.4 percent in the preceding 12-month period. Labor costs have also decelerated. The employment cost index--a broad measure of wage and benefit costs in private industry--rose only 1.2 percent in the 12 months to December after hovering around 3 to 4 percent for most of the preceding two decades. Other measures of labor compensation show comparable slowdowns and, when coupled with the acceleration in productivity, imply the largest four-quarter drop in unit labor costs in decades. This development also should work to restrain price inflation. The Shape of the RecoveryOften in the past, very steep recessions, such as the one we have been through, are followed by sharp recoveries. As I noted at the beginning of my talk, I don't expect that outcome this time; instead, I think the most likely scenario is a gradual pickup in economic activity as the forces that got us into this difficult situation slowly fade away. First, although financial conditions are improving and capital markets are open for larger firms, credit remains unusually tight for many borrowers, especially consumers and smaller businesses that are dependent on banks. Banks are still rebuilding their capital, and their lending will be held back as they work through the embedded losses in their portfolios, particularly for consumer and commercial real estate loans. Beyond this challenge, some securitization markets are still impaired. As the economy improves and credit losses become easier to estimate, banks should be able to build capital from earnings and outside investors, and they will have greater confidence in the prospective profitability of lending. They will become more able and willing to compete for new business--in effect, allowing low market interest rates to pass through to more borrowers. These developments will induce more borrowing and spending, further improving the economy, but this process will take time. Second, I do not expect that the recovery in housing construction will boost growth substantially this year, in contrast to its usual pattern early in economic recoveries. A large overhang of vacant homes is likely to weigh on new construction for some time, even though residential construction activity has declined dramatically since its peak in 2005 and inventories of unsold new homes have fallen to very low levels. In addition, the pace of foreclosures is likely to remain elevated for a while, adding to the stock of homes for sale. On the positive side, housing affordability is quite favorable, in part reflecting low mortgage rates, and house prices appear to be stabilizing. Still, problems persist in housing, and I anticipate a relatively subdued pickup in housing starts over the coming year. Third, households need to continue rebuilding wealth. They became too indebted and too dependent on housing wealth to finance current purchases and provide for future events like the education of their children and their retirement. Now they need to repay debt and save more out of current income. In addition, restraints on consumer credit continue to hold down spending, and high unemployment and uncertainty have weighed on consumer confidence. Again, these constraints will fade as consumers adjust to the shocks they have been dealt. Indeed, the effects on spending of past reductions in wealth are receding, and household net worth is rising again. And as employment continues to pick up, income will rise more rapidly and households will presumably become more confident about the future--and thus more willing to spend. But they are unlikely to return to the spending patterns of old, and we cannot expect outsized gains in consumer outlays to provide an extra push to the economic expansion. Last, business investment spending has been depressed by a weak and uncertain sales outlook, tight credit conditions, and significant unused capacity. However, signs are growing that confidence is returning as the outlook for sales brightens and bond spreads narrow. Moreover, spending on equipment and software is likely getting a boost from replacement demand. Gross investment in equipment and software has fallen so low that it is not even covering estimated depreciation, meaning that further spending increases are needed just to prevent the capital stock from continuing to shrink, let alone to foster a modest expansion of the capital stock as the recovery proceeds. So this sector has the potential to be a source of strength for the economy. With only a moderate recovery likely on tap, I expect unemployment to come down only slowly from its currently elevated level. Although the persistent high level of unemployment will tend to restrain inflation further, the effect of resource slack on inflation does not appear to be as great as some previous episodes might have led us to expect. The difference is that inflation expectations now appear to be much more firmly anchored than they once were, probably reflecting the extended period of low inflation that we have experienced and a credible monetary policy directed at sustaining this performance. I anticipate that inflation will remain low for a while, with core PCE inflation not likely to fall much further from the subdued pace I cited a few minutes ago. Longer-Run RebalancingThe U.S. economy should emerge from this episode stronger, more resilient, and on a more sustainable growth path than before the recession. This outcome will entail a gradual long-run shift in both the composition and financing of aggregate spending. In particular, as I already noted, consumers probably will save more than in the past, reflecting the likelihood that household net worth will be lower relative to income than it was over the past decade or so and that credit, appropriately, will be somewhat less available than during the boom. In addition, housing is almost certainly going to be a smaller part of the economy than it was when lax credit standards encouraged overbuilding and overborrowing. Increased private saving and reduced demand for housing should prompt movements in relative prices and other factors that will, in turn, make room for a larger role for business investment and net exports in overall economic activity. In addition, households that have worked down debt levels will be less vulnerable and better able to withstand shocks in the future. As I have been emphasizing, the transition to full employment and the emergence of this new configuration of spending and production, and borrowing and saving, will take time. This rebalancing involves repairs to balance sheets, the movement of capital and labor across sectors of the economy, and shifts in the global pattern of production and consumption--adjustments that are likely to be gradual under any conditions. Moreover, the re-equilibration may be slower than might otherwise be the case because tight credit will limit the ability of some households and firms to make the necessary adjustments. Government policies will be essential to supporting the smooth transition to more-sustainable economic growth with greater investment and exports. We must ensure that changes in taxation and regulation do not blunt incentives for business investment. In addition, although fiscal policy has provided important support for the economic recovery, it will need to be put on a more sustainable path in the medium term. Failure to do so risks a market reaction that could increase longer-term interest rates; economic growth would be hindered if government borrowing boosts the cost of capital and diverts resources away from private investment. Reducing the deficit and avoiding a continuing buildup in government debt relative to income will be essential for bringing national production and spending into better balance. That balance, in turn, is necessary so that we are no longer so reliant on borrowing from other nations. Heavy dependence on foreign borrowing by the United States is not a solid foundation for long-term economic growth either here or in those countries extending us credit. The actions of U.S. authorities and private parties to bring about a better balance of saving and investment must be matched by action overseas in chronic surplus countries. While we reduce demand relative to our productive potential, the surplus countries must increase their domestic demand if the global economy is to thrive. Finally, as has been so painfully demonstrated over the past few years, sustained growth requires a financial system that is much more resilient and thus better equipped to continue to supply funds to creditworthy borrowers when the unexpected happens. To this end, banks and other lenders must hold capital and liquidity to cover more of the risks they are taking, and they must have the capability to know what those risks are and to manage them effectively. Critically, the financial regulatory structure needs to be modernized to bring oversight and market discipline to bear much more effectively on our rapidly evolving financial system and to give regulators more tools to deal with problems as they arise. At the Federal Reserve, we are improving our supervision and regulation to incorporate a broader view of emerging risks in the financial system and to become more effective at translating identified risks to supervisory oversight and, if required, remedial actions by the banks. Monetary PolicyThe picture I've drawn today--of a gradually improving economy, bolstered by better functioning financial markets and rising asset prices, but also still held back by the effects of the previous imbalances and corrections--has had important implications for monetary policy. Because the economy and financial markets have improved, we have been able to wind down our special liquidity facilities and complete our purchases of long-term assets, like mortgage-backed securities. But because the recovery looks as though it will be gradual, and because it started with the economy in a deep hole, with large margins of underutilized labor and capital resources and low inflation likely to persist well into the future, the Federal Open Market Committee has stated that the current exceptionally low level of interest rates is likely to be required for "an extended period" to make progress toward our legislative goals of maximum employment and stable prices. The exceptionally low rates help offset the lingering restraining effects on economic activity and prices discussed earlier. In due course, as these restraints abate and the expansion matures, we will need to withdraw monetary stimulus to prevent the development of inflationary pressures. As in past cycles, our decision to begin tightening will be based not on a particular indicator or small set of indicators, but rather on forecasts of economic activity and inflation that take account of all available information. We will want to make sure the economy has enough forward momentum to continue absorbing the unused resources and to limit disinflationary pressure. But we will also want to be sure that we haven't left highly accommodative policy in place so long that economic and financial conditions become conducive to future inflation. Given the lags in the effects of monetary policy, that means we will not be able to wait until the unemployment rate is down close to its long-term level. We will be watching inflation and inflation expectations carefully. Inflation expectations have been stable, and I expect them to remain so. Still, one risk is that, in line with past behavior, expectations could follow actual inflation down, imparting additional downward momentum to actual inflation. However, another risk is that expectations could increase, perhaps reflecting concerns about the Federal Reserve's balance sheet or the federal budget deficit. For the moment, the public seems confident that the Fed will keep inflation stable over time. We do not take that trust for granted: We monitor inflationary developments closely and stand ready to respond quickly and vigorously should the need arise. Although the framework for deciding when and how fast to tighten monetary policy will not differ conceptually from the framework used in the past, our decision this time has some added complexities. In particular, our assets and the corresponding bank reserves are far larger than anything in our experience. We are developing the tools to manage our enlarged balance sheet in support of policy tightening when the time comes, and we will need to deploy them in ways that reinforce our ability to achieve our macroeconomic objectives. That won't be easy since we've never had so many levers to manipulate before, but the FOMC has been giving considerable thought to this issue, and I'm confident that we will find the right balance and sequence of actions to support our basic policy decisions. Some Implications of UncertaintyAs this last point illustrates, we are still in the midst of a very unusual period in U.S. economic history and therefore in the conduct of monetary policy. Policy always operates in an environment of uncertainty. The events of the past three years have highlighted to me yet again our limited knowledge of the dynamics of the financial system, the economy, and the interactions between them. I can be reasonably certain of only one point: My economic forecast is highly likely to be wrong--but I don't know how. One implication of this pervasive uncertainty is that any statement about the future path of monetary policy must be conditional--dependent on the economy following the expected path. Although the FOMC has stated that the federal funds rate is likely to remain exceptionally low for an extended period, this statement explicitly depends on an economic outlook similar to the one I have given today. We cannot provide a precise timetable for when short-term interest rates will begin to return to normal because that depends on the evolution of actual and projected activity and inflation. Another implication of uncertainty is that policymakers need to be open to alternative views about how best to set policy over time to stabilize prices and achieve maximum employment. All models of the economy are flawed to some degree, and a policymaker cannot dismiss a risk simply because it is improbable in his or her favorite model. I don't know of any formal model that predicted what we have just been through. Rather, policymakers need to weigh the predictions of competing models in light of both theory and empirical evidence. They also need to be prepared to adjust these weights or even abandon some models when the incoming data are inconsistent with the view of the world embodied in the particular model. In my experience, these and other considerations put a premium on flexibility. The need to learn from and respond to news means that policy should have a substantial discretionary component. We have certainly needed to innovate over the past several years to contain the damage from unprecedented events in financial markets. But discretion has its limits as well. We must be able to explain and justify our actions within a coherent framework--even if the elements of that framework are adjusted from time to time as experience dictates. And to the extent that we can act predictably, households and businesses will be able to anticipate our actions, reinforcing their effects. Finally, we must not be flexible about our objectives. The goals of monetary policy--price stability and maximum employment--are stable and well known. The flexibility relates to the actions we take to get there. ConclusionThe economy appears to be moving in the right direction, though not as quickly as we all would like. As I prepare to step down from my current position, I recognize that I am leaving Janet and my other colleagues with some formidable tasks. But I am confident that under the leadership of Chairman Bernanke, the Federal Reserve will be able to foster the restoration of prosperity and stability for the U.S. economy over the years to come. Footnotes 1.Peter TulipandDaniel Sichelof the Board's staff contributed to these remarks.Return to text
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Jump$tart Coalition Investing in Our Future: Financial Education and Washington Event, Washington, D.C. Good morning. I am pleased to be here with the Greater Washington chapter of the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Finance to kick off Financial Literacy Month 2010. And I would like to take this opportunity to applaud each of you here today for your commitment to revitalizing the Washington chapter. The coalition is a national leader among organizations that work to improve financial education for students from kindergarten through college. Its programs provide students with the knowledge and skills they need to make informed decisions that will have a positive impact on their economic well-being. With a new leadership team and renewed enthusiasm, the Greater Washington, D.C., chapter of the coalition has joined forces with more than 100 individuals, businesses, and not-for-profit educational and government organizations--including the Federal Reserve Board--to increase knowledge about personal finance among students in our region. The Federal Reserve System is made up of the Board of Governors here in Washington and 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks with branches across the country. Throughout the Federal Reserve System, we work with the Jump$tart Coalition--locally with the Washington, D.C., chapter and through alliances between the Reserve Banks and other state chapters of the coalition--to achieve our shared goals. The partnership between the Federal Reserve and the Jump$tart Coalition is a natural one. Jump$tart's mission to develop a more financially literate population supports the Federal Reserve's goal of a stable and growing economy. In collaboration with partners like you, Jump$tart enables students to make economically sound financial decisions in their personal and business lives. As students individually form households or start businesses, their collective decisions will shape the economy of our future. I am especially pleased to be able to represent the Federal Reserve in this effort as my personal commitment to financial literacy has spanned more than 30 years. I have been involved with a number of initiatives including some that took me into the classroom to teach students directly and others that provided teachers with tools and training to better prepare them to teach economics and personal finance. The need in this country for financial education is so great that we must continue to tackle it at all levels and with all available resources. We need to imbed financial concepts in every K-12 curriculum in the country. While physical education and even driver education are part of nearly every curriculum, financial education is mandated by only a handful of states as a requirement for graduation. Alongside classes that prepare students to join the workforce we need courses that demonstrate how to use the financial compensation from their work to meet family necessities and build personal wealth in an era of complex financial products. Students will need to identify situations in which it makes sense to borrow and choose among loan products. They need to know how to budget and save and how to select the best investment vehicles for their savings. And as the recent financial turmoil has taught us, they must understand how to prepare for and deal with financial contingencies such as unemployment or unexpected expenses. Jump$tart supports efforts to provide such an education. The Federal Reserve is working on several fronts to promote financial education that will help prepare young people to take on the responsibilities of market participants and manage the risks that come with the opportunities to spend, save, borrow, and invest. Financial education that begins at a young age and extends through one's life is the most effective preparation for making important financial decisions such as buying a car, purchasing a home, saving for retirement, borrowing for postsecondary education, and even choosing a career. In support of our efforts, the Reserve Banks have developed programming and curriculum to serve the needs of schools, educators, and students. Among them are: In addition to providing materials for financial education, the Federal Reserve has also begun to assess the effectiveness of the education programs it engages in, so that we can better evaluate the outcomes of our efforts. This research is intended to help us better answer the question, "What works in education?" so that we may allocate our resources in the best possible manner. While financial education is an important first step in enabling consumers to make informed financial decisions, it is also important that consumers be presented with clear and consistent information about their financial products. The Federal Reserve is the primary government agency charged with writing rules governing consumer financial products. Historically, we have focused on disclosure as the best way to provide consumers with information to choose between products or to make decisions about using financial products. In recent years, we have used extensive consumer testing to gauge consumers' understanding of financial disclosures and to highlight practices that simply cannot be understood by consumers even with the best disclosures. If we identify practices that cannot be adequately explained through disclosure, we now prohibit those practices. Recently, the Federal Reserve has written strong new consumer protection rules for mortgages, credit cards, and overdraft charges. And we have improved our response time for drafting rules to address emerging trends that may pose new risks for consumers. In closing, I would like to thank the educators here today for your dedication to Washington-area students. Your role is vital to preparing them with the skills they will need to grow into financially successful adults. I am pleased to be a part of this conversation among the private and public sectors, as well as the education community, about how best to empower students with the confidence and savvy to navigate their financial worlds.
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Community Bankers’ Conference, New York, New York These are difficult times for many community banks, a reflection of the difficult times for the many workers and businesses across the nation who depend on the loans provided by your institutions. This morning I will address some of the problems that you currently face and offer a few thoughts about the future of community banking. Before doing so, however, I thought it would be useful to explain my perspective on the Federal Reserve's monetary policy posture, which will obviously have great significance for the economic environment in which community banks will be operating. Specifically, I want to speak about what has become known as our "exit strategy"--that is, the means by which the Federal Reserve will bring to an end the extraordinary lending and monetary policies that it adopted in response to the financial crisis. Planning and Implementing an Exit StrategyIn thinking about an exit strategy, it is important to distinguish between two types of policies that the Federal Reserve adopted, beginning in 2007 and continuing thereafter, beyond its sharp reductions in the target for the federal funds rate. First, the Federal Reserve created a number of liquidity programs, which provided well-secured, mostly short-term credit to various parts of the financial system that were under increasingly severe strains. Among these were the Term Auction Facility (TAF), which auctioned short-term funds to banks; the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, which served as a backstop liquidity provider for securities firms; the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF), which was designed to help revive the market for asset-backed securities, and others. Second, and separately, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) undertook large-scale purchases of Treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed securities, and agency debt. This unconventional monetary policy action was taken because the FOMC, after having reduced short-term interest rates nearly to zero, determined that the severity of the economic downturn made additional stimulus necessary. In addition to improving conditions in mortgage markets, these asset purchases helped lower yields on long-term debt; they also substantially increased the level of reserve balances that depository institutions held with Federal Reserve Banks. Thus, while reference is often made to a single exit strategy, there are in fact two separate objectives: One is to terminate the special liquidity facilities and otherwise normalize our activities as liquidity provider of last resort when the exceptional stresses have eased sufficiently. The other is to raise interest rates when warranted by economic conditions. Historically, the Fed has affected the level of short-term interest rates primarily by varying the supply of bank reserves. However, as I just mentioned, the Fed's asset purchases have had the effect of putting an unusually high level of reserves into the banking system. Thus, in order to tighten monetary policy, the Fed cannot simply raise its target for the federal funds rate; it will have to take other steps to ensure that interest rates actually increase. The first objective has now been substantially achieved. Diminished use of some of our special facilities followed the easing of liquidity stresses in the relevant markets, and led naturally to our closing those facilities. In other cases, we decided that liquidity conditions had improved enough that further support was not warranted and that markets should function on their own. Many of our liquidity facilities expired in February, and last month we ended the TAF and most of the TALF. All that now remains of the special liquidity facilities is the part of the TALF for loans backed by newly issued commercial mortgage-backed securities, which itself is scheduled to close on June 30. We have also restored pre-crisis practice with respect to the maximum maturity of discount window loans and have increased the rate on such loans to 50 basis points over the rate we pay on reserve balances, from the 25 basis point level that was put in place during the crisis. I would emphasize that the winding down of our emergency liquidity facilities and the normalization of the terms for discount window credit were undertaken because the recovery in financial markets suggested that they were no longer necessary. These changes were not expected to lead to tighter financial conditions for households and businesses and they did not signal any change in the outlook for the economy or for monetary policy. As I have indicated, the second objective will likely require some innovative measures, insofar as, all else equal, the unusually high level of reserve balances would undercut efforts to raise the federal funds rate through conventional means. As Chairman Bernanke has detailed in his speeches and Congressional testimony, we have a number of tools that will allow us to accomplish this task at the appropriate time.1The most important instrument is likely to be increasing the interest rate paid to banks on the reserves they hold with the Fed. Raising this rate should itself tend to raise the federal funds rate, because banks have little incentive to lend into the federal funds market at rates below what they can earn risk-free at the Fed. The efficacy of this instrument can be increased by draining reserves through the use of a number of instruments, including reverse repurchase agreements (reverse repos), term deposits for reserve balances, and, if necessary, sales of assets on our balance sheet. Thus, unlike a monetary policy action under more normal conditions, our eventual decision to raise interest rates will require a determination of the mix and sequencing of these policy tools, as well as the basic determination of when monetary tightening is appropriate. In recent months, the Federal Reserve has been evaluating the likely effects of each of these tools. We have also successfully tested our capacity to carry out reverse repo transactions and are expanding the group of counterparties with which these transactions can be carried out. We have also been working on the development of a term deposit facility. These analytic and practical steps are obviously taking place in preparation for a change in monetary policy. But it is important to emphasize that the completion of preparatory steps need not be followed in short order by the initiation of tightening measures. The preparations for exit will allow us to move with confidence when the time is right. They do not push us toward the door. Indeed, the relatively modest pace of recovery, the continued high rate of unemployment, subdued inflation trends, and well-anchored inflation expectations together suggest that the need for highly accommodative monetary policies will not diminish soon. Of course, we should and will be attentive to new information suggesting otherwise. As to the precise mix and sequencing of tools when the time to tighten does come, the FOMC should continue to analyze conditions and keep the public apprised of our thinking. But it seems to me neither necessary nor advisable to decide upon a single game plan that will be announced in advance and rigidly implemented after a decision is made to raise rates. Apart from the key element of raising interest rates on reserves, the optimal strategy will likely depend on the specific money market and lending conditions that prevail at the time. For instance, some circumstances might dictate the advisability of a quite rapid sequence of reserve draining and interest rate raising steps, whereas other conditions might argue for a more measured and incremental approach. Like many others--on and off the FOMC--I have certain predispositions in considering the question of an exit strategy. For example, I would be very cautious about any exit strategy that includes early asset sales. While we ultimately want to move our balance sheet back to a more traditional structure, the effects of such sales are very uncertain, particularly in a period before a sustainable recovery is well established. But, as with all monetary policy decisions, we should ultimately tailor the particulars of our response to the circumstances as we find them. If anything, the unprecedented nature of this exercise means that we should be unusually attuned to economic and financial conditions during, as well as before, our exit, and we should be prepared to make prudent adjustments as necessary. Community Banks TodayLet me turn now more specifically to the state of community banking. Convention at the Federal Reserve defines a community banking organization as any institution with assets of $10 billion or less. Although this size-based definition correlates well with the other characteristics of community banks, such a quantitative measure doesn't capture the full meaning of the term "community bank" or illuminate the business model behind the term. Community banks are locally owned and focus their attention on the needs of the community and its businesses. Because they are grounded in their communities, these banks are able to provide services that are personalized, and tailored to meet local preferences and needs. Community banks transform local deposits into loans to the community where their depositors live and work. By doing this, they help to keep their local economies vital and growing. Community banks thus epitomize the notion of relationship banking. They are better positioned than their national competitors to go beyond models and consider other factors when making credit decisions. They can often respond faster to lending requests than their national competitors because of their direct knowledge of their customers' financing needs and debt servicing capacities. To appreciate the importance of community banks, we need look no further than small business lending. Other than personal borrowing or credit card use by proprietors, community banks are often the only source of credit potentially available to smaller businesses. Indeed, it is precisely in this kind of lending that an exercise of judgment based on the characteristics of borrowers and local economic conditions is most likely to be significant in making decisions on creditworthiness. Large numbers of community banks thrive in the United States operating under the model just described. But, as with all banks, the fortunes of these institutions have ebbed and flowed with economic conditions, and the number of community banks has consistently declined over the last few decades. During the current economic downturn, community banks have been particularly hard hit. During 2009, banks with assets of $10 billion or less recorded an aggregate net loss of more than $4 billion. This weak performance stemmed primarily from sustained deterioration in residential mortgages and commercial real estate loans. Loan loss provisions reached $33.0 billion, seven times the pre-crisis level of $4.5 billion recorded in 2006. Net interest margins also narrowed, squeezed by a substantial rise in nonaccruing assets, and the nonperforming assets ratio reached nearly five percent. Almost one in every three community banks recorded a net loss last year. Moreover, only a little more than one quarter of these institutions reported a return on assets of one percent or more (a typical measure of sound earnings performance), down from 56 percent of institutions in the pre-crisis year 2006. And the FDIC problem list recently reached 702 banks and thrifts, its highest level since 1993. The Challenges for Community BanksGiven these circumstances, the immediate challenges for many community banks are clear. The first order of business for many will be to address concentrations and weaknesses in commercial real estate (CRE) lending activities. This will require not only rethinking credit administration practices and management information system (MIS) requirements, but also expanding loan workout expertise and disposing of acquired real estate with a minimum of additional loss. This last task could be complicated by the large volume of commercial properties expected to come onto the market as a result of failures of other banks that concentrated their lending in the commercial real estate sector. Loan writedowns and loan provisioning will also require management attention, and frequent updates of appraisals or evaluations may be required to support impairment analyses. Coping with CRE problems will not be easy. I expect these problems to be with us for some time to come, with both direct and indirect consequences for many smaller banks. Recognizing the effect that difficult real estate conditions were having on banks' loan quality and thereby their lending activities, last year the Federal Reserve and other banking agencies issued guidance addressing the restructuring and workout of commercial real estate loans.2This policy statement set forth a framework for prudently working out commercial real estate loans and, importantly, included specific examples to guide examiners and bankers in evaluating these loans and their prospects for rehabilitation. Because many small business loans are supported by commercial real estate collateral, we hope that this guidance will not only help to alleviate undue pressures on commercial real estate markets, but also to improve the climate for small business lending. Our guidance is not an invitation to lend and pretend. Itisa commitment that Federal Reserve supervisors will not take a mechanical or reflexive approach to your management of CRE exposures that are, or soon could be, problems. If you believe that we are not implementing the terms of this guidance, please let us know and give us the details. Only with such detailed information can our senior supervisory officials at the Federal Reserve Board determine if our implementation is in fact promoting the policies set forth in last fall's guidance. As if the core CRE problems were not enough, community banks face other short-term challenges. While liquidity strains have eased following temporary increases in deposit insurance and the gradual stabilization of market conditions, banks will also have to bolster liquidity contingency funding planning. Some banks that relied to a significant degree on so-called noncore funding sources to grow rapidly in the run-up to the crisis may have to rework their business plans to secure more stable funding sources. Additionally, capital planning will need to be strengthened across all institutions as companies adjust to the change in market conditions and investor expectations for higher capital cushions. Although these immediate financial challenges will, I am afraid, overwhelm quite a number of community banks this year, the vast majority will survive the present downturn. These survivors, however, will face a substantially different operating environment than they saw earlier this decade, and will need to adjust their operations to prosper over the long term. The financial crisis was ignited far from the operations of community banks. However, we must overhaul our regulatory regime, so as better to contain systemic risk and the threats posed to the financial system by institutions perceived as too big to fail. Still, as the CRE situation graphically demonstrates, too many community banks have proven unable to manage their high concentrations of exposures. As a result, we expect bankers in the coming years to try to escape, and then avoid, high loan concentrations, regardless of loan type. Important as this goal is, it will not be easy to achieve for many banks. For example, one means to this end would be to operate a bank with much higher capital ratios and thereby lower concentrations. This strategy, however, would lower a bank's returns and, while that may be manageable for a closely held bank, it would make any needed capital raises more difficult for a publicly traded community bank. Alternatively, banks could further diversify their loan and investment portfolios, expanding into lower risk or new loan and investment segments. But this too presents difficulties. For one thing, lower risk assets have lower returns. Also, one of the reasons community banks have been so concentrated in commercial real estate loans is stiff competition for other types of loans, such as consumer installment loans, from larger banks and other nonbank competitors. A second long-term challenge facing community banks is the secular compression in the net interest margin. Despite all of the emphasis on noninterest revenues in recent years, community banks have continued to rely heavily on spread income, indicating that many community banks have been unsuccessful in diversifying their revenue streams.3The aggregate net interest margin for banks with assets of $10 billion or less has also tightened considerably as competition in the debt and lending markets has intensified, compressing by more than 70 basis points over the last 10 years to 3.63 percent. As a result, it becomes more difficult for community banks to cover their overhead, pressuring their earnings and their ability to support capital needs from internal sources. It is possible that this declining trend in spread income could be reversed once the high level of non-accruing assets falls and if the premium charged for credit risk remains elevated once the current crisis has passed. Smaller banks may also find that they are able to win good, solid business away from their national competitors, if customers turn away from large banks as a consequence of the crisis. But community banks cannot count on this happening. As a result, some banks may reach further out on the risk spectrum to relieve earnings pressures. We have seen these actions in the past, for example, when banks have engaged in ill-conceived investment securities leveraging programs or entered the subprime credit card market to expand their income. Others may be tempted to cut back on critical risk-management infrastructure, such as loan review, to pare expenses and enhance returns. Some may also simply pull back from market pricing if they think it is too thin and accept a lower return. Regardless of the course of action you pursue, you will confront risk and reward trade-offs that will fundamentally affect the financial condition and performance, and ultimately safety and soundness, of your banks. I cannot emphasize enough the importance of being attentive to the implications of changes in your business activities for your risk levels. Far more often than you might expect, we encounter banks that have not adequately thought through the potential risks of a new business line or lending product and that later suffer adverse financial consequences. ConclusionIn closing, let me say how encouraged I am that, despite your struggles in the current economic environment, most community banks remain sound and profitable. In a sense, the lessons from the financial crisis are paradoxical. On the one hand, the crisis has underscored the importance of a strong community banking system to the health of local economies around the country, particularly in keeping credit flowing to small businesses. On the other hand, the crisis and its aftermath will work changes, some painful, in all parts of our financial system, including those involving community banks. My concluding thought is that it is not too soon to begin considering your strategy in light of these changes. Footnotes 1.Ben S. Bernanke (2010), "Federal Reserve's exit strategy," statement before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, March 25.Return to text 2.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Adopts Policy Statement Supporting Prudent Commercial Real Estate (CRE) Loan Workouts," press release, October 30.Return to text 3.On average, during the five years ending December 31, 2004, community banks generated 32 percent of their revenue from noninterest-based sources. For the most recent five years ending December 31, 2009, the average contribution of noninterest income to total revenues was even lower, at 27 percent.Return to text
Government to Currency Users: Know Its FeaturesSo You Can Know It's Real Officials from the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the United States Secret Service today unveiled the new design for the $100 note. Complete with advanced technology to combat counterfeiting, the new design for the $100 note retains the traditional look of U.S. currency. "As with previous U.S. currency redesigns, this note incorporates the best technology available to ensure we're staying ahead of counterfeiters," said Secretary of the Treasury Tim Geithner. "When the new design $100 note is issued on February 10, 2011, the approximately 6.5 billion older design $100s already in circulation will remain legal tender," said Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board Ben S. Bernanke. "U.S. currency users should know they will not have to trade in their older design $100 notes when the new ones begin circulating." There are a number of security features in the redesigned $100 note, including two new features, the 3-D Security Ribbon and the Bell in the Inkwell. These security features are easy for consumers and merchants to use to authenticate their currency. The blue 3-D Security Ribbon on the front of the new $100 note contains images of bells and 100s that move and change from one to the other as you tilt the note. The Bell in the Inkwell on the front of the note is another new security feature. The bell changes color from copper to green when the note is tilted, an effect that makes it seem to appear and disappear within the copper inkwell. "The new security features announced today come after more than a decade of research and development to protect our currency from counterfeiting. To ensure a seamless introduction of the new $100 note into the financial system, we will conduct a global public education program to ensure that users of U.S. currency are aware of the new security features," said Treasurer of the United States Rosie Rios. "For 145 years, the men and women of the United States Secret Service have worked diligently to protect the integrity of U.S. currency from counterfeiters," said Director Mark Sullivan. "During that time, our agency has evolved to keep pace with the advanced methodologies employed by the criminals we pursue. What has remained constant in combating counterfeiting, however, is the effectiveness of consumer education initiatives that urge merchants and customers to examine the security features on the notes they receive." Although less than 1/100th of one percent of the value of all U.S. currency in circulation is reported counterfeit, the $100 note is the most widely circulated and most often counterfeited denomination outside the U.S. "The $100 is the highest value denomination that we issue, and it circulates broadly around the world," said Michael Lambert, Assistant Director for Cash at the Federal Reserve Board. "Therefore, we took the necessary time to develop advanced security features that are easy for the public to use in everyday transactions, but difficult for counterfeiters to replicate." "The advanced security features we've included in the new $100 note will hinder potential counterfeiters from producing high-quality fakes that can deceive consumers and merchants," said Larry R. Felix, Director of the Treasury's Bureau of Engraving and Printing. "Protect yourself - it only takes a few seconds to check the new $100 note and know it's real." The new design for the $100 note retains three effective security features from the previous design: the portrait watermark of Benjamin Franklin, the security thread, and the color-shifting numeral 100. The new $100 note also displays American symbols of freedom, including phrases from the Declaration of Independence and the quill the Founding Fathers used to sign this historic document. Both are located to the right of the portrait on the front of the note. The back of the note has a new vignette of Independence Hall featuring the rear, rather than the front, of the building. Both the vignette on the back of the note and the portrait on the front have been enlarged, and the oval that previously appeared around both images has been removed. For a more detailed description of the redesigned $100 note and its features, visitwww.newmoney.govwhere you can watch an animated video, click through an interactive note or browse through the multimedia resources for images and B-roll. Also, visitwww.newmoney.govfor information on how to order free training materials for cash handlers, or you may download the materials directly from the Web site. The training materials for the $100 note are available in 25 languages.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Access Bancshares, Inc., Champlin, Minnesota, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Ameri-National Corporation, Overland Park, Kansas, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Atlantic Southern Financial Group, Inc., Macon, Georgia, a registered bank holding company, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and the Banking Commissioner of the State of Georgia. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Citizens Bancshares of Woodville, Inc., Hudson, Wisconsin, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Coast Bancorp, San Luis Obispo, California, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among East Dubuque Bancshares, Inc., East Dubuque, Illinois, a registered bank holding company, East Dubuque Savings Bank, Dubuque, Iowa, a state chartered member bank, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among FCB Florida Bancorporation, Inc., Orlando, Florida, a registered bank holding company, First Commercial Bank of Florida, Orlando, Florida, a state chartered member bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and the State of Florida Office of Financial Regulation. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between First National Financial Services, Inc., Elk River, Minnesota, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among FMB Equibanc, Inc., Statesboro, Georgia, a registered bank holding company, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and the Banking Commissioner of the State of Georgia. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Independent Bancshares, Inc., Ocala, Florida, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Liberty Financial Group, Inc., Eugene, Oregon, a registered bank holding company, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, and the Oregon Department of Consumer and Business Services, Division of Finance and Corporate Securities. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Rosemount Financial Services, Inc., Rosemount, Minnesota, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Sun West Capital Corporation, Las Vegas, Nevada, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among The Bank of Currituck, Moyock, North Carolina, a state chartered member bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, and the North Carolina Office of the Commissioner of Banks. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among First Banks, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri, The San Francisco Company, Clayton, Missouri, both registered bank holding companies, their subsidiary bank, First Bank, Creve Coeur, Missouri, a state chartered member bank, and the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.