The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies today announced changes to Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations to support stabilization of communities affected by high foreclosure levels. The final rule is substantially the same as the proposal published for comment on June 24, 2010. It encourages depository institutions to support eligible development activities in areas designated under the Neighborhood Stabilization Program (NSP) administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Under the NSP, HUD has provided funds to state and local governments and nonprofit organizations for the purchase and redevelopment of abandoned and foreclosed properties. The new rule encourages depository institutions to make loans and investments, and provide services to support NSP activities in areas with HUD-approved plans. The final rule reflects the broad support expressed by public comments for the agencies’ proposal to expand existing CRA consideration for neighborhood stabilization activities. NSP-eligible activities will receive favorable consideration under the new rule if conducted within two years after the date when NSP program funds are required to be spent. Allowing banking institutions to receive CRA consideration for NSP-eligible activities in additional NSP-targeted areas serves the purposes of the CRA and creates an opportunity to build upon government programs in areas with high rates of foreclosure and vacancy. CRA consideration is not limited to activities actually receiving NSP funds and may include other eligible activities in NSP plan areas. The final rule is attached. It is effective 30 days from the date of its publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. Federal Registernotice:HTML|88 KB PDF
The federal financial regulatory agencies issued final supervisory guidance today on sound practices by financial institutions for real estate appraisals and evaluations. Financial institutions use reliable appraisals and evaluations to determine the value of collateral for mortgages and other loans; appraisals and evaluations are integral to institutions' real estate lending. Institutions base credit decisions primarily on borrowers' ability to repay, but institutions also consider the value of real estate collateral as a secondary source of repayment. TheInteragency Appraisal and Evaluation Guidelines, which replace 1994 guidelines, explain the agencies' minimum regulatory standards for appraisals. The guidelines incorporate the agencies' recent supervisory issuances on appraisal practices, address advancements in information technology used in collateral valuation practices, and clarify standards for the industry's appropriate use of analytical methods and technological tools in developing evaluations. Financial institutions should review their appraisal and evaluation programs to ensure they are consistent with the guidelines. The guidelines emphasize that financial institutions are responsible for selecting appraisers and people performing evaluations based on their competence, experience, and knowledge of the market and type of property being valued. Institutions should demonstrate the independence of their processes for obtaining property values, and adopt standards for appropriate communications and information-sharing with appraisers and people performing evaluations, according to the guidelines. In promoting sound credit decisions, the guidelines emphasize the importance of institutions maintaining strong internal controls to ensure reliable appraisals and evaluations. Institutions also are responsible for monitoring and periodically updating valuations of collateral for existing real estate loans and for transactions, such as modifications and workouts, according to the guidelines. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Financial Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 underscores the importance of sound real estate lending decisions; future revisions to the appraisal guidelines may be necessary after regulations are adopted to implement the Act. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced the annual adjustment to the asset-size thresholds used to define small bank, small savings association, intermediate small bank and intermediate small savings association under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations. The annual adjustments for banks are required by the CRA rules. Annual adjustments to these asset-size thresholds are based on the change in the average of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for urban wage earners and clerical workers, not seasonally adjusted, for each 12-month period ending in November, with rounding to the nearest million. As a result of the 2.21 percent increase in the CPI index for the period ending in November 2010, the definitions of small and intermediate small institutions for CRA examinations will change as follows: These asset-size threshold adjustments are effective January 1, 2011. The agencies will publish the adjustments in the Federal Register. In addition, the agencies will post a list of the current and historical asset-size thresholds on the website of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (http://www.ffiec.gov/cra). Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
Three federal bank regulatory agencies today announced they are seeking comment on a notice of proposed rulemaking that would revise the market risk capital rules for banking organizations with significant trading activity. The proposed rule would implement changes approved by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to its market risk framework. The Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) believe the proposed revisions would better capture positions for which the market risk capital rules are appropriate, reduce procyclicality in market risk capital requirements, enhance the rules’ sensitivity to risks that are not adequately captured by the current regulatory measurement methodologies, and increase market discipline through enhanced disclosures. The Federal Reserve, OCC, and FDIC request comments on the notice within 90 days of its publication in theFederal Register, which is expected soon. Separately, the Federal Reserve, the OCC, and the FDIC are seeking comment on a notice of proposed rulemaking that would amend the advanced approaches capital adequacy framework known as Basel II to be consistent with certain provisions of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. More specifically, a banking organization operating under the advanced approaches standards would be required to meet, on an on-going basis, the higher of the generally applicable and the advanced approaches minimum risk-based capital standards. The Federal Reserve, OCC, and FDIC request comments on this notice within 60 days of its publication in theFederal Register, which is expected soon. Federal Registernotice: (R-1401)HTML|PDF Federal Registernotice: (R-1402)HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday published its annual notice of the asset-size exemption threshold for depository institutions under Regulation C, which implements the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). The asset-size exemption for depository institutions will increase to $40 million based on the annual percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers for the twelve-month period ending in November 2010. Depository institutions with assets of $40 million or less as of December 31, 2010, are exempt from collecting data in 2011. An institution's exemption from collecting data in 2011 does not affect its responsibility to report the data it was required to collect in 2010. The adjustment is effective January 1, 2011. HMDA and the Board's Regulation C require most mortgage lenders located in metropolitan areas to collect, report, and disclose data about applications for, and originations and purchases of, home purchase loans, home improvement loans, and refinancings. Data reported include the type, purpose, and amount of the loan; the race, ethnicity, sex, and income of the loan applicant; the location of the property; and loan price information for some loans. The purposes of HMDA include helping to determine whether financial institutions are serving the housing needs of their communities and assisting in fair lending enforcement. The Board's notice is attached. Federal Registernotice:HTML|43 KB PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the proposal by Caja de Ahorros de Valencia, Castellón y Alicante, Bancaja, Valencia, Spain, and Banco Financiero y de Ahorros, S.A., Madrid, Spain, to acquire Caja de Ahorros y Monte de Piedad de Madrid, also of Madrid, and its subsidiary bank, City National Bank of Florida, Miami, Florida. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Friday that a live webcast of its December 16 open meeting will be available on the Board's website. At the meeting, which is scheduled to begin at 2:30 p.m. EST, the Board will discuss proposed rules governing debit card interchange fees and routing. This will be the first time the Board has webcast one of its meetings. The Board has previously webcast other public events such asChairman Bernanke's town hall meeting with educatorsand aconference on addressing issues facing small businesses. Live webcast of open Board meetingLive captioningis available. Also seemeeting documentation.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Bank of America Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. The agreement addresses issues associated with anti-competitive activities at Bank of America by certain employees in conjunction with the sale of certain derivative financial products to municipalities and other non-profit organizations from 1998 to 2003. In separate, coordinated actions, theOffice of the Comptroller of the Currency announcedthe execution of a formal agreement with Bank of America, N.A., Charlotte, North Carolina, a wholly owned subsidiary of Bank of America Corporation. Actions were also taken by theSecurities and Exchange Commission, the Internal Revenue Service, and 20 States Attorneys General. In addition, theDepartment of Justice announcedthat Bank of America has met its obligation under the Antitrust Division's Corporate Leniency Program to pay restitution based on anti-competitive conduct identified by federal and state agencies. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: TCSB Bancorp, Inc. (50 KB PDF), Traverse City, MichiganWritten Agreement dated December 6, 2010 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: Weststar Financial Services Corporation (44 KB PDF), Asheville, North CarolinaWritten Agreement dated December 9, 2010 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: FEB Bancshares, Inc., Louisville, Alabama (44 KB PDF)Written Agreement dated December 21, 2010 First International Bancorp of Texas, Inc., Plano, Texas, and First International Bancorp America, Reno, Nevada (50 KB PDF)Written Agreement dated December 15, 2010 Norcal Community Bancorp, Alameda, California (45 KB PDF)Written Agreement dated December 20, 2010 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: First Community Bank (108 KB PDF), Glasgow, MontanaWritten Agreement dated November 29, 2010 First National Community Bancorp, Inc. (65 KB PDF), Dunmore, PennsylvaniaWritten Agreement dated November 24, 2010 Oxford Financial Corporation (62 KB PDF), Oak Brook, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated November 29, 2010 Ridgestone Financial Services, Inc. (58 KB PDF), Brookfield, WisconsinWritten Agreement dated November 29, 2010 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: Lino Lakes Banc Shares, Inc. (46 KB PDF), Forest Lake, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated December 2, 2010Village Bancshares, Inc. (48 KB PDF), St. Francis, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated December 1, 2010 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the following enforcement actions: City National Bancshares Corporation (50 KB PDF), Newark, New JerseyWritten Agreement dated December 14, 2010Community Shores Bank Corporation (46 KB PDF), Muskegon, MichiganWritten Agreement dated December 16, 2010 Search Federal Reserve enforcement actions
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the following enforcement action: The Park Avenue Bank (46 KB PDF), Valdosta, GeorgiaPrompt Corrective Action Directive dated December 13, 2010 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions.
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Payment Cards Center Conference, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Good afternoon. I am delighted to be here for the 10th anniversary of the establishment of the Payment Cards Center at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. I would especially like to recognize Bob Hunt, director of the center, and his staff as well as the leadership of the Philadelphia Fed for providing such an outstanding forum for research, policy, and industry discussion in the important area of consumer credit and payments. I plan to set the stage for this conference by focusing on three topics that are of particular interest to the Federal Reserve: changes in consumer credit, changes in the use of payment methods, and regulatory developments that affect both consumer credit and payments. I'll finish with some comments about the future of consumer payments. Changes in Consumer CreditDuring the recent financial crisis, the Federal Reserve and other policymakers throughout the government took unprecedented actions to mitigate the fallout from severely distressed market conditions and support the flow of credit to consumers and businesses. Nonetheless, the level of credit outstanding for households has been very slow to rebound and remains lower than it was at the onset of the crisis. The reasons for the slow rebound are, without a doubt, complex and multidimensional. Still, it is worthwhile to examine the data and try to understand why credit growth is not more robust. For this forum, I have chosen to focus my discussion on factors affecting the overall movements in credit card debt. The bulk of revolving credit in the United States today is held in the form of credit card debt. As the financial crisis developed in late 2008, the aggregate amount of credit card debt outstanding began to fall. Revolving credit has dropped every month since that time and is currently about 15 percent lower than it was at the time of the Lehman Brothers Holdings bankruptcy. Although our economy has experienced other long episodes in which revolving credit growth has slowed, we have never seen such a prolonged period of outright decline. As overall consumer spending weakened significantly over the course of the recession and the early stages of the recovery, a proportionate decline in revolving credit used to finance purchases might actually have been expected. However, the decrease in revolving credit appeared to outpace the contemporaneous decline in spending during the recession, and, so far in the recovery, revolving credit has continued to decrease even as spending has turned up. This suggests that there are factors at work other than cyclical spending weakness. Within this context, it is helpful to consider the three main reasons that net borrowing--that is, the change in credit outstanding--can decrease: First, households can charge less on their revolving accounts; second, households can pay off a larger share of their balances each month; or third, households can default on (or lenders can charge off) their existing balances. Taking the three factors in reverse order, consider first the role of cardholder defaults. As the economy weakened in 2008 and 2009, an increasing number of households found it difficult to pay their credit card bills on time. With nearly 10 percent of the workforce unemployed and many more underemployed, a significant number of households experienced sharply reduced incomes. Weakness in the housing market also contributed to financial strains, as many households could no longer easily tap into home equity to consolidate their card debt and lower their monthly payments.1In this adverse economic environment, it is perhaps not surprising that the charge-off rate on credit cards more than doubled from about 4 percent in 2007 to more than 9 percent in 2009. The rate of charge-offs has since declined from its peak but remains elevated. All told, we estimate that the rise in charge-offs can account for about one-third of the net decline in revolving credit growth from 2007 to 2009. Another possible explanation for the decline in outstanding balances might be that households, in an effort to repair their balance sheetsorbring down their debt burdens, have begun paying down their credit card balances faster than usual. But, on the whole, the data do not indicate that faster paydown is a significant factor. Historically, households tend to repay their credit card balances at a faster rate during good economic times and tend to slow this rate when economic activity is weak. And, over the past several years, this tendency appears to have held up. In 2006, the rate of credit card repayment was well above its long-run trend, probably reflecting strong incomes as well as ample home equity that could be tapped to pay off more expensive card debt. However, beginning in 2007, as housing markets weakened and unemployment climbed, households began to pay off their card debt at a significantly slower pace--a trend that extended into 2008 and 2009 as the economic downturn worsened. All told, the drop in the payoff rate has been more pronounced than in the recessions of 1990-91 and 2000-01. More recently, however, this trend has reversed, and as of August 2010, the repayment rate had risen to a more typical level. While this increase likely reflects a gradual improvement in the ability of cardholders to repay their debt, it could also be attributed to a shift in the composition of cardholders in bank portfolios toward more creditworthy borrowers as charged-off accounts were replaced with new accounts underwritten using stricter criteria. The bottom line is that accelerated payment rates on existing balances do not seem to have contributed importantly to the drop in credit card debt outstanding over the past couple of years. Finally, consumers have been charging less on their credit cards. According to industry statistics, the amount of money charged on credit cards for purchases or cash advances fell around 10 percent between the third quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2010. This slowdown in new charges could be the result of a variety of factors. The significant overall drop in consumption during the recession no doubt cut into the demand for credit, as households simply opted to spend less than in the past. When they did spend, they may have been less willing to borrow to fund consumption given their experiences during the financial crisis, expectations for weaker economic conditions, and continued uncertainty about job prospects. Indeed, consumer preferences toward debt do appear to have shifted. Preliminary data from the 2007-09 Panel Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) show a modest increase--from 35 percent in 2007 to more than 40 percent in 2009--in the share of households that believed that buying things on credit was a "bad idea." Further, those households whose views about buying on credit became more negative between 2007 and 2009 reported reducing their charges substantially more than other households. Consumers also appear to be seeking less new credit: Applications for new credit accounts, as recorded in data from the national credit bureaus, remain significantly lower than were observed for most of the past decade. Credit supply factors have also likely contributed to the decline in overall credit card outstanding balances. Households may have charged less because they had less credit available. In the SCF panel, about 44 percent of households with credit card debt in 2007 experienced a reduction in their credit limits by 2009. Data from the national credit bureaus indicate that credit lines peaked in the third quarter of 2008 and continued to fall over the course of 2009 and 2010. The average dollar value of combined credit lines available to cardholders fell from a high near $26,000 per cardholder in late 2008 to around $21,000 per cardholder by the third quarter of 2010, a decline of about 20 percent. Moreover, SCF data indicate that changes in credit limits are indeed related to credit card spending: Among households whose credit limit declined, SCF data show that the median amount of monthly new charges fell from $200 in 2007 to $50 in 2009, while among households whose credit limit did not decline, the median amount of new charges rose from $150 to $200. Although this relationship is not necessarily causal, credit line restrictions have likely played at least some role in the reduction in credit card borrowing. Looking further at the supply side of credit card debt, card lenders did report retrenching during the financial crisis. According to the Federal Reserve Board's quarterly Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), large fractions of banks tightened standards and terms on new and existing credit card accounts throughout 2008 and 2009.2In recent months, however, some banks reported having eased standards somewhat. In the most recent survey, published in October 2010, about two-thirds of banks thought that credit standards for prime borrowers on credit card loans and other consumer loans either were at their longer-run averages or would return to them over the next two years. In contrast, for nonprime borrowers, more than half of the respondents thought that standards would remain tighter through at least 2013 or would not return to longer-run norms for the foreseeable future. In addition to reductions in existing credit lines, new credit card account solicitations also fell considerably during the recession. By early 2009, offers to households for new credit cards had dropped to around one-fifth of their count in 2006. Card solicitations have turned up over the course of 2010, but they remain well below their pre-crisis levels. In addition, consistent with the SLOOS, the data on credit card offers show that solicitations to borrowers with lower credit scores are rebounding more slowly than those to borrowers with higher scores. Interest rates may have caused some households to reduce their credit card usage even if unused credit lines remained available. Although credit card interest rates declined in line with broader interest rates early in the financial crisis, card rates diverged from the broader rate environment by reversing this decline during 2009. Some of the rate increase likely reflects a rise in charge-offs, which increases card issuers' costs of providing credit. However, the divergence from rates on other forms of credit that also experienced higher charge-offs indicates that a portion of the increase may have been in anticipation of regulatory changes, which I will discuss a bit later, that will restrict some card issuers' ability to reprice credit. Overall, then, the available data lead me to conclude that, in large part, the decline in revolving consumer credit outstanding is due to a combination of higher charge-offs, tighter credit, and less consumer willingness to take on debt, but probably not to widespread increases in discretionary paydowns of existing debt. Although households account for the vast majority of credit card loans and credit card spending in our economy, the market for small business credit cards has grown considerably over the past 10 to 15 years. After checking accounts, credit cards are the second-most-common financial product used by small businesses. Small business cards are structured to cater to business needs with features, pricing, and underwriting unique to their typical usage. Issuers provide several services specifically for small businesses, such as employee cards with customizable spending limits and detailed spending statements each month or quarter. Also, small business cards often have higher credit limits than personal cards to facilitate the higher spending needs of small businesses. Small businesses are noticeably less likely than households to carry a balance on their cards. As of the end of 2009, 83 percent of small businesses used credit cards. Of those using credit cards, 64 percent used small business cards and 41 percent used personal cards. Despite the widespreaduseof credit cards, only a minority of small businesses--18 percent--reportedborrowingon credit cards. In comparison, nearly one-half of households reported carrying a balance on their credit cards.3Thus, although most small businesses appear to use credit cards for transactions purposes, and perhaps as a source of short-term credit, the data suggest that only a small fraction of them rely on credit cards as a source of longer-term credit. Yet even if firms do not carry a balance, reductions in the size of their credit card lines may strain their cash flow and force them to cut spending or require them to use more expensive forms of short-term credit, such as trade finance. Changes in the Use of Payment InstrumentsConsumer credit pricing and availability also appear to affect consumer preferences for different payment methods. When consumers decide how to pay for their purchases, they may have a variety of payment options to choose from, including cash, checks, debit cards, credit cards, prepaid cards, and even, increasingly, their mobile phones. The Federal Reserve has tracked changes in consumers' use of payment instruments in a number of studies over the past decade. These studies cast an interesting light on the effects that weakened economic conditions have had on the mix of payments. The number of checks processed in the United States has been declining since the late 1990s, as consumers, businesses, and governments have shifted away from checks and toward electronic payment methods. The annual number of checks dropped from more than 40 billion in 2000 to 30 billion in 2006, and we expect the data for 2009 to show continued declines. At the same time, the use of debit and credit cards has risen. Debit card payments, in particular, have grown remarkably: Between 2000 and 2008, the number of debit card transactions grew at an annual rate of more than 17 percent, while the value of debit card transactions grew 15 percent per year. Credit card transactions have grown at a slower pace than debit card transactions over the same period--about 2 percent per year in number and roughly 5 percent per year in value. For smaller-value payments, both types of cards, but especially debit cards, have served as substitutes for checks and, very likely, cash. Although the nature of cash makes direct measurement of aggregate cash payments difficult, we can infer a trend in usage from changes in the level of small-denomination currency that is most frequently used in cash payments. The amount of small-denomination domestic currency in circulation has been steadily declining since the 1970s, leading us to believe that cash payments have similarly declined. Most interestingly, the recent period of economic weakness appears to have caused some consumers to shift away from credit cards not only as a source of credit but also as a method of payment. As I said earlier, between late 2008 and early 2010, the value of credit card purchases declined 10 percent. In comparison, although the rate of growth in debit card use slowed during the recession, debit card transactions did not decline in either volume or value. This shift from credit to debit makes sense from the perspective of the consumer. If credit is tight and consumption is contracting, consumers who are reluctant or unable to increase their debt levels can use debit cards to pay for current expenses out of current, rather than future, income. In addition, for individuals with existing credit card balances, interest must be paid on new purchases as well as on previous balances. Those individuals might seek to avoid interest charges on new purchases by using debit cards. This incentive is even stronger in the presence of higher credit card interest rates. Finally, some consumers might use debit cards to track their spending in real time when budgets are tight. Regulatory Changes in Consumer Credit and PaymentsIn addition to the economic recession and recovery, the regulations governing consumer payment and credit products changed significantly in the past few years. So it is especially difficult to separate the effects of economic conditions from regulatory effects on credit and debit card usage. In December 2008, the Federal Reserve issued rules that introduced new consumer protections and revised the disclosures that consumers receive in connection with their credit card accounts. Then, in May 2009, the Congress enacted the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure (Credit CARD) Act, which contained additional provisions regarding credit cards and gift cards. Collectively, these rules have comprehensively overhauled the regulatory regime that applies to credit cards. In large part, these reforms developed in response to concerns about the growing complexity of the products offered to consumers and concerns that consumers could not accurately assess the costs associated with their credit cards. To address these concerns, the Federal Reserve used extensive consumer testing to develop new disclosures to be provided with credit card solicitations and in periodic statements. These disclosures highlight key account terms and attempt to improve consumers' understanding of the costs associated with using their cards. The resulting disclosure requirements establish a new baseline for transparency in the credit card industry. In addition, the new rules ban certain practices that increase the cost of credit in ways that cannot easily be disclosed to consumers, such as double-cycle billing. The new rules also generally prohibit card issuers from increasing interest rates applied to existing balances and require issuers to provide adequate notice of higher rates to be applied to future balances. It is too early to draw conclusions about the ultimate impact of these changes because many of the new requirements have been in effect only since earlier this year. For example, card issuers appear to have changed their credit card pricing and underwriting models as their ability to use penalty pricing has been reduced. And some of the reduction in new account solicitations may also be due in part to the regulatory changes. But, in light of the concurrent changes in charge-off rates, economic conditions, and regulatory requirements, it is hard to separate the relative effects of each. One way to assess the effects of regulation alone might be to watch the relative developments in business credit cards in comparison to consumer credit cards. Credit cards issued primarily for business or commercial purposes generally are not governed by the consumer protections in the Truth in Lending Act or the amendments to that act in the 2009 Credit CARD Act. Some observers have already expressed concern that some card issuers may be marketing business and professional cards to consumers in an effort to sidestep new restrictions. At the same time, some business owners and professionals might find the higher credit line availability or other terms offered on business cards to be more attractive than using their personal cards for business expenses. The federal banking agencies have sufficient supervisory and enforcement authority to ensure that issuers market and issue business cards only to borrowers who they have legitimate reason to believe are using them for business purposes. Generally speaking, the card issuer is responsible for determining whether an account is intended to be used for business or personal purposes, and indeed, business card applications commonly request information necessary to make this determination. The detailed information requested may include, for example, the type of business, annual revenue, age of the firm, number of employees, and tax identification number. The answers to these questions help verify that the applicant owns a business, as well as gauge the creditworthiness of the business. Aside from credit cards, the regulatory landscape is also changing for other payment products. The Federal Reserve has recently issued regulations that prohibit consumers from being automatically enrolled in overdraft programs for overdrafts created by automated teller machine withdrawals and one-time debit card transactions. In addition, new disclosures are required to help consumers understand the associated costs before they choose to opt into overdraft coverage. We have also implemented new protections under the Credit CARD Act that restrict the fees and expiration dates that apply to gift cards.4 The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act requires the Federal Reserve to develop standards for debit card interchange fees and the routing of debit card transactions. I am aware of the high level of interest in this topic, and I recognize the importance of the statute and its implementation for the future development of the payment card industry. However, we plan to issue a proposal for comment soon, so I will not comment on any specific elements at this time. Just as credit card products have undergone change in response to the new credit card rules, new regulations affecting debit card overdrafts and interchange fees are likely to result in some changes in deposit product pricing and design. For example, depository institutions have stated that they are reconsidering their ability to offer free or low-cost checking accounts if losses due to lower revenue from overdraft or interchange fees materialize. As the pricing of checking accounts changes, financial institutions and consumers may turn to certain types of reloadable prepaid cards as checking account alternatives. The Future of Consumer Credit and PaymentsWhile the pace of the economic recovery and the effects of new consumer regulations are strongly influencing lender and consumer behavior, the evolution in the consumer credit and payments landscape in the years ahead will be equally shaped by technological innovation. Innovative product and system design in the payment card marketplace continues to produce new electronic payment products. For example, a growing number of consumers are using prepaid cards. Preliminary estimates from the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's 2009 Survey of Consumer Payment Choice indicate that about one-third of consumers sampled reported having a prepaid card of some type. Offering functionality similar to credit and debit cards, prepaid cards include a variety of products targeted to different groups of customers, from general-purpose reloadable cards that may serve as deposit account substitutes for the unbanked or the underbanked to more-limited-purpose products, such as gift cards, teen spending cards, or mass transit cards. In addition, as an alternative to checks, employers issue payroll cards to employees and numerous government entities make payments and issue benefits on cards. And of course, the idea behind prepaid cards is not limited to being in card form; their function also may show up in the form of codes, stickers, cell phones, and chips embedded in any number of other devices, with payments transferring across the debit card interchange system or automated clearinghouse systems. Depending on the card type, the issuer, the purpose of issuance, the payment collection network, and the form of access, payments made using prepaid cards or other devices may be governed by different regulations and interchange fee restrictions. Consumers cannot be expected to know these differences. It will be important for regulators to monitor, over time, the effect of differences in regulation and pricing restrictions to ensure that consumers are adequately protected regardless of their payment method preferences. Other emerging payment methods, such as mobile payments, also show potential for broad adoption in the United States. Earlier this year, the Federal Reserve Board hosted a forum on consumer protection and education issues associated with mobile payment methods. The Reserve Banks, including the Reserve Bank of Philadelphia through the efforts of the Payment Cards Center, have also been active in soliciting information from industry participants on the roles that various players are taking on in U.S. mobile payments and the forces that are affecting the rate of adoption by card issuers, merchants, networks, telecommunication firms, consumers, and others. As of yet, mobile payments do not represent a meaningful percentage of overall consumer payments in the United States, but the Federal Reserve remains engaged in monitoring the emergence of this product to ensure that adequate consumer protections are put in place as the technology is adopted more broadly in the marketplace. ConclusionIn closing, I encourage you to continue to push forward on research and policy work in the area of consumer credit and payments. The landscape is changing rapidly and dramatically in response to economic, regulatory, and technological developments. You have some very interesting conversations ahead of you during this conference and quite challenging work for the foreseeable future as these markets continue to evolve. I wish you great success in your work, and I thank you for inviting me to participate in this conference. 1.On average since 2003, about half of the respondents to the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers who took cash out during a mortgage refinancing have reported using the funds to pay down other debt.Return to text 2.Results of the SLOOS are available on theBoard's website.Return to text 3.See theFederal Reserve Board's Report to the Congress on the Use of Credit Cards by Small Businesses and the Credit Card Market for Small Businesses(May 2010).Return to text 4.For more information on the new rules concerning credit cards and other payment products, see the "What You Need to Know" publication series.Return to text
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Payment Cards Center Conference, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Good afternoon. I am delighted to be here for the 10th anniversary of the establishment of the Payment Cards Center at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. I would especially like to recognize Bob Hunt, director of the center, and his staff as well as the leadership of the Philadelphia Fed for providing such an outstanding forum for research, policy, and industry discussion in the important area of consumer credit and payments. I plan to set the stage for this conference by focusing on three topics that are of particular interest to the Federal Reserve: changes in consumer credit, changes in the use of payment methods, and regulatory developments that affect both consumer credit and payments. I'll finish with some comments about the future of consumer payments. Changes in Consumer CreditDuring the recent financial crisis, the Federal Reserve and other policymakers throughout the government took unprecedented actions to mitigate the fallout from severely distressed market conditions and support the flow of credit to consumers and businesses. Nonetheless, the level of credit outstanding for households has been very slow to rebound and remains lower than it was at the onset of the crisis. The reasons for the slow rebound are, without a doubt, complex and multidimensional. Still, it is worthwhile to examine the data and try to understand why credit growth is not more robust. For this forum, I have chosen to focus my discussion on factors affecting the overall movements in credit card debt. The bulk of revolving credit in the United States today is held in the form of credit card debt. As the financial crisis developed in late 2008, the aggregate amount of credit card debt outstanding began to fall. Revolving credit has dropped every month since that time and is currently about 15 percent lower than it was at the time of the Lehman Brothers Holdings bankruptcy. Although our economy has experienced other long episodes in which revolving credit growth has slowed, we have never seen such a prolonged period of outright decline. As overall consumer spending weakened significantly over the course of the recession and the early stages of the recovery, a proportionate decline in revolving credit used to finance purchases might actually have been expected. However, the decrease in revolving credit appeared to outpace the contemporaneous decline in spending during the recession, and, so far in the recovery, revolving credit has continued to decrease even as spending has turned up. This suggests that there are factors at work other than cyclical spending weakness. Within this context, it is helpful to consider the three main reasons that net borrowing--that is, the change in credit outstanding--can decrease: First, households can charge less on their revolving accounts; second, households can pay off a larger share of their balances each month; or third, households can default on (or lenders can charge off) their existing balances. Taking the three factors in reverse order, consider first the role of cardholder defaults. As the economy weakened in 2008 and 2009, an increasing number of households found it difficult to pay their credit card bills on time. With nearly 10 percent of the workforce unemployed and many more underemployed, a significant number of households experienced sharply reduced incomes. Weakness in the housing market also contributed to financial strains, as many households could no longer easily tap into home equity to consolidate their card debt and lower their monthly payments.1In this adverse economic environment, it is perhaps not surprising that the charge-off rate on credit cards more than doubled from about 4 percent in 2007 to more than 9 percent in 2009. The rate of charge-offs has since declined from its peak but remains elevated. All told, we estimate that the rise in charge-offs can account for about one-third of the net decline in revolving credit growth from 2007 to 2009. Another possible explanation for the decline in outstanding balances might be that households, in an effort to repair their balance sheetsorbring down their debt burdens, have begun paying down their credit card balances faster than usual. But, on the whole, the data do not indicate that faster paydown is a significant factor. Historically, households tend to repay their credit card balances at a faster rate during good economic times and tend to slow this rate when economic activity is weak. And, over the past several years, this tendency appears to have held up. In 2006, the rate of credit card repayment was well above its long-run trend, probably reflecting strong incomes as well as ample home equity that could be tapped to pay off more expensive card debt. However, beginning in 2007, as housing markets weakened and unemployment climbed, households began to pay off their card debt at a significantly slower pace--a trend that extended into 2008 and 2009 as the economic downturn worsened. All told, the drop in the payoff rate has been more pronounced than in the recessions of 1990-91 and 2000-01. More recently, however, this trend has reversed, and as of August 2010, the repayment rate had risen to a more typical level. While this increase likely reflects a gradual improvement in the ability of cardholders to repay their debt, it could also be attributed to a shift in the composition of cardholders in bank portfolios toward more creditworthy borrowers as charged-off accounts were replaced with new accounts underwritten using stricter criteria. The bottom line is that accelerated payment rates on existing balances do not seem to have contributed importantly to the drop in credit card debt outstanding over the past couple of years. Finally, consumers have been charging less on their credit cards. According to industry statistics, the amount of money charged on credit cards for purchases or cash advances fell around 10 percent between the third quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2010. This slowdown in new charges could be the result of a variety of factors. The significant overall drop in consumption during the recession no doubt cut into the demand for credit, as households simply opted to spend less than in the past. When they did spend, they may have been less willing to borrow to fund consumption given their experiences during the financial crisis, expectations for weaker economic conditions, and continued uncertainty about job prospects. Indeed, consumer preferences toward debt do appear to have shifted. Preliminary data from the 2007-09 Panel Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) show a modest increase--from 35 percent in 2007 to more than 40 percent in 2009--in the share of households that believed that buying things on credit was a "bad idea." Further, those households whose views about buying on credit became more negative between 2007 and 2009 reported reducing their charges substantially more than other households. Consumers also appear to be seeking less new credit: Applications for new credit accounts, as recorded in data from the national credit bureaus, remain significantly lower than were observed for most of the past decade. Credit supply factors have also likely contributed to the decline in overall credit card outstanding balances. Households may have charged less because they had less credit available. In the SCF panel, about 44 percent of households with credit card debt in 2007 experienced a reduction in their credit limits by 2009. Data from the national credit bureaus indicate that credit lines peaked in the third quarter of 2008 and continued to fall over the course of 2009 and 2010. The average dollar value of combined credit lines available to cardholders fell from a high near $26,000 per cardholder in late 2008 to around $21,000 per cardholder by the third quarter of 2010, a decline of about 20 percent. Moreover, SCF data indicate that changes in credit limits are indeed related to credit card spending: Among households whose credit limit declined, SCF data show that the median amount of monthly new charges fell from $200 in 2007 to $50 in 2009, while among households whose credit limit did not decline, the median amount of new charges rose from $150 to $200. Although this relationship is not necessarily causal, credit line restrictions have likely played at least some role in the reduction in credit card borrowing. Looking further at the supply side of credit card debt, card lenders did report retrenching during the financial crisis. According to the Federal Reserve Board's quarterly Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), large fractions of banks tightened standards and terms on new and existing credit card accounts throughout 2008 and 2009.2In recent months, however, some banks reported having eased standards somewhat. In the most recent survey, published in October 2010, about two-thirds of banks thought that credit standards for prime borrowers on credit card loans and other consumer loans either were at their longer-run averages or would return to them over the next two years. In contrast, for nonprime borrowers, more than half of the respondents thought that standards would remain tighter through at least 2013 or would not return to longer-run norms for the foreseeable future. In addition to reductions in existing credit lines, new credit card account solicitations also fell considerably during the recession. By early 2009, offers to households for new credit cards had dropped to around one-fifth of their count in 2006. Card solicitations have turned up over the course of 2010, but they remain well below their pre-crisis levels. In addition, consistent with the SLOOS, the data on credit card offers show that solicitations to borrowers with lower credit scores are rebounding more slowly than those to borrowers with higher scores. Interest rates may have caused some households to reduce their credit card usage even if unused credit lines remained available. Although credit card interest rates declined in line with broader interest rates early in the financial crisis, card rates diverged from the broader rate environment by reversing this decline during 2009. Some of the rate increase likely reflects a rise in charge-offs, which increases card issuers' costs of providing credit. However, the divergence from rates on other forms of credit that also experienced higher charge-offs indicates that a portion of the increase may have been in anticipation of regulatory changes, which I will discuss a bit later, that will restrict some card issuers' ability to reprice credit. Overall, then, the available data lead me to conclude that, in large part, the decline in revolving consumer credit outstanding is due to a combination of higher charge-offs, tighter credit, and less consumer willingness to take on debt, but probably not to widespread increases in discretionary paydowns of existing debt. Although households account for the vast majority of credit card loans and credit card spending in our economy, the market for small business credit cards has grown considerably over the past 10 to 15 years. After checking accounts, credit cards are the second-most-common financial product used by small businesses. Small business cards are structured to cater to business needs with features, pricing, and underwriting unique to their typical usage. Issuers provide several services specifically for small businesses, such as employee cards with customizable spending limits and detailed spending statements each month or quarter. Also, small business cards often have higher credit limits than personal cards to facilitate the higher spending needs of small businesses. Small businesses are noticeably less likely than households to carry a balance on their cards. As of the end of 2009, 83 percent of small businesses used credit cards. Of those using credit cards, 64 percent used small business cards and 41 percent used personal cards. Despite the widespreaduseof credit cards, only a minority of small businesses--18 percent--reportedborrowingon credit cards. In comparison, nearly one-half of households reported carrying a balance on their credit cards.3Thus, although most small businesses appear to use credit cards for transactions purposes, and perhaps as a source of short-term credit, the data suggest that only a small fraction of them rely on credit cards as a source of longer-term credit. Yet even if firms do not carry a balance, reductions in the size of their credit card lines may strain their cash flow and force them to cut spending or require them to use more expensive forms of short-term credit, such as trade finance. Changes in the Use of Payment InstrumentsConsumer credit pricing and availability also appear to affect consumer preferences for different payment methods. When consumers decide how to pay for their purchases, they may have a variety of payment options to choose from, including cash, checks, debit cards, credit cards, prepaid cards, and even, increasingly, their mobile phones. The Federal Reserve has tracked changes in consumers' use of payment instruments in a number of studies over the past decade. These studies cast an interesting light on the effects that weakened economic conditions have had on the mix of payments. The number of checks processed in the United States has been declining since the late 1990s, as consumers, businesses, and governments have shifted away from checks and toward electronic payment methods. The annual number of checks dropped from more than 40 billion in 2000 to 30 billion in 2006, and we expect the data for 2009 to show continued declines. At the same time, the use of debit and credit cards has risen. Debit card payments, in particular, have grown remarkably: Between 2000 and 2008, the number of debit card transactions grew at an annual rate of more than 17 percent, while the value of debit card transactions grew 15 percent per year. Credit card transactions have grown at a slower pace than debit card transactions over the same period--about 2 percent per year in number and roughly 5 percent per year in value. For smaller-value payments, both types of cards, but especially debit cards, have served as substitutes for checks and, very likely, cash. Although the nature of cash makes direct measurement of aggregate cash payments difficult, we can infer a trend in usage from changes in the level of small-denomination currency that is most frequently used in cash payments. The amount of small-denomination domestic currency in circulation has been steadily declining since the 1970s, leading us to believe that cash payments have similarly declined. Most interestingly, the recent period of economic weakness appears to have caused some consumers to shift away from credit cards not only as a source of credit but also as a method of payment. As I said earlier, between late 2008 and early 2010, the value of credit card purchases declined 10 percent. In comparison, although the rate of growth in debit card use slowed during the recession, debit card transactions did not decline in either volume or value. This shift from credit to debit makes sense from the perspective of the consumer. If credit is tight and consumption is contracting, consumers who are reluctant or unable to increase their debt levels can use debit cards to pay for current expenses out of current, rather than future, income. In addition, for individuals with existing credit card balances, interest must be paid on new purchases as well as on previous balances. Those individuals might seek to avoid interest charges on new purchases by using debit cards. This incentive is even stronger in the presence of higher credit card interest rates. Finally, some consumers might use debit cards to track their spending in real time when budgets are tight. Regulatory Changes in Consumer Credit and PaymentsIn addition to the economic recession and recovery, the regulations governing consumer payment and credit products changed significantly in the past few years. So it is especially difficult to separate the effects of economic conditions from regulatory effects on credit and debit card usage. In December 2008, the Federal Reserve issued rules that introduced new consumer protections and revised the disclosures that consumers receive in connection with their credit card accounts. Then, in May 2009, the Congress enacted the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure (Credit CARD) Act, which contained additional provisions regarding credit cards and gift cards. Collectively, these rules have comprehensively overhauled the regulatory regime that applies to credit cards. In large part, these reforms developed in response to concerns about the growing complexity of the products offered to consumers and concerns that consumers could not accurately assess the costs associated with their credit cards. To address these concerns, the Federal Reserve used extensive consumer testing to develop new disclosures to be provided with credit card solicitations and in periodic statements. These disclosures highlight key account terms and attempt to improve consumers' understanding of the costs associated with using their cards. The resulting disclosure requirements establish a new baseline for transparency in the credit card industry. In addition, the new rules ban certain practices that increase the cost of credit in ways that cannot easily be disclosed to consumers, such as double-cycle billing. The new rules also generally prohibit card issuers from increasing interest rates applied to existing balances and require issuers to provide adequate notice of higher rates to be applied to future balances. It is too early to draw conclusions about the ultimate impact of these changes because many of the new requirements have been in effect only since earlier this year. For example, card issuers appear to have changed their credit card pricing and underwriting models as their ability to use penalty pricing has been reduced. And some of the reduction in new account solicitations may also be due in part to the regulatory changes. But, in light of the concurrent changes in charge-off rates, economic conditions, and regulatory requirements, it is hard to separate the relative effects of each. One way to assess the effects of regulation alone might be to watch the relative developments in business credit cards in comparison to consumer credit cards. Credit cards issued primarily for business or commercial purposes generally are not governed by the consumer protections in the Truth in Lending Act or the amendments to that act in the 2009 Credit CARD Act. Some observers have already expressed concern that some card issuers may be marketing business and professional cards to consumers in an effort to sidestep new restrictions. At the same time, some business owners and professionals might find the higher credit line availability or other terms offered on business cards to be more attractive than using their personal cards for business expenses. The federal banking agencies have sufficient supervisory and enforcement authority to ensure that issuers market and issue business cards only to borrowers who they have legitimate reason to believe are using them for business purposes. Generally speaking, the card issuer is responsible for determining whether an account is intended to be used for business or personal purposes, and indeed, business card applications commonly request information necessary to make this determination. The detailed information requested may include, for example, the type of business, annual revenue, age of the firm, number of employees, and tax identification number. The answers to these questions help verify that the applicant owns a business, as well as gauge the creditworthiness of the business. Aside from credit cards, the regulatory landscape is also changing for other payment products. The Federal Reserve has recently issued regulations that prohibit consumers from being automatically enrolled in overdraft programs for overdrafts created by automated teller machine withdrawals and one-time debit card transactions. In addition, new disclosures are required to help consumers understand the associated costs before they choose to opt into overdraft coverage. We have also implemented new protections under the Credit CARD Act that restrict the fees and expiration dates that apply to gift cards.4 The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act requires the Federal Reserve to develop standards for debit card interchange fees and the routing of debit card transactions. I am aware of the high level of interest in this topic, and I recognize the importance of the statute and its implementation for the future development of the payment card industry. However, we plan to issue a proposal for comment soon, so I will not comment on any specific elements at this time. Just as credit card products have undergone change in response to the new credit card rules, new regulations affecting debit card overdrafts and interchange fees are likely to result in some changes in deposit product pricing and design. For example, depository institutions have stated that they are reconsidering their ability to offer free or low-cost checking accounts if losses due to lower revenue from overdraft or interchange fees materialize. As the pricing of checking accounts changes, financial institutions and consumers may turn to certain types of reloadable prepaid cards as checking account alternatives. The Future of Consumer Credit and PaymentsWhile the pace of the economic recovery and the effects of new consumer regulations are strongly influencing lender and consumer behavior, the evolution in the consumer credit and payments landscape in the years ahead will be equally shaped by technological innovation. Innovative product and system design in the payment card marketplace continues to produce new electronic payment products. For example, a growing number of consumers are using prepaid cards. Preliminary estimates from the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's 2009 Survey of Consumer Payment Choice indicate that about one-third of consumers sampled reported having a prepaid card of some type. Offering functionality similar to credit and debit cards, prepaid cards include a variety of products targeted to different groups of customers, from general-purpose reloadable cards that may serve as deposit account substitutes for the unbanked or the underbanked to more-limited-purpose products, such as gift cards, teen spending cards, or mass transit cards. In addition, as an alternative to checks, employers issue payroll cards to employees and numerous government entities make payments and issue benefits on cards. And of course, the idea behind prepaid cards is not limited to being in card form; their function also may show up in the form of codes, stickers, cell phones, and chips embedded in any number of other devices, with payments transferring across the debit card interchange system or automated clearinghouse systems. Depending on the card type, the issuer, the purpose of issuance, the payment collection network, and the form of access, payments made using prepaid cards or other devices may be governed by different regulations and interchange fee restrictions. Consumers cannot be expected to know these differences. It will be important for regulators to monitor, over time, the effect of differences in regulation and pricing restrictions to ensure that consumers are adequately protected regardless of their payment method preferences. Other emerging payment methods, such as mobile payments, also show potential for broad adoption in the United States. Earlier this year, the Federal Reserve Board hosted a forum on consumer protection and education issues associated with mobile payment methods. The Reserve Banks, including the Reserve Bank of Philadelphia through the efforts of the Payment Cards Center, have also been active in soliciting information from industry participants on the roles that various players are taking on in U.S. mobile payments and the forces that are affecting the rate of adoption by card issuers, merchants, networks, telecommunication firms, consumers, and others. As of yet, mobile payments do not represent a meaningful percentage of overall consumer payments in the United States, but the Federal Reserve remains engaged in monitoring the emergence of this product to ensure that adequate consumer protections are put in place as the technology is adopted more broadly in the marketplace. ConclusionIn closing, I encourage you to continue to push forward on research and policy work in the area of consumer credit and payments. The landscape is changing rapidly and dramatically in response to economic, regulatory, and technological developments. You have some very interesting conversations ahead of you during this conference and quite challenging work for the foreseeable future as these markets continue to evolve. I wish you great success in your work, and I thank you for inviting me to participate in this conference. 1.On average since 2003, about half of the respondents to the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers who took cash out during a mortgage refinancing have reported using the funds to pay down other debt.Return to text 2.Results of the SLOOS are available on theBoard's website.Return to text 3.See theFederal Reserve Board's Report to the Congress on the Use of Credit Cards by Small Businesses and the Credit Card Market for Small Businesses(May 2010).Return to text 4.For more information on the new rules concerning credit cards and other payment products, see the "What You Need to Know" publication series.Return to text
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Payment Cards Center Conference, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Good afternoon. I am delighted to be here for the 10th anniversary of the establishment of the Payment Cards Center at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. I would especially like to recognize Bob Hunt, director of the center, and his staff as well as the leadership of the Philadelphia Fed for providing such an outstanding forum for research, policy, and industry discussion in the important area of consumer credit and payments. I plan to set the stage for this conference by focusing on three topics that are of particular interest to the Federal Reserve: changes in consumer credit, changes in the use of payment methods, and regulatory developments that affect both consumer credit and payments. I'll finish with some comments about the future of consumer payments. Changes in Consumer CreditDuring the recent financial crisis, the Federal Reserve and other policymakers throughout the government took unprecedented actions to mitigate the fallout from severely distressed market conditions and support the flow of credit to consumers and businesses. Nonetheless, the level of credit outstanding for households has been very slow to rebound and remains lower than it was at the onset of the crisis. The reasons for the slow rebound are, without a doubt, complex and multidimensional. Still, it is worthwhile to examine the data and try to understand why credit growth is not more robust. For this forum, I have chosen to focus my discussion on factors affecting the overall movements in credit card debt. The bulk of revolving credit in the United States today is held in the form of credit card debt. As the financial crisis developed in late 2008, the aggregate amount of credit card debt outstanding began to fall. Revolving credit has dropped every month since that time and is currently about 15 percent lower than it was at the time of the Lehman Brothers Holdings bankruptcy. Although our economy has experienced other long episodes in which revolving credit growth has slowed, we have never seen such a prolonged period of outright decline. As overall consumer spending weakened significantly over the course of the recession and the early stages of the recovery, a proportionate decline in revolving credit used to finance purchases might actually have been expected. However, the decrease in revolving credit appeared to outpace the contemporaneous decline in spending during the recession, and, so far in the recovery, revolving credit has continued to decrease even as spending has turned up. This suggests that there are factors at work other than cyclical spending weakness. Within this context, it is helpful to consider the three main reasons that net borrowing--that is, the change in credit outstanding--can decrease: First, households can charge less on their revolving accounts; second, households can pay off a larger share of their balances each month; or third, households can default on (or lenders can charge off) their existing balances. Taking the three factors in reverse order, consider first the role of cardholder defaults. As the economy weakened in 2008 and 2009, an increasing number of households found it difficult to pay their credit card bills on time. With nearly 10 percent of the workforce unemployed and many more underemployed, a significant number of households experienced sharply reduced incomes. Weakness in the housing market also contributed to financial strains, as many households could no longer easily tap into home equity to consolidate their card debt and lower their monthly payments.1In this adverse economic environment, it is perhaps not surprising that the charge-off rate on credit cards more than doubled from about 4 percent in 2007 to more than 9 percent in 2009. The rate of charge-offs has since declined from its peak but remains elevated. All told, we estimate that the rise in charge-offs can account for about one-third of the net decline in revolving credit growth from 2007 to 2009. Another possible explanation for the decline in outstanding balances might be that households, in an effort to repair their balance sheetsorbring down their debt burdens, have begun paying down their credit card balances faster than usual. But, on the whole, the data do not indicate that faster paydown is a significant factor. Historically, households tend to repay their credit card balances at a faster rate during good economic times and tend to slow this rate when economic activity is weak. And, over the past several years, this tendency appears to have held up. In 2006, the rate of credit card repayment was well above its long-run trend, probably reflecting strong incomes as well as ample home equity that could be tapped to pay off more expensive card debt. However, beginning in 2007, as housing markets weakened and unemployment climbed, households began to pay off their card debt at a significantly slower pace--a trend that extended into 2008 and 2009 as the economic downturn worsened. All told, the drop in the payoff rate has been more pronounced than in the recessions of 1990-91 and 2000-01. More recently, however, this trend has reversed, and as of August 2010, the repayment rate had risen to a more typical level. While this increase likely reflects a gradual improvement in the ability of cardholders to repay their debt, it could also be attributed to a shift in the composition of cardholders in bank portfolios toward more creditworthy borrowers as charged-off accounts were replaced with new accounts underwritten using stricter criteria. The bottom line is that accelerated payment rates on existing balances do not seem to have contributed importantly to the drop in credit card debt outstanding over the past couple of years. Finally, consumers have been charging less on their credit cards. According to industry statistics, the amount of money charged on credit cards for purchases or cash advances fell around 10 percent between the third quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2010. This slowdown in new charges could be the result of a variety of factors. The significant overall drop in consumption during the recession no doubt cut into the demand for credit, as households simply opted to spend less than in the past. When they did spend, they may have been less willing to borrow to fund consumption given their experiences during the financial crisis, expectations for weaker economic conditions, and continued uncertainty about job prospects. Indeed, consumer preferences toward debt do appear to have shifted. Preliminary data from the 2007-09 Panel Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) show a modest increase--from 35 percent in 2007 to more than 40 percent in 2009--in the share of households that believed that buying things on credit was a "bad idea." Further, those households whose views about buying on credit became more negative between 2007 and 2009 reported reducing their charges substantially more than other households. Consumers also appear to be seeking less new credit: Applications for new credit accounts, as recorded in data from the national credit bureaus, remain significantly lower than were observed for most of the past decade. Credit supply factors have also likely contributed to the decline in overall credit card outstanding balances. Households may have charged less because they had less credit available. In the SCF panel, about 44 percent of households with credit card debt in 2007 experienced a reduction in their credit limits by 2009. Data from the national credit bureaus indicate that credit lines peaked in the third quarter of 2008 and continued to fall over the course of 2009 and 2010. The average dollar value of combined credit lines available to cardholders fell from a high near $26,000 per cardholder in late 2008 to around $21,000 per cardholder by the third quarter of 2010, a decline of about 20 percent. Moreover, SCF data indicate that changes in credit limits are indeed related to credit card spending: Among households whose credit limit declined, SCF data show that the median amount of monthly new charges fell from $200 in 2007 to $50 in 2009, while among households whose credit limit did not decline, the median amount of new charges rose from $150 to $200. Although this relationship is not necessarily causal, credit line restrictions have likely played at least some role in the reduction in credit card borrowing. Looking further at the supply side of credit card debt, card lenders did report retrenching during the financial crisis. According to the Federal Reserve Board's quarterly Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), large fractions of banks tightened standards and terms on new and existing credit card accounts throughout 2008 and 2009.2In recent months, however, some banks reported having eased standards somewhat. In the most recent survey, published in October 2010, about two-thirds of banks thought that credit standards for prime borrowers on credit card loans and other consumer loans either were at their longer-run averages or would return to them over the next two years. In contrast, for nonprime borrowers, more than half of the respondents thought that standards would remain tighter through at least 2013 or would not return to longer-run norms for the foreseeable future. In addition to reductions in existing credit lines, new credit card account solicitations also fell considerably during the recession. By early 2009, offers to households for new credit cards had dropped to around one-fifth of their count in 2006. Card solicitations have turned up over the course of 2010, but they remain well below their pre-crisis levels. In addition, consistent with the SLOOS, the data on credit card offers show that solicitations to borrowers with lower credit scores are rebounding more slowly than those to borrowers with higher scores. Interest rates may have caused some households to reduce their credit card usage even if unused credit lines remained available. Although credit card interest rates declined in line with broader interest rates early in the financial crisis, card rates diverged from the broader rate environment by reversing this decline during 2009. Some of the rate increase likely reflects a rise in charge-offs, which increases card issuers' costs of providing credit. However, the divergence from rates on other forms of credit that also experienced higher charge-offs indicates that a portion of the increase may have been in anticipation of regulatory changes, which I will discuss a bit later, that will restrict some card issuers' ability to reprice credit. Overall, then, the available data lead me to conclude that, in large part, the decline in revolving consumer credit outstanding is due to a combination of higher charge-offs, tighter credit, and less consumer willingness to take on debt, but probably not to widespread increases in discretionary paydowns of existing debt. Although households account for the vast majority of credit card loans and credit card spending in our economy, the market for small business credit cards has grown considerably over the past 10 to 15 years. After checking accounts, credit cards are the second-most-common financial product used by small businesses. Small business cards are structured to cater to business needs with features, pricing, and underwriting unique to their typical usage. Issuers provide several services specifically for small businesses, such as employee cards with customizable spending limits and detailed spending statements each month or quarter. Also, small business cards often have higher credit limits than personal cards to facilitate the higher spending needs of small businesses. Small businesses are noticeably less likely than households to carry a balance on their cards. As of the end of 2009, 83 percent of small businesses used credit cards. Of those using credit cards, 64 percent used small business cards and 41 percent used personal cards. Despite the widespreaduseof credit cards, only a minority of small businesses--18 percent--reportedborrowingon credit cards. In comparison, nearly one-half of households reported carrying a balance on their credit cards.3Thus, although most small businesses appear to use credit cards for transactions purposes, and perhaps as a source of short-term credit, the data suggest that only a small fraction of them rely on credit cards as a source of longer-term credit. Yet even if firms do not carry a balance, reductions in the size of their credit card lines may strain their cash flow and force them to cut spending or require them to use more expensive forms of short-term credit, such as trade finance. Changes in the Use of Payment InstrumentsConsumer credit pricing and availability also appear to affect consumer preferences for different payment methods. When consumers decide how to pay for their purchases, they may have a variety of payment options to choose from, including cash, checks, debit cards, credit cards, prepaid cards, and even, increasingly, their mobile phones. The Federal Reserve has tracked changes in consumers' use of payment instruments in a number of studies over the past decade. These studies cast an interesting light on the effects that weakened economic conditions have had on the mix of payments. The number of checks processed in the United States has been declining since the late 1990s, as consumers, businesses, and governments have shifted away from checks and toward electronic payment methods. The annual number of checks dropped from more than 40 billion in 2000 to 30 billion in 2006, and we expect the data for 2009 to show continued declines. At the same time, the use of debit and credit cards has risen. Debit card payments, in particular, have grown remarkably: Between 2000 and 2008, the number of debit card transactions grew at an annual rate of more than 17 percent, while the value of debit card transactions grew 15 percent per year. Credit card transactions have grown at a slower pace than debit card transactions over the same period--about 2 percent per year in number and roughly 5 percent per year in value. For smaller-value payments, both types of cards, but especially debit cards, have served as substitutes for checks and, very likely, cash. Although the nature of cash makes direct measurement of aggregate cash payments difficult, we can infer a trend in usage from changes in the level of small-denomination currency that is most frequently used in cash payments. The amount of small-denomination domestic currency in circulation has been steadily declining since the 1970s, leading us to believe that cash payments have similarly declined. Most interestingly, the recent period of economic weakness appears to have caused some consumers to shift away from credit cards not only as a source of credit but also as a method of payment. As I said earlier, between late 2008 and early 2010, the value of credit card purchases declined 10 percent. In comparison, although the rate of growth in debit card use slowed during the recession, debit card transactions did not decline in either volume or value. This shift from credit to debit makes sense from the perspective of the consumer. If credit is tight and consumption is contracting, consumers who are reluctant or unable to increase their debt levels can use debit cards to pay for current expenses out of current, rather than future, income. In addition, for individuals with existing credit card balances, interest must be paid on new purchases as well as on previous balances. Those individuals might seek to avoid interest charges on new purchases by using debit cards. This incentive is even stronger in the presence of higher credit card interest rates. Finally, some consumers might use debit cards to track their spending in real time when budgets are tight. Regulatory Changes in Consumer Credit and PaymentsIn addition to the economic recession and recovery, the regulations governing consumer payment and credit products changed significantly in the past few years. So it is especially difficult to separate the effects of economic conditions from regulatory effects on credit and debit card usage. In December 2008, the Federal Reserve issued rules that introduced new consumer protections and revised the disclosures that consumers receive in connection with their credit card accounts. Then, in May 2009, the Congress enacted the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure (Credit CARD) Act, which contained additional provisions regarding credit cards and gift cards. Collectively, these rules have comprehensively overhauled the regulatory regime that applies to credit cards. In large part, these reforms developed in response to concerns about the growing complexity of the products offered to consumers and concerns that consumers could not accurately assess the costs associated with their credit cards. To address these concerns, the Federal Reserve used extensive consumer testing to develop new disclosures to be provided with credit card solicitations and in periodic statements. These disclosures highlight key account terms and attempt to improve consumers' understanding of the costs associated with using their cards. The resulting disclosure requirements establish a new baseline for transparency in the credit card industry. In addition, the new rules ban certain practices that increase the cost of credit in ways that cannot easily be disclosed to consumers, such as double-cycle billing. The new rules also generally prohibit card issuers from increasing interest rates applied to existing balances and require issuers to provide adequate notice of higher rates to be applied to future balances. It is too early to draw conclusions about the ultimate impact of these changes because many of the new requirements have been in effect only since earlier this year. For example, card issuers appear to have changed their credit card pricing and underwriting models as their ability to use penalty pricing has been reduced. And some of the reduction in new account solicitations may also be due in part to the regulatory changes. But, in light of the concurrent changes in charge-off rates, economic conditions, and regulatory requirements, it is hard to separate the relative effects of each. One way to assess the effects of regulation alone might be to watch the relative developments in business credit cards in comparison to consumer credit cards. Credit cards issued primarily for business or commercial purposes generally are not governed by the consumer protections in the Truth in Lending Act or the amendments to that act in the 2009 Credit CARD Act. Some observers have already expressed concern that some card issuers may be marketing business and professional cards to consumers in an effort to sidestep new restrictions. At the same time, some business owners and professionals might find the higher credit line availability or other terms offered on business cards to be more attractive than using their personal cards for business expenses. The federal banking agencies have sufficient supervisory and enforcement authority to ensure that issuers market and issue business cards only to borrowers who they have legitimate reason to believe are using them for business purposes. Generally speaking, the card issuer is responsible for determining whether an account is intended to be used for business or personal purposes, and indeed, business card applications commonly request information necessary to make this determination. The detailed information requested may include, for example, the type of business, annual revenue, age of the firm, number of employees, and tax identification number. The answers to these questions help verify that the applicant owns a business, as well as gauge the creditworthiness of the business. Aside from credit cards, the regulatory landscape is also changing for other payment products. The Federal Reserve has recently issued regulations that prohibit consumers from being automatically enrolled in overdraft programs for overdrafts created by automated teller machine withdrawals and one-time debit card transactions. In addition, new disclosures are required to help consumers understand the associated costs before they choose to opt into overdraft coverage. We have also implemented new protections under the Credit CARD Act that restrict the fees and expiration dates that apply to gift cards.4 The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act requires the Federal Reserve to develop standards for debit card interchange fees and the routing of debit card transactions. I am aware of the high level of interest in this topic, and I recognize the importance of the statute and its implementation for the future development of the payment card industry. However, we plan to issue a proposal for comment soon, so I will not comment on any specific elements at this time. Just as credit card products have undergone change in response to the new credit card rules, new regulations affecting debit card overdrafts and interchange fees are likely to result in some changes in deposit product pricing and design. For example, depository institutions have stated that they are reconsidering their ability to offer free or low-cost checking accounts if losses due to lower revenue from overdraft or interchange fees materialize. As the pricing of checking accounts changes, financial institutions and consumers may turn to certain types of reloadable prepaid cards as checking account alternatives. The Future of Consumer Credit and PaymentsWhile the pace of the economic recovery and the effects of new consumer regulations are strongly influencing lender and consumer behavior, the evolution in the consumer credit and payments landscape in the years ahead will be equally shaped by technological innovation. Innovative product and system design in the payment card marketplace continues to produce new electronic payment products. For example, a growing number of consumers are using prepaid cards. Preliminary estimates from the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's 2009 Survey of Consumer Payment Choice indicate that about one-third of consumers sampled reported having a prepaid card of some type. Offering functionality similar to credit and debit cards, prepaid cards include a variety of products targeted to different groups of customers, from general-purpose reloadable cards that may serve as deposit account substitutes for the unbanked or the underbanked to more-limited-purpose products, such as gift cards, teen spending cards, or mass transit cards. In addition, as an alternative to checks, employers issue payroll cards to employees and numerous government entities make payments and issue benefits on cards. And of course, the idea behind prepaid cards is not limited to being in card form; their function also may show up in the form of codes, stickers, cell phones, and chips embedded in any number of other devices, with payments transferring across the debit card interchange system or automated clearinghouse systems. Depending on the card type, the issuer, the purpose of issuance, the payment collection network, and the form of access, payments made using prepaid cards or other devices may be governed by different regulations and interchange fee restrictions. Consumers cannot be expected to know these differences. It will be important for regulators to monitor, over time, the effect of differences in regulation and pricing restrictions to ensure that consumers are adequately protected regardless of their payment method preferences. Other emerging payment methods, such as mobile payments, also show potential for broad adoption in the United States. Earlier this year, the Federal Reserve Board hosted a forum on consumer protection and education issues associated with mobile payment methods. The Reserve Banks, including the Reserve Bank of Philadelphia through the efforts of the Payment Cards Center, have also been active in soliciting information from industry participants on the roles that various players are taking on in U.S. mobile payments and the forces that are affecting the rate of adoption by card issuers, merchants, networks, telecommunication firms, consumers, and others. As of yet, mobile payments do not represent a meaningful percentage of overall consumer payments in the United States, but the Federal Reserve remains engaged in monitoring the emergence of this product to ensure that adequate consumer protections are put in place as the technology is adopted more broadly in the marketplace. ConclusionIn closing, I encourage you to continue to push forward on research and policy work in the area of consumer credit and payments. The landscape is changing rapidly and dramatically in response to economic, regulatory, and technological developments. You have some very interesting conversations ahead of you during this conference and quite challenging work for the foreseeable future as these markets continue to evolve. I wish you great success in your work, and I thank you for inviting me to participate in this conference. 1.On average since 2003, about half of the respondents to the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers who took cash out during a mortgage refinancing have reported using the funds to pay down other debt.Return to text 2.Results of the SLOOS are available on theBoard's website.Return to text 3.See theFederal Reserve Board's Report to the Congress on the Use of Credit Cards by Small Businesses and the Credit Card Market for Small Businesses(May 2010).Return to text 4.For more information on the new rules concerning credit cards and other payment products, see the "What You Need to Know" publication series.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced a new feature of itsData Download Programthat allows users to create custom charts. Users will now be able to create and view interactive graphics of data packages from the program before downloading the underlying data and charts. The charting feature allows users to view multiple data series on a single chart as well as to display individual data points. The charts can be saved as PDFs or in a standard image file format (PNG) for publication and redistribution. "Graphics play an important role in identifying data trends and relationships," said Federal Reserve Vice Chair Janet L. Yellen. "With the help of this intuitive new user interface, it's now possible to create customized charts directly from Federal Reserve statistical data." The Data Download Program allows users to create customized data sets or download preformatted packages in multiple formats, including XML. Additional information about how to use the program is available at:http://www.federalreserve.gov/datadownload/help/default.htm.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday approved an interim rule amending Regulation Z, which implements the Truth in Lending Act (TILA). The Board is issuing this interim rule to clarify certain aspects of a September 24, 2010 interim rule, in response to public comments. The September interim rule implements provisions of the Mortgage Disclosure Improvement Act (MDIA) which amended TILA to require mortgage lenders to disclose examples of how a loan's interest rate or monthly payments can change. Those statutory amendments will become effective on January 30, 2011. The MDIA seeks to alert borrowers to the risks of payment increases before they take out mortgage loans with variable rates or payments. Under the Board's September interim rule, lenders' cost disclosures must include a payment summary in the form of a table stating the initial rate and corresponding periodic payment and, for adjustable rate loans, the maximum rate and payment that can occur during the first five years as well as a "worst case" example showing the maximum rate and payment possible over the life of the loan. This interim rule clarifies that creditors' disclosure should reflect the first rate adjustment for a "5/1 ARM" loan because the new rate typically becomes effective within 5 years after the first regular payment due date. Today's interim rule also corrects the requirements for interest-only loans to clarify that creditors' disclosures should show the earliest date the consumer's interest rate can change rather than the due date for making the first payment under the new rate. The rule also clarifies which mortgage transactions are covered by the special disclosure requirements for loans that allow minimum payments that cause the loan balance to increase. Creditors have the option of complying with either the Board's September 2010 interim rule as originally published or as revised by this interim rule until October 1, 2011, at which time compliance with this interim rule will become mandatory. The Board is soliciting comment on the interim rule for 60 days after publication in theFederal Register,which is expected shortly. The Board's notice is attached. Federal Registernotice:HTML|PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday proposed two rules that would expand the coverage of consumer protection regulations to credit transactions and leases of higher dollar amounts. The proposed rules would amend Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) and Regulation M (Consumer Leasing) to implement a provision of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). Effective July 21, 2011, the Dodd-Frank Act requires that the protections of the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) and the Consumer Leasing Act (CLA) apply to consumer credit transactions and consumer leases up to $50,000, compared with $25,000 currently. This amount will be adjusted annually to reflect any increase in the Consumer Price Index. TILA requires creditors to disclose key terms of consumer loans and prohibits creditors from engaging in certain practices with respect to those loans. Currently, consumer loans of more than $25,000 are generally exempt from TILA. However, private education loans and loans secured by real property (such as mortgages) are subject to TILA regardless of the amount of the loan. The CLA requires lessors to provide consumers with disclosures regarding the cost and other terms of personal property leases. An automobile lease is the most common type of consumer lease covered by the CLA. Currently, a lease is exempt from the CLA if the consumer's total obligation exceeds $25,000. The notices that will be published in the Federal Register are attached. Comments on the proposals must be submitted by the later of 30 days after publication in the Federal Register or February 1, 2011. Regulation MFederal Registernotice:HTML|65 KB PDFRegulation ZFederal Registernotice:HTML|86 KB PDF Comment Regulation M:Submit|View Comment Regulation Z:Submit|View
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday posted detailed information on its public website about more than 21,000 individual credit and other transactions conducted to stabilize markets during the recent financial crisis, restore the flow of credit to American families and businesses, and support economic recovery and job creation in the aftermath of the crisis. Many of the transactions, conducted through a variety of broad-based lending facilities, provided liquidity to financial institutions and markets through fully secured, mostly short-term loans. Purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) supported mortgage and housing markets, lowered longer-term interest rates, and fostered economic growth. Dollar liquidity swap lines with foreign central banks helped stabilize dollar funding markets abroad, thus contributing to the restoration of stability in U.S. markets. Other transactions provided liquidity to particular institutions whose disorderly failure could have severely stressed an already fragile financial system. As financial conditions have improved, the need for the broad-based facilities has dissipated, and most were closed earlier this year. The Federal Reserve followed sound risk-management practices in administering all of these programs, incurred no credit losses on programs that have been wound down, and expects to incur no credit losses on the few remaining programs. These facilities were open to participants that met clearly outlined eligibility criteria; participation in them reflected the severe market disruptions during the financial crisis and generally did not reflect participants' financial weakness. The Federal Reserve is committed to transparency and has previously provided extensive aggregate information on its facilities in weekly and monthly reports. As provided by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010, transaction-level details now are posted from December 1, 2007, to July 21, 2010, in the following programs: Additionally, discount window and open market operation transactions after July 21, 2010, will be posted with a two-year lag. The data made available Wednesday can be downloaded in multiple formats, including Excel, atwww.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/reform_transaction.htm. The Excel files allow users to search, sort, and filter the data for each program in multiple categories. The site also provides explanations of each program as well as definitions for the data elements. In the case of broad-based facilities, details provided include the name of the borrower, the amount borrowed, the date the credit was extended, the interest rate charged, information about collateral, and other relevant credit terms. Similar information is provided for the draws of foreign central banks on their dollar liquidity swap lines with the Federal Reserve. For agency MBS transactions, details include the name of the counterparty, the security purchased or sold, and the date, amount, and price of the transaction.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday requested comment on a proposed rule that would establish debit card interchange fee standards and prohibit network exclusivity arrangements and routing restrictions. The Board's proposal would implement the debit card interchange fee and routing provisions of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Debit card interchange fees are established by payment card networks and paid by merchants to card issuers for each transaction. The proposed new Regulation II, Debit-Card Interchange Fees and Routing, would establish standards for determining whether a debit card interchange fee received by a card issuer is reasonable and proportional to the cost incurred by the issuer for the transaction. These standards would apply to issuers that, together with their affiliates, have assets of $10 billion or more. Certain government-administered payment programs and reloadable general-use prepaid cards would be exempt from the interchange fee limitations. The Board is requesting comment on two alternative interchange fee standards that would apply to all covered issuers: one based on each issuer's costs, with a safe harbor (initially set at 7 cents per transaction) and a cap (initially set at 12 cents per transaction); and the other a stand-alone cap (initially set at 12 cents per transaction). Under both alternatives, circumvention or evasion of the interchange fee limitations would be prohibited. The Board also is requesting comment on possible frameworks for an adjustment to the interchange fees to reflect certain issuer costs associated with fraud prevention. If the Board adopts either of these proposed standards in the final rule, the maximum allowable interchange fee received by covered issuers for debit card transactions would be more than 70 percent lower than the 2009 average, once the new rule takes effect on July 21, 2011. The proposed rule would also prohibit all issuers and networks from restricting the number of networks over which debit card transactions may be processed. The Board is requesting comment on two alternative approaches: one alternative would require at least two unaffiliated networks per debit card, and the other would require at least two unaffiliated networks per debit card for each type of cardholder authorization method (such as signature or PIN). Under both alternatives, the issuers and networks would be prohibited from inhibiting a merchant's ability to direct the routing of debit card transactions over any network that the issuer enabled to process them. According to the recently released 2010 Federal Reserve payment study, debit card use in the United States now exceeds all other forms of noncash payments and, by number of payments, represents approximately 35 percent of total noncash payments. Comments on the proposal are due by February 22, 2011. Federal Registernotice:HTML|290 KB PDFComments on this proposal:Submit|View Statement by Chairman Ben S. BernankeStatement by Vice Chair Janet L. Yellen
James SavageFSPC Spokesman(216)579-3079 [email protected] Cleveland, Ohio The Federal Reserve's 2010 study of noncash payments released today revealed that in 2009 more than three-quarters of all U.S. noncash payments were made electronically, a 9.3 percent annual increase since the Federal Reserve's last study in 2007. This growth and other statistics in the study emphasize consumers' increasing adoption of electronic alternatives for payments in the United States. The 2007 study revealed that in 2006 roughly two-thirds of the payments were made electronically. From 2006 to 2009, the period covered by the study, all types of electronic payments included in the study grew with the exception of credit cards. (Wire transfers were not included in the study.) The number of noncash payments in the United States grew more slowly between 2006 and 2009 than in prior periods and the total value of noncash payments declined. As in previous years, check payments continued to decline and were eclipsed by debit cards as the most used noncash instrument in the United States. "The results of the study clearly underscore this nation's efforts to move toward a more efficient electronic clearing system for all types of retail payments," noted Richard Oliver, executive vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which sponsored the study. "It is also likely that the results reflect changing consumer behavior during difficult economic times." The number of noncash payments in the United States increased 4.6 percent per year since 2006, approximately the same pace as the previous three-year period, 4.5 percent. The value of noncash payments experienced an annual rate of decline of 1.6 percent over the last three years compared to an annual growth rate of 3.9 percent from 2003 to 2006. About 20 billion more electronic payments were made in 2009 than in 2006 which represented a 9.3 percent annual increase. In contrast, the number of checks paid fell by about 6 billion or 7.2 percent over the same period, while the number of checks written fell by about 5.7 billion, an average of 6.1 percent per year. While checks written by consumers to businesses for household bill payments and point-of-sale transactions represented 44 percent of all checks written, both payments types declined by 4.9 billion or 10.6 percent annually, reflecting growing comfort of consumers with electronic options. The use of checks between businesses and between businesses and individuals experienced more modest declines. Checks written between individuals, which may include some very small businesses, actually increased slightly. The annual use of debit cards increased by over 12.8 billion payments, the largest increase by any payment type during the survey period, reaching 37.9 billion payments in 2009, which represented a 14.8 percent annual growth rate. Debit card usage now exceeds all other forms of noncash payments and, by number of payments, represents approximately 35 percent of total noncash payments. Over the same period, automated clearinghouse (ACH) payments grew to 19.1 billion, an increase of 4.5 billion payments. Credit card payments declined by 0.1 billion to 21.6 billion in 2009. Prepaid card transactions had the lowest transaction volume of all noncash payments at 6 billion; however, these transactions represented the fastest growing payment type, increasing 21.5 percent annually from 2006 to 2009. The check collection process continued to become increasingly electronic over the survey period. Approximately 96 percent of interbank checks--those drawn on a different depository institution than the one at which they were deposited--involved electronic clearing, compared to roughly 43 percent during the 2007 study. Approximately 13 percent of checks were deposited as images at the bank of first deposit. "Not only does this study show the continued move from checks to electronic means of making payments, but we also see the extraordinary progress the industry has made in electronifying the clearing process for the 27.5 billion checks still being written," added Oliver. The2010 Federal Reserve Payments Studyconsists of three research efforts commissioned to estimate the annual number, dollar value, and composition of noncash retail payments in the United States. TheDepository Institutions Payments Studyincluded responses from approximately 1,300 financial institutions (commercial banks, savings institutions and credit unions). TheElectronic Payments Studyincluded responses from 94 of the largest payment networks, processors and card issuers. TheCheck Sample Studycharacterized check payments according to type of payer, payee and purpose. Study data are based on a random sample of checks processed by 11 banks that use the Viewpointe archive. "The 2010Payments Studyis part of an ongoing effort by the Federal Reserve System to measure the changing nature of the nation's noncash payments system and share the results broadly as a means of better informing future investment decisions facing this country's payments industry," Oliver said. "Additionally, more detailed data resulting from this year's survey, including information about processing methods and emerging payment options, will be released early next year. We deeply appreciate the efforts of all the institutions that provided the data necessary to complete these studies." A summary report of the2010 Federal Reserve Payments Studyis available athttp://www.frbservices.org/files/communications/pdf/press/2010_payments_study.pdf (71 KB PDF).Detailed reports on the individual studies will be available in early 2011. Fact Sheet Background The2010 Federal Reserve Payments Studyincludes three research efforts to estimate the annual number, dollar value, and composition of noncash payments in the United States. For this study, noncash payments included check, automated clearinghouse (ACH), credit card, debit card (both signature and PIN), prepaid debit card and electronic benefits transfer (EBT) transactions. The study also estimated the number and value of ATM withdrawals. TheDepository Institutions Payments Studyestimated the number and value of checks and other types of payments from deposit accounts based on responses from approximately 1,300 financial institutions in the United States for March and April of 2010. TheElectronic Payments Studyestimated the number and value of electronic payments in the United States for calendar year 2009 based on responses from 94 of the largest payment networks, processors and card issuers. TheCheck Sample Studycharacterized check payments according to type of payer, payee and purpose. Study data are based on a random sample of checks processed by 11 banks that use the Viewpointe archive. McKinsey & Company assisted the Federal Reserve with the three data collection efforts for the2010 Payments Study. McKinsey & Company worked with Lieberman Research Group as a subcontractor for theDepository Institutions Payments Study. Findings (All are annual estimates based on survey data) Check Payments Electronic Payments ACH Transactions Credit Cards Debit Cards Prepaid Cards ATM Withdrawals
Vice Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Committee for Economic Development 2010 International Counterparts Conference, New York, New York Good morning. Thank you for inviting me to be with you today. The Committee for Economic Development has a long and distinguished record in identifying and addressing crucial issues related to our nation's economic growth and productivity. And today's conference on fiscal sustainability and the global economy fits squarely within that tradition. My remarks will focus on the challenges faced by U.S. policymakers as they confront the need to put fiscal policy on a sustainable track in the long term while providing support to the economy in the near term. I will also offer some thoughts on the recent actions undertaken by the Federal Reserve and on the implications of our nation's fiscal and monetary policy choices for the global economy.1 The Challenge of Achieving Fiscal Sustainability in the United StatesCharting a sensible course for the federal budget is an essential but formidable task for U.S. policymakers. Since the onset of the recent recession and financial crisis, the federal budget deficit has soared as the weak economy has depressed revenues and pushed up expenditures and as necessary policy actions have been taken to help ease the recession and shore up the financial system. At 9 percent of gross domestic product (GDP), the budget deficit in fiscal year 2010 was a little lower than it had been a year earlier, but it was still considerably above the average of 2 percent of GDP during the pre-crisis period from fiscal 2005 to 2007. As a result of the recent deficits, federal debt held by the public has increased to around 60 percent of GDP--a level not seen in 60 years. For now, the budget deficit seems to have topped out. So long as the economy and financial markets continue to recover, the deficit should narrow relative to GDP over the next few years as a growing economy boosts revenues and reduces safety-net expenditures and as the policies put in place to provide economic stimulus and promote financial stability wind down. That said, the budget situation over the longer run presents some very difficult challenges, in part because the aging of the U.S. population implies a sizable and sustained increase in the share of the population receiving benefits from Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. Currently, there are about five individuals between the ages of 20 and 64 for each person aged 65 and older. This ratio is projected to decline to around three by the time most of the baby boomers have retired in 2030, and further increases in average life expectancies may push this ratio down a little more in the years after that. Moreover, the demographic pressures on the budget appear likely to be compounded by continued large increases in per capita spending on health care. Admittedly, the ability of budget analysts to forecast the trajectory of health-care spending is limited, but it is prudent to assume that federal health spending per beneficiary will continue to rise faster than per capita GDP for the foreseeable future. In a nutshell, the problem is that, in the absence of significant policy changes, and under reasonable assumptions about economic growth, demographics, and medical costs, federal spending will rise significantly faster than federal tax revenues in coming years. As a result, if current policy settings are maintained, the budget will be on an unsustainable path, with the ratio of federal debt held by the public to national income rising rapidly. A failure to address these fiscal challenges would expose the United States to serious economic costs and risks. A high and rising level of government debt relative to national income is likely to eventually put upward pressure on interest rates, thereby restraining capital formation, productivity, and economic growth. Indeed, once the economy has recovered from its downturn, fiscal deficits will crowd out private spending. Large fiscal deficits will also likely put upward pressure on our current account deficits with the rest of the world; the associated greater reliance on borrowing from abroad means that an increasing share of our future income will be required to make interest payments on federal debt held abroad, thereby reducing the amount of income available for domestic spending and investment. A large federal debt will also limit the ability and flexibility of policymakers to address future economic stresses and other emergencies, a risk that is underscored by the critical fiscal policy actions that were taken to buffer the effects of the recent recession and stabilize financial markets in the wake of the crisis. And a prolonged failure by policymakers to address America's fiscal challenges could eventually undermine confidence in U.S. economic management. I do not underestimate the difficulty of crafting a long-range budget plan that will both garner sufficient political support and have sound economic foundations. The reactions to the proposals offered by members of the President's National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform, as well as to those offered by other prominent groups, provide ample evidence of the differences that must be bridged. Nonetheless, I am encouraged that the debate seems to be moving forward and is starting to touch on some broad principles that--if followed--would improve economic growth and make achieving sustainable fiscal policies at least somewhat easier. Perhaps the most fundamental question that must be faced concerns the size and scope of the federal government--that is, how much of the nation's economic resources we will devote to federal programs, including transfer programs such as Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. Crucially, whatever size of government we choose, taxes must ultimately be set at a level sufficient to achieve an appropriate balance of spending and revenues. We should not defer charting a course for fiscal consolidation. Timely enactment of a plan to eliminate future unsustainable budget gaps will make it easier for individuals and businesses to prepare for and adjust to the changes. Moreover, the sooner we start addressing the longer-term budget problem, the less wrenching the adjustment will have to be and the more control we--rather than market forces or international creditors--will have over the timing, size, and composition of the necessary adjustments. That said, it is important to recognize that fiscal tightening, were it to occur prematurely, could retard an already tepid economic recovery. We need, and I believe there is scope for, an approach to fiscal policy that puts in place a well-timed and credible plan to bring deficits down to sustainable levels over the medium and long terms while also addressing the economy's short-term needs. Unfortunately, U.S. economic performance continues to be impaired by the lingering effects of the financial crisis. The economy remains far from full employment even though a year and a half has elapsed since the trough of the business cycle. Job gains have continued to be subpar, and the unemployment rate remains near its highest level since the early 1980s; moreover, given the slow pace of economic growth, unemployment is likely to remain high for some time. Meanwhile, measures of underlying inflation have continued to trend lower and are now below the levels the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) judges to be consistent, over the longer run, with its statutory mandate of maximum employment and price stability. In this context, the Federal Reserve decided at its November meeting to undertake additional monetary policy actions to satisfy its dual mandate. After weighing carefully the uncertainties and risks, the FOMC decided to further expand the Federal Reserve's holdings of longer-term Treasury securities. The objective of this action is to reduce longer-term interest rates, thereby promoting a stronger pace of economic growth. The purchase of longer-term securities, while in some ways "unconventional," is actually quite similar to the Fed's traditional approach to monetary policy, which involves lowering the overnight federal funds rate by increasing the supply of reserve balances. With the federal funds rate now effectively pinned at zero, purchases of longer-term securities are intended to push down rates further out the yield curve. By bolstering activity in the United States and mitigating risks that could threaten the recovery, this policy should also provide support for a sustained expansion of the global economy. In announcing its intention to purchase an additional $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities, the FOMC committed to review the purchase program regularly in light of incoming information and to make adjustments as needed to meet our objectives. The Committee, of course, recognizes that at the appropriate time, as the economy more fully recovers, the Federal Reserve will need to remove this extraordinary monetary accommodation in order to maintain price stability and keep inflation expectations well anchored. I am confident that the Federal Reserve has both the commitment and the tools to achieve this unwinding. I strongly supported the Federal Reserve's recent action because I believe it will be helpful in strengthening the recovery. But it is hardly a panacea. Thus, a fiscal program that combines a focus on pro-growth policies in the near term with concrete steps to reduce longer-term budget deficits could be a valuable complement to our efforts. Indeed, some budget experts are exploring the idea of explicitly coupling fiscal stimulus in the near term, when unemployment is high and resource utilization is low, with specific deficit-reducing actions that take effect at scheduled future times, when output and employment are expected to have moved closer to their potential. Although a plan of this type might be challenging to develop and implement, it could provide an effective means to support economic activity in the short run while moving toward fiscal sustainability over time. International Implications of U.S. Policy ChoicesBecause the focus of this conference is on fiscal adjustments and the global economy, let me now try to place this discussion of U.S. fiscal and monetary policies into the current international context. The process of long-run fiscal consolidation in the United States would likely entail higher national saving relative to investment, which should have the direct effect of restraining U.S. imports and shrinking the U.S. trade deficit. More generally, by lowering interest rates, fiscal consolidation should diminish net capital inflows into the United States, thereby reducing the current accountdeficitin this country and current accountsurpluseselsewhere. The resulting pattern of international debt accumulation and capital flows would be more balanced than at present, promoting a more sustainable pattern of growth in the global economy. Indeed, such a rebalancing program was strongly endorsed by the leaders of the Group of Twenty at their recent meeting in Seoul. Although the fiscal consolidation process is just beginning, the weakness of private demand in the United States and other advanced economies, combined with robust growth in the emerging market economies, has led to a two-speed global recovery that already is creating pressures toward rebalancing. The advanced economies started their recoveries in 2009, but economic growth has barely exceeded the growth rate of potential output; as a result, the level of output in most advanced economies, including the United States, is still well below its potential. Forecasts suggest that growth and resource utilization will remain lackluster in the advanced economies for some time. Furthermore, inflation pressures in most other advanced countries, as in the United States, remain quite low, reflecting the existence of substantial economic slack. In contrast to the subdued pace of recovery in the advanced economies, economic activity in the emerging market economies has rebounded sharply, and the level of output in most of those economies now well exceeds pre-crisis levels. The consequence is that policymakers in emerging market countries have turned their attention to the threat of rising inflation and have begun tightening monetary policy. The stronger growth prospects in the emerging market economies, coupled with the tightening stance of their monetary policies, appear to be contributing to a resurgence of capital inflows to these economies. Sizeable differentials in expected returns between advanced and emerging market economies also seem to be reinforcing these flows and causing emerging market currencies to rise. In light of their increasing concerns about inflation, a case can be made that emerging market policymakers should welcome currency appreciation because it reduces inflation pressures and, over time, aids global rebalancing. However, some of them have argued that unduly large and rapid capital inflows may lead to asset-price bubbles and expose the financial sectors in their economies to a subsequent reversal of these flows, while rapid currency appreciation could derail the growth of their export sectors. A number of emerging market economies have accordingly attempted to counter the effects of financial inflows through a range of policies, including foreign exchange intervention and capital controls. The U.S. fiscal program that I discussed earlier might also moderate the pressures emerging market economies are experiencing at present. Stronger U.S. growth would boost our demand for foreign goods and reduce the incentives for capital flows to emerging markets, thereby diminishing some of the upward pressure on emerging market currencies. Thus, the U.S. fiscal program would lessen for a time the natural mechanisms pushing the emerging markets to rebalance their economies toward domestic demand, even as it helped put the global economy as a whole on a more solid footing. However, such developments would in no way diminish the need for such rebalancing in the medium term. It is also important for both advanced and emerging market economies to begin planning now for the structural reforms that will eventually be needed to promote rebalancing. ConclusionAs I hope I've made clear, the challenge for U.S. policymakers will be to craft a strategy that puts our fiscal policy on a sustainable path in the longer term while helping support the recovery in economic activity in the near term. These goals are challenging to achieve but not inconsistent. Moreover, making progress on them would not only provide important benefits to the United States; it would also help foster a stronger world economy in the near term and a better global balance in spending, production, saving, and borrowing over time. 1.My remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).Return to text
The Federal Open Market Committee has authorized an extension through August 1, 2011, of its temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangements with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Swiss National Bank. The swap arrangements, established in May 2010, had been authorized through January 2011. Information on the actions that will be taken by other central banks is available at the following websites: Bank of Canada Bank of England European Central Bank Bank of Japan Swiss National Bank U.S. Dollar Liquidity Swaps--Frequently Asked Questions
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in November confirms that the economic recovery is continuing, though at a rate that has been insufficient to bring down unemployment. Household spending is increasing at a moderate pace, but remains constrained by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit. Business spending on equipment and software is rising, though less rapidly than earlier in the year, while investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak. Employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. The housing sector continues to be depressed. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable, but measures of underlying inflation have continued to trend downward. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. Currently, the unemployment rate is elevated, and measures of underlying inflation are somewhat low, relative to levels that the Committee judges to be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual mandate. Although the Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability, progress toward its objectives has been disappointingly slow. To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to continue expanding its holdings of securities as announced in November. The Committee will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings. In addition, the Committee intends to purchase $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011, a pace of about $75 billion per month. The Committee will regularly review the pace of its securities purchases and the overall size of the asset-purchase program in light of incoming information and will adjust the program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; James Bullard; Elizabeth A. Duke; Sandra Pianalto; Sarah Bloom Raskin; Eric S. Rosengren; Daniel K. Tarullo; Kevin M. Warsh; and Janet L. Yellen. Voting against the policy was Thomas M. Hoenig. In light of the improving economy, Mr. Hoenig was concerned that a continued high level of monetary accommodation would increase the risks of future economic and financial imbalances and, over time, would cause an increase in long-term inflation expectations that could destabilize the economy.
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the Committee, thank you for your invitation to this morning's hearing on problems in mortgage servicing. In the first portion of my testimony, I will explain our current understanding of the nature and extent of the deficiencies in mortgage documentation that have been so apparent in the robo-signing misconduct, as well as what the banking agencies are doing in support of a broader interagency effort to develop a full picture of these problems. I also want to address the issue of so-called put backs of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) to mortgage originators or securitization sponsors. Though only indirectly related to robo-signing and associated servicing flaws, financial exposure resulting from put backs could be more significant for some institutions than that from documentation flaws. In the second portion of my testimony, I will turn to the question of appropriate policy responses--with respect to specific regulated financial institutions, to supervisory practices more generally, and to the structural problems we have observed in the mortgage servicing industry, including the discouragingly sluggish pace of mortgage modifications. This last point is a matter of concern not only because of its significance for the millions of American families who are unable to maintain their mortgage payments on homes that have lost considerable value in recent years, but also because of the importance from a macroeconomic perspective of realizing as quickly and efficiently as possible a clearing of housing prices, which would help create the conditions for a market recovery. Mortgage Documentation and other Servicing IssuesForeclosure is a legal process initiated to terminate a borrower's interest in a property and is permitted only when the borrower has defaulted on the debt obligation for a specified period. The process allows the lender to sell the property and use the proceeds to satisfy the borrower's unpaid debt to the extent it is secured by the property. Foreclosure requirements are generally established by state laws and each state has its own statutes, rules, and court decisions pertaining to foreclosures. Some 23 states, known as judicial foreclosure states, require foreclosures to be reviewed and approved by a court. Nonjudicial foreclosure states have different processes for foreclosures that do not require the creditor to obtain court approval for a foreclosure, but instead impose varying waiting periods and documentation, filing, and notice requirements after a default occurs and before a foreclosure sale may take place. In nonjudicial foreclosure states, the homeowner typically has access to the court in a foreclosure matter only if the homeowner initiates a suit to stop the foreclosure process or seeks protection in a bankruptcy court. Because mortgage servicers maintain the official accounting of all amounts paid and owed by borrowers, they serve as the critical link between borrowers and mortgage holders. In addition, servicers manage loan defaults, including the negotiation of loan modification and repayment plans with borrowers. Should the servicer decide to initiate foreclosure, it would often do so as the agent for third parties, such as securitization trusts. In this regard, servicers have responsibilities to investors holding residential MBS. Servicers also have responsibilities to borrowers to maintain accurate and complete records of payments received, amounts advanced, notifications made to borrowers, and changes of payment terms with respect to any mortgage modification discussions. Foreclosure documentation typically requires an assertion that the agent bringing forth the action has the legal right to foreclose and that the loan is in default. The document filings contain details of the transactions and the amounts owed. These documents typically include attestations signed by individuals who have personal knowledge of the facts and who are properly authorized to make such assertions. In most jurisdictions, the documents must be signed by these individuals in the presence of a notary, following proper notarization procedures. Lenders and servicers are responsible for ensuring that the individuals who sign these documents are duly authorized and have appropriate knowledge of the facts and circumstances. In addition, lenders and servicers are responsible for ensuring the accuracy of records and the facts recited in the foreclosure documents. State and local laws govern the recordation process for real estate transfers and mortgage filings and assignments. Given the multiple sales and assignments of mortgage loans that often occur, concerns have been raised regarding investors' or servicers' rights to initiate foreclosure actions. Although state-by-state practices vary considerably, generally the noteholder has the right to initiate foreclosure, once default has occurred, if an original note can be produced and the current holder's ownership is verified. If there is no controversy concerning ownership of the note, but rather an inability to locate original documents, processes usually allow for foreclosure to proceed, albeit at some cost and delay. If there is some question of ownership, the investor or servicer may be required to produce evidence of ownership before a foreclosure can proceed. Since matters regarding real estate titles and foreclosures are generally governed by state law, state attorneys general are undertaking a joint review of lenders and servicers focusing on the reported problems in foreclosures. In addition, numerous federal agencies have launched investigations, including the examinations in process by the federal financial regulators. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Federal Reserve are conducting an in-depth review of practices at the largest mortgage servicing operations. The interagency examinations and reviews focus on foreclosure practices generally, but with an emphasis on the internal control breakdowns that led to inaccurate affidavits and other questionable legal documents being used in the foreclosure process. The agencies are reviewing firms' policies, procedures, and internal controls, including sampling loan files. We have also solicited the views of consumer organizations to help detect problems at specific servicers. The agencies expect the initial on-site portion of our work to be completed by the end of the year. The agencies plan to publish a summary overview in early 2011 that will describe the range of industry practices found in the examinations and identify weaknesses requiring remediation. The Federal Reserve has supervisory and regulatory authority for bank holding companies and their nonbank subsidiaries, as well as for approximately 800 state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System (state member banks), and certain other financial institutions and activities. We work with other federal and state supervisory authorities to ensure the safety and soundness of the banking industry, foster the stability of the financial system, and provide for fair and equitable treatment of consumers in their financial transactions. The Federal Reserve is engaged in both regulation, which involves establishing the rules within which banking organizations must operate, and supervision, which involves reviewing the efforts of banking organizations to abide by those rules and remain, overall, in safe and sound condition. The Federal Reserve serves as the primary federal regulator for two of the 10 largest servicers affiliated with banking organizations, one a holding company affiliate and the other a state member bank. The Federal Reserve is participating with the other federal banking agencies in examining the foreclosure policies and practices of the other large institutions. For additional information on foreclosure processes, we have sent a self-assessment questionnaire to other Federal Reserve-regulated institutions that engage in mortgage servicing but are not part of the interagency examination effort. While quite preliminary, the banking agencies' findings from the supervisory review suggest significant weaknesses in risk-management, quality control, audit, and compliance practices as underlying factors contributing to the problems associated with mortgage servicing and foreclosure documentation. We have also found shortcomings in staff training, coordination among loan modification and foreclosure staff, and management and oversight of third-party service providers, including legal services. It is for this reason that we expanded the review to include an examination of pre-foreclosure loans, or those past due but not yet in the foreclosure process, and certain third-party service providers. As examiners identify weaknesses, they will require firms to take remedial action and, when necessary, require servicers to address resource shortfalls, training and coordination problems, and control failures. It is important to recognize that the extent of these problems is not the same across all firms. Nonetheless, the problems are sufficiently widespread that they suggest structural problems in the mortgage servicing industry. The servicing industry overall has not been up to the challenge of handling the large volumes of distressed mortgages. The banking agencies have been focused for some time on the problems related to modifying mortgage loans and the large number of consumer complaints by homeowners seeking loan modifications. It has now become evident that significant parts of the servicing industry also failed to handle foreclosures properly. While we are still in the process of determining the extent of these problems and the required supervisory response, it is clear that the industry will need to make substantial investments to improve its functioning in these areas and supervisors must ensure that these improvements occur. Moreover, fixing the problems in the mortgage servicing industry may also require thinking about some fundamental structural changes to the current mortgage system. I will discuss the issue of structural solutions to these issues in more detail later in my testimony. Investor Repurchase RequestsThe cost associated with foreclosure documentation problems, including robo-signing, are not the only potential liabilities facing financial institutions in the wake of the mortgage and housing crisis. As losses in MBS have been escalating, investors in MBS and purchasers of unsecuritized whole loans are more frequently exploring, and in some cases asserting, contractual and securities law claims against the parties that originated the loans, sold the loans, underwrote securities offerings, or had other roles in the process. The essence of these claims is that mortgages in the securitization pools, or sold as unsecuritized whole loans, did not conform to representations and warranties made about their quality--specifically that the loan applications contained misrepresentations or the underwriting was not in conformance with stated standards. The potential liability associated with contract claims in securitizations is usually called put back risk because many of the relevant agreements permit the buyer of the mortgages to put them back to the seller at par. Buyers can demand that the seller or another party that makes representations repurchase the mortgages if defects are found in the underlying loan documentation or in the underwriting that conflict with the sale agreements. Although the representations and warranties in the various agreements vary considerably, they frequently require that the defect materially and adversely affect the value of the loan before put back rights can be exercised. At the time of the put back, the mortgage loan may have become seriously delinquent or entered into default. Because underperforming mortgages are typically valued substantially less than par, the put back transfers any potential loss from the buyer back to the original seller or mortgage securitizer. Given the poor performance of the mortgage assets, investors, including the Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs), have sought to pursue put back claims through various legal avenues, including requesting that mortgage servicers provide underlying mortgage files and the requisite documents. A GSE will generally buy a loan out of an MBS pool when the loan becomes 120 days delinquent. The GSE will then conduct a review of the delinquent loan file, and if it finds that the loan did not comply with its underwriting standards, it will request that the loan be repurchased by the originator/seller or that the GSE be made whole on any credit losses incurred. During the third quarter of 2010, Fannie Mae collected $1.6 billion in unpaid principal balance (UPB) from originators, and currently has $7.7 billion UPB in outstanding repurchase requests, $2.8 billion of which has been outstanding for more than 120 days. Freddie Mac has $5.6 billion UPB in outstanding repurchase requests, $1.8 billion of which has been outstanding for more than 120 days. As of the third quarter of 2010, the four largest banks held $9.7 billion in repurchase reserves, most of which is intended for GSE put backs. There are also pending claims by some investors alleging that underwriters and sponsors of securitizations failed to comply with the federal securities laws covering the offering documents and registration statements. These suits specifically reference descriptions of the risks to investors, the quality of assets in the securitization, the order in which investors would be paid, or other factors. Most of these lawsuits are in the early stages, and it is difficult to ascertain the probability that investors will be able to shift a substantial portion of the losses on defaulted mortgages back to the parties that sold the loans or underwrote the offerings. While the full extent of put back exposure is for this reason hard to specify with precision, the risk has been known for some time and has been an ongoing focus of supervisory oversight at some institutions. However, in light of recent increased investor activity, the Federal Reserve has been conducting a detailed evaluation of put back risk to financial institutions. We are asking institutions that originated large numbers of mortgages or sponsored significant MBS to assess and provide for these risks as part of their overall capital planning process. Supervisory ResponsesThe revelation of documentation flaws in foreclosure processes raise two kinds of questions for supervisors: First, what actions are appropriate and sufficient to respond to problems identified at specific regulated banking organizations? Second, what does the failure of supervisory examinations to uncover these flaws counsel for future supervisory practice? With respect to the question of actions aimed at specific institutions, the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies have significant supervisory and enforcement tools that can be used to address certain types of deficiencies in the foreclosure and mortgage transfer process. For example, numerous enforcement tools are available to address safety and soundness issues such as inadequate controls and processes, weaknesses in risk-management and quality control, and certain types of compliance weaknesses in foreclosure operations. These tools include supervisory enforcement actions that require an institution to correct deficient operations in a prescribed period of time and Civil Money Penalties (CMPs) for egregious actions. The agencies may also lower examination ratings, which can result in limiting the permissible activities and affiliations of financial firms and trigger other supervisory reviews and limitations, and restrict the ability of institutions to expand. The agencies also have the authority to assess CMPs on individuals who are responsible for violations, to issue cease and desist orders on responsible individuals, or, if the statutory criteria are met, to remove them from banking. In addition, we may make referrals to law enforcement agencies, or require institutions to file Suspicious Activity Reports, as appropriate. Although the examinations are not yet fully completed, based on what we have already learned, the Federal Reserve expects to use many or all of these tools through the course of our review of foreclosure and other mortgage matters. In particular, the Federal Reserve has already emphasized to the industry and to institutions we supervise the importance of addressing identified weaknesses in risk-management, quality control, audit, and compliance practices. The problems that are evident to date raise significant reputation and legal risk for the major mortgage servicers. These weaknesses require immediate remedial action. They will also affect the rating assigned by Federal Reserve supervisors to management of bank holding companies, even where the servicing activity was in a banking subsidiary of a holding company. In addition, the federal banking agencies expect that employees are adequately trained and have sufficient resources to appropriately review the facts and circumstances of files when preparing documents, and that legal processes are fully and properly followed. Banking organizations also must ensure quality control for third-party service providers, including legal services. With respect to future supervisory practice more generally, two points for increased emphasis are already apparent. First, this episode has underscored the importance of our using the new authority given the Federal Reserve in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act to send our examiners into non-bank affiliates of large bank holding companies, including those in large institutions that have become bank holding companies only in the last couple of years. Second, our experience suggests that the utility of examining and validating internal control processes within firms may extend beyond improvements to the specific processes subject to the exam. We have found that problems in foreclosure practices do not seem as pervasive in institutions in which we had previously examined other internal control processes, found shortcomings, and insisted on corrective action. While we would not draw strong conclusions from such a limited experience, it seems possible that a firm may improve its general approach to control processes once it has been required to remedy problems in discrete areas. If this relationship is borne out, it could be a significant advance in supervisory practice, insofar as resource constraints will always limit the number of supervisory examinations. Possible Need for Structural SolutionsBeyond remedial or punitive measures directed at specific firms and future-oriented changes in supervisory practice, structural solutions may be needed to address the range of problems associated with mortgage servicing. Similarly, the foreclosure documentation problems are another reminder of the degree to which foreclosure has been preferred to mortgage modification, notwithstanding various efforts to change this imbalance. Here again, a more structural solution may be needed The explosive growth of securitization as a vehicle for financing mortgages was accompanied by the emergence of a sizeable mortgage servicing industry--that is, a group of firms servicing mortgages that they did not own or, in many cases, that they had not originated. While there have surely been economies associated with this industry, there have also been chronic problems. It has been increasingly apparent that the inadequacy of servicer resources to deal with mortgage modifications--an area that was a point of supervisory emphasis--was actually a reflection of a larger inability to deal with the challenges entailed in servicing mortgages in many jurisdictions and dealing with a complicated investor base. For example, foreclosure procedures are specifically the province of real property law governed by the states, and can vary not only by state, but also within states and sometimes even within counties. With or without regulatory changes, it is quite probable that servicer fees to securitization trusts will increase to reflect the costs associated with the complexities of the contemporary mortgage model. The impetus for change in the mortgage servicing industry is likely only to increase as the advantages of servicing rights for regulatory capital purposes become limited after the new Basel III requirements are implemented.1It is possible that servicing issues can be satisfactorily addressed through the actions of the various primary regulators. However, in light of the range of problems already encountered, and the prospect of further changes in the industry--including the possible migration of more servicing activity to non-banking organizations--it seems reasonable at least to consider whether a national set of standards for mortgage servicers may be warranted. The case for concerted, coordinated action is much clearer with respect to the slow-moving pace of mortgage modifications. Regardless of the findings that emerge from the examinations underway, and remedial actions required to correct past mistakes, this episode has again drawn attention to what can only be described as a perverse set of incentives for homeowners with underwater mortgages. Homeowners who try to obtain a modification of the terms of their mortgages are all too frequently subject to delay and disappointment, while those who simply stop paying their mortgages have found that they can often stay in their homes rent free for a time before the foreclosure process moves ahead. Moreover, many homeowners believe, reportedly on the basis of communications from servicers, that the only way they can qualify for modifications is by stopping their mortgage payments and thus becoming delinquent. Quite apart from the impact upon families who lose their homes, the dominance of foreclosures over modifications raises macroeconomic concerns. The number of foreclosures initiated on residential properties has soared from about 1 million in 2006, the year that house prices peaked, to 2.8 million last year. Over the first three quarters of this year, we have seen a further 2 million foreclosure filings, and an additional 2.3 million homes were in foreclosure at the end of September. All told, we expect about 2.5 million foreclosure filings this year and next year and about 2.4 million more in 2012. While our outlook is for filings to decline in coming years, they will remain high by historical standards. Currently, more than 4.5 million mortgage loans are 90 days or more past due or in foreclosure. These numbers compare to just 520,000 permanent loan modifications executed under the Treasury Department's Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP) and an additional 1.6 million proprietary loan modifications by servicers participating in the HOPE NOW Alliance program.2 The Federal Reserve believes that in most cases the best way to assist struggling borrowers is a mortgage modification allowing them to retain their home with an affordable mortgage payment. In a housing market where values have declined so much, following a period in which all actors relied upon rising house prices to sustain mortgage practices, foreclosures simply do not make sense as a preferred response. Foreclosures are costly to all parties and more broadly to our economy. Lenders and investors incur financial losses arising from the litigation expenses associated with the foreclosure process and the loss on the defaulted mortgage when the foreclosed property sells at a liquidation price that is substantially less than the loan balance. Local governments must contend with lower property tax revenue and the ramifications of neglected properties that may threaten public safety. Additionally, neighbors and neighborhoods suffer potential spillover effects from foreclosure sales because foreclosures may reduce the attractiveness of the neighborhood or may signal to potential buyers a forthcoming decline in neighborhood quality. In the end, an overhang of homes awaiting foreclosure is unhealthy for the housing market and can delay a recovery in housing markets and the broader economy. Several possible explanations have been suggested for the prominence of foreclosures: the lack of servicer capacity to execute modifications, purported financial incentives for servicers to foreclose rather than modify, what until recently appeared to be easier execution of foreclosures relative to modifications, limits on the authority of securitization trustees, and conflicts between primary and secondary lien holders. Whatever the merits and relative weights of these various explanations, the social costs of this situation are huge. It just cannot be the case that foreclosure is preferable to modification for a significant proportion of mortgages where the deadweight costs of foreclosure, including a distressed sale discount, are so high. While some banks and other industry participants have stepped forward to increase the rate of modifications relative to foreclosures, many have not done enough. We need renewed attention in many quarters of government and the financial industry, and among investors in mortgage-backed securities, to the lagging incidence of modifications. ConclusionIn conclusion, I regret to say that the hangover from the housing bubble of this past decade is still very much with us, as revealed both in the inadequate capacity of mortgage servicers and the continued impact of foreclosed homes on the housing market. While bank regulatory agencies can and should respond to specific failings that are being identified in our interagency examination, there is a strong case to be made that broader solutions are needed both to address structural problems in the mortgage servicing industry and to accelerate the pace of mortgage modifications or other loss mitigation efforts. Thank you very much for your attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you might have. 1.The proposed Basel III capital rules would simultaneously introduce a specific minimum common equity ratio and define "common equity" so as to limit or exclude consideration of items that may not provide the loss absorbing capacity that common equity is supposed to represent.Return to text 2.Written testimony of Phyllis Caldwell, Chief of Homeownership Preservation Office, U.S. Department of the Treasury, before the House Financial Services Subcommittee on Housing and Community Opportunity hearing on "Robo-Signing, Chain of Title, Loss Mitigation and Other Issues in Mortgage Servicing," November 18, 2010.Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the Committee, thank you for your invitation to this morning's hearing on problems in mortgage servicing. In the first portion of my testimony, I will explain our current understanding of the nature and extent of the deficiencies in mortgage documentation that have been so apparent in the robo-signing misconduct, as well as what the banking agencies are doing in support of a broader interagency effort to develop a full picture of these problems. I also want to address the issue of so-called put backs of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) to mortgage originators or securitization sponsors. Though only indirectly related to robo-signing and associated servicing flaws, financial exposure resulting from put backs could be more significant for some institutions than that from documentation flaws. In the second portion of my testimony, I will turn to the question of appropriate policy responses--with respect to specific regulated financial institutions, to supervisory practices more generally, and to the structural problems we have observed in the mortgage servicing industry, including the discouragingly sluggish pace of mortgage modifications. This last point is a matter of concern not only because of its significance for the millions of American families who are unable to maintain their mortgage payments on homes that have lost considerable value in recent years, but also because of the importance from a macroeconomic perspective of realizing as quickly and efficiently as possible a clearing of housing prices, which would help create the conditions for a market recovery. Mortgage Documentation and other Servicing IssuesForeclosure is a legal process initiated to terminate a borrower's interest in a property and is permitted only when the borrower has defaulted on the debt obligation for a specified period. The process allows the lender to sell the property and use the proceeds to satisfy the borrower's unpaid debt to the extent it is secured by the property. Foreclosure requirements are generally established by state laws and each state has its own statutes, rules, and court decisions pertaining to foreclosures. Some 23 states, known as judicial foreclosure states, require foreclosures to be reviewed and approved by a court. Nonjudicial foreclosure states have different processes for foreclosures that do not require the creditor to obtain court approval for a foreclosure, but instead impose varying waiting periods and documentation, filing, and notice requirements after a default occurs and before a foreclosure sale may take place. In nonjudicial foreclosure states, the homeowner typically has access to the court in a foreclosure matter only if the homeowner initiates a suit to stop the foreclosure process or seeks protection in a bankruptcy court. Because mortgage servicers maintain the official accounting of all amounts paid and owed by borrowers, they serve as the critical link between borrowers and mortgage holders. In addition, servicers manage loan defaults, including the negotiation of loan modification and repayment plans with borrowers. Should the servicer decide to initiate foreclosure, it would often do so as the agent for third parties, such as securitization trusts. In this regard, servicers have responsibilities to investors holding residential MBS. Servicers also have responsibilities to borrowers to maintain accurate and complete records of payments received, amounts advanced, notifications made to borrowers, and changes of payment terms with respect to any mortgage modification discussions. Foreclosure documentation typically requires an assertion that the agent bringing forth the action has the legal right to foreclose and that the loan is in default. The document filings contain details of the transactions and the amounts owed. These documents typically include attestations signed by individuals who have personal knowledge of the facts and who are properly authorized to make such assertions. In most jurisdictions, the documents must be signed by these individuals in the presence of a notary, following proper notarization procedures. Lenders and servicers are responsible for ensuring that the individuals who sign these documents are duly authorized and have appropriate knowledge of the facts and circumstances. In addition, lenders and servicers are responsible for ensuring the accuracy of records and the facts recited in the foreclosure documents. State and local laws govern the recordation process for real estate transfers and mortgage filings and assignments. Given the multiple sales and assignments of mortgage loans that often occur, concerns have been raised regarding investors' or servicers' rights to initiate foreclosure actions. Although state-by-state practices vary considerably, generally the noteholder has the right to initiate foreclosure, once default has occurred, if an original note can be produced and the current holder's ownership is verified. If there is no controversy concerning ownership of the note, but rather an inability to locate original documents, processes usually allow for foreclosure to proceed, albeit at some cost and delay. If there is some question of ownership, the investor or servicer may be required to produce evidence of ownership before a foreclosure can proceed. Since matters regarding real estate titles and foreclosures are generally governed by state law, state attorneys general are undertaking a joint review of lenders and servicers focusing on the reported problems in foreclosures. In addition, numerous federal agencies have launched investigations, including the examinations in process by the federal financial regulators. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Federal Reserve are conducting an in-depth review of practices at the largest mortgage servicing operations. The interagency examinations and reviews focus on foreclosure practices generally, but with an emphasis on the internal control breakdowns that led to inaccurate affidavits and other questionable legal documents being used in the foreclosure process. The agencies are reviewing firms' policies, procedures, and internal controls, including sampling loan files. We have also solicited the views of consumer organizations to help detect problems at specific servicers. The agencies expect the initial on-site portion of our work to be completed by the end of the year. The agencies plan to publish a summary overview in early 2011 that will describe the range of industry practices found in the examinations and identify weaknesses requiring remediation. The Federal Reserve has supervisory and regulatory authority for bank holding companies and their nonbank subsidiaries, as well as for approximately 800 state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System (state member banks), and certain other financial institutions and activities. We work with other federal and state supervisory authorities to ensure the safety and soundness of the banking industry, foster the stability of the financial system, and provide for fair and equitable treatment of consumers in their financial transactions. The Federal Reserve is engaged in both regulation, which involves establishing the rules within which banking organizations must operate, and supervision, which involves reviewing the efforts of banking organizations to abide by those rules and remain, overall, in safe and sound condition. The Federal Reserve serves as the primary federal regulator for two of the 10 largest servicers affiliated with banking organizations, one a holding company affiliate and the other a state member bank. The Federal Reserve is participating with the other federal banking agencies in examining the foreclosure policies and practices of the other large institutions. For additional information on foreclosure processes, we have sent a self-assessment questionnaire to other Federal Reserve-regulated institutions that engage in mortgage servicing but are not part of the interagency examination effort. While quite preliminary, the banking agencies' findings from the supervisory review suggest significant weaknesses in risk-management, quality control, audit, and compliance practices as underlying factors contributing to the problems associated with mortgage servicing and foreclosure documentation. We have also found shortcomings in staff training, coordination among loan modification and foreclosure staff, and management and oversight of third-party service providers, including legal services. It is for this reason that we expanded the review to include an examination of pre-foreclosure loans, or those past due but not yet in the foreclosure process, and certain third-party service providers. As examiners identify weaknesses, they will require firms to take remedial action and, when necessary, require servicers to address resource shortfalls, training and coordination problems, and control failures. It is important to recognize that the extent of these problems is not the same across all firms. Nonetheless, the problems are sufficiently widespread that they suggest structural problems in the mortgage servicing industry. The servicing industry overall has not been up to the challenge of handling the large volumes of distressed mortgages. The banking agencies have been focused for some time on the problems related to modifying mortgage loans and the large number of consumer complaints by homeowners seeking loan modifications. It has now become evident that significant parts of the servicing industry also failed to handle foreclosures properly. While we are still in the process of determining the extent of these problems and the required supervisory response, it is clear that the industry will need to make substantial investments to improve its functioning in these areas and supervisors must ensure that these improvements occur. Moreover, fixing the problems in the mortgage servicing industry may also require thinking about some fundamental structural changes to the current mortgage system. I will discuss the issue of structural solutions to these issues in more detail later in my testimony. Investor Repurchase RequestsThe cost associated with foreclosure documentation problems, including robo-signing, are not the only potential liabilities facing financial institutions in the wake of the mortgage and housing crisis. As losses in MBS have been escalating, investors in MBS and purchasers of unsecuritized whole loans are more frequently exploring, and in some cases asserting, contractual and securities law claims against the parties that originated the loans, sold the loans, underwrote securities offerings, or had other roles in the process. The essence of these claims is that mortgages in the securitization pools, or sold as unsecuritized whole loans, did not conform to representations and warranties made about their quality--specifically that the loan applications contained misrepresentations or the underwriting was not in conformance with stated standards. The potential liability associated with contract claims in securitizations is usually called put back risk because many of the relevant agreements permit the buyer of the mortgages to put them back to the seller at par. Buyers can demand that the seller or another party that makes representations repurchase the mortgages if defects are found in the underlying loan documentation or in the underwriting that conflict with the sale agreements. Although the representations and warranties in the various agreements vary considerably, they frequently require that the defect materially and adversely affect the value of the loan before put back rights can be exercised. At the time of the put back, the mortgage loan may have become seriously delinquent or entered into default. Because underperforming mortgages are typically valued substantially less than par, the put back transfers any potential loss from the buyer back to the original seller or mortgage securitizer. Given the poor performance of the mortgage assets, investors, including the Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs), have sought to pursue put back claims through various legal avenues, including requesting that mortgage servicers provide underlying mortgage files and the requisite documents. A GSE will generally buy a loan out of an MBS pool when the loan becomes 120 days delinquent. The GSE will then conduct a review of the delinquent loan file, and if it finds that the loan did not comply with its underwriting standards, it will request that the loan be repurchased by the originator/seller or that the GSE be made whole on any credit losses incurred. During the third quarter of 2010, Fannie Mae collected $1.6 billion in unpaid principal balance (UPB) from originators, and currently has $7.7 billion UPB in outstanding repurchase requests, $2.8 billion of which has been outstanding for more than 120 days. Freddie Mac has $5.6 billion UPB in outstanding repurchase requests, $1.8 billion of which has been outstanding for more than 120 days. As of the third quarter of 2010, the four largest banks held $9.7 billion in repurchase reserves, most of which is intended for GSE put backs. There are also pending claims by some investors alleging that underwriters and sponsors of securitizations failed to comply with the federal securities laws covering the offering documents and registration statements. These suits specifically reference descriptions of the risks to investors, the quality of assets in the securitization, the order in which investors would be paid, or other factors. Most of these lawsuits are in the early stages, and it is difficult to ascertain the probability that investors will be able to shift a substantial portion of the losses on defaulted mortgages back to the parties that sold the loans or underwrote the offerings. While the full extent of put back exposure is for this reason hard to specify with precision, the risk has been known for some time and has been an ongoing focus of supervisory oversight at some institutions. However, in light of recent increased investor activity, the Federal Reserve has been conducting a detailed evaluation of put back risk to financial institutions. We are asking institutions that originated large numbers of mortgages or sponsored significant MBS to assess and provide for these risks as part of their overall capital planning process. Supervisory ResponsesThe revelation of documentation flaws in foreclosure processes raise two kinds of questions for supervisors: First, what actions are appropriate and sufficient to respond to problems identified at specific regulated banking organizations? Second, what does the failure of supervisory examinations to uncover these flaws counsel for future supervisory practice? With respect to the question of actions aimed at specific institutions, the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies have significant supervisory and enforcement tools that can be used to address certain types of deficiencies in the foreclosure and mortgage transfer process. For example, numerous enforcement tools are available to address safety and soundness issues such as inadequate controls and processes, weaknesses in risk-management and quality control, and certain types of compliance weaknesses in foreclosure operations. These tools include supervisory enforcement actions that require an institution to correct deficient operations in a prescribed period of time and Civil Money Penalties (CMPs) for egregious actions. The agencies may also lower examination ratings, which can result in limiting the permissible activities and affiliations of financial firms and trigger other supervisory reviews and limitations, and restrict the ability of institutions to expand. The agencies also have the authority to assess CMPs on individuals who are responsible for violations, to issue cease and desist orders on responsible individuals, or, if the statutory criteria are met, to remove them from banking. In addition, we may make referrals to law enforcement agencies, or require institutions to file Suspicious Activity Reports, as appropriate. Although the examinations are not yet fully completed, based on what we have already learned, the Federal Reserve expects to use many or all of these tools through the course of our review of foreclosure and other mortgage matters. In particular, the Federal Reserve has already emphasized to the industry and to institutions we supervise the importance of addressing identified weaknesses in risk-management, quality control, audit, and compliance practices. The problems that are evident to date raise significant reputation and legal risk for the major mortgage servicers. These weaknesses require immediate remedial action. They will also affect the rating assigned by Federal Reserve supervisors to management of bank holding companies, even where the servicing activity was in a banking subsidiary of a holding company. In addition, the federal banking agencies expect that employees are adequately trained and have sufficient resources to appropriately review the facts and circumstances of files when preparing documents, and that legal processes are fully and properly followed. Banking organizations also must ensure quality control for third-party service providers, including legal services. With respect to future supervisory practice more generally, two points for increased emphasis are already apparent. First, this episode has underscored the importance of our using the new authority given the Federal Reserve in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act to send our examiners into non-bank affiliates of large bank holding companies, including those in large institutions that have become bank holding companies only in the last couple of years. Second, our experience suggests that the utility of examining and validating internal control processes within firms may extend beyond improvements to the specific processes subject to the exam. We have found that problems in foreclosure practices do not seem as pervasive in institutions in which we had previously examined other internal control processes, found shortcomings, and insisted on corrective action. While we would not draw strong conclusions from such a limited experience, it seems possible that a firm may improve its general approach to control processes once it has been required to remedy problems in discrete areas. If this relationship is borne out, it could be a significant advance in supervisory practice, insofar as resource constraints will always limit the number of supervisory examinations. Possible Need for Structural SolutionsBeyond remedial or punitive measures directed at specific firms and future-oriented changes in supervisory practice, structural solutions may be needed to address the range of problems associated with mortgage servicing. Similarly, the foreclosure documentation problems are another reminder of the degree to which foreclosure has been preferred to mortgage modification, notwithstanding various efforts to change this imbalance. Here again, a more structural solution may be needed The explosive growth of securitization as a vehicle for financing mortgages was accompanied by the emergence of a sizeable mortgage servicing industry--that is, a group of firms servicing mortgages that they did not own or, in many cases, that they had not originated. While there have surely been economies associated with this industry, there have also been chronic problems. It has been increasingly apparent that the inadequacy of servicer resources to deal with mortgage modifications--an area that was a point of supervisory emphasis--was actually a reflection of a larger inability to deal with the challenges entailed in servicing mortgages in many jurisdictions and dealing with a complicated investor base. For example, foreclosure procedures are specifically the province of real property law governed by the states, and can vary not only by state, but also within states and sometimes even within counties. With or without regulatory changes, it is quite probable that servicer fees to securitization trusts will increase to reflect the costs associated with the complexities of the contemporary mortgage model. The impetus for change in the mortgage servicing industry is likely only to increase as the advantages of servicing rights for regulatory capital purposes become limited after the new Basel III requirements are implemented.1It is possible that servicing issues can be satisfactorily addressed through the actions of the various primary regulators. However, in light of the range of problems already encountered, and the prospect of further changes in the industry--including the possible migration of more servicing activity to non-banking organizations--it seems reasonable at least to consider whether a national set of standards for mortgage servicers may be warranted. The case for concerted, coordinated action is much clearer with respect to the slow-moving pace of mortgage modifications. Regardless of the findings that emerge from the examinations underway, and remedial actions required to correct past mistakes, this episode has again drawn attention to what can only be described as a perverse set of incentives for homeowners with underwater mortgages. Homeowners who try to obtain a modification of the terms of their mortgages are all too frequently subject to delay and disappointment, while those who simply stop paying their mortgages have found that they can often stay in their homes rent free for a time before the foreclosure process moves ahead. Moreover, many homeowners believe, reportedly on the basis of communications from servicers, that the only way they can qualify for modifications is by stopping their mortgage payments and thus becoming delinquent. Quite apart from the impact upon families who lose their homes, the dominance of foreclosures over modifications raises macroeconomic concerns. The number of foreclosures initiated on residential properties has soared from about 1 million in 2006, the year that house prices peaked, to 2.8 million last year. Over the first three quarters of this year, we have seen a further 2 million foreclosure filings, and an additional 2.3 million homes were in foreclosure at the end of September. All told, we expect about 2.5 million foreclosure filings this year and next year and about 2.4 million more in 2012. While our outlook is for filings to decline in coming years, they will remain high by historical standards. Currently, more than 4.5 million mortgage loans are 90 days or more past due or in foreclosure. These numbers compare to just 520,000 permanent loan modifications executed under the Treasury Department's Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP) and an additional 1.6 million proprietary loan modifications by servicers participating in the HOPE NOW Alliance program.2 The Federal Reserve believes that in most cases the best way to assist struggling borrowers is a mortgage modification allowing them to retain their home with an affordable mortgage payment. In a housing market where values have declined so much, following a period in which all actors relied upon rising house prices to sustain mortgage practices, foreclosures simply do not make sense as a preferred response. Foreclosures are costly to all parties and more broadly to our economy. Lenders and investors incur financial losses arising from the litigation expenses associated with the foreclosure process and the loss on the defaulted mortgage when the foreclosed property sells at a liquidation price that is substantially less than the loan balance. Local governments must contend with lower property tax revenue and the ramifications of neglected properties that may threaten public safety. Additionally, neighbors and neighborhoods suffer potential spillover effects from foreclosure sales because foreclosures may reduce the attractiveness of the neighborhood or may signal to potential buyers a forthcoming decline in neighborhood quality. In the end, an overhang of homes awaiting foreclosure is unhealthy for the housing market and can delay a recovery in housing markets and the broader economy. Several possible explanations have been suggested for the prominence of foreclosures: the lack of servicer capacity to execute modifications, purported financial incentives for servicers to foreclose rather than modify, what until recently appeared to be easier execution of foreclosures relative to modifications, limits on the authority of securitization trustees, and conflicts between primary and secondary lien holders. Whatever the merits and relative weights of these various explanations, the social costs of this situation are huge. It just cannot be the case that foreclosure is preferable to modification for a significant proportion of mortgages where the deadweight costs of foreclosure, including a distressed sale discount, are so high. While some banks and other industry participants have stepped forward to increase the rate of modifications relative to foreclosures, many have not done enough. We need renewed attention in many quarters of government and the financial industry, and among investors in mortgage-backed securities, to the lagging incidence of modifications. ConclusionIn conclusion, I regret to say that the hangover from the housing bubble of this past decade is still very much with us, as revealed both in the inadequate capacity of mortgage servicers and the continued impact of foreclosed homes on the housing market. While bank regulatory agencies can and should respond to specific failings that are being identified in our interagency examination, there is a strong case to be made that broader solutions are needed both to address structural problems in the mortgage servicing industry and to accelerate the pace of mortgage modifications or other loss mitigation efforts. Thank you very much for your attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you might have. 1.The proposed Basel III capital rules would simultaneously introduce a specific minimum common equity ratio and define "common equity" so as to limit or exclude consideration of items that may not provide the loss absorbing capacity that common equity is supposed to represent.Return to text 2.Written testimony of Phyllis Caldwell, Chief of Homeownership Preservation Office, U.S. Department of the Treasury, before the House Financial Services Subcommittee on Housing and Community Opportunity hearing on "Robo-Signing, Chain of Title, Loss Mitigation and Other Issues in Mortgage Servicing," November 18, 2010.Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the Committee, thank you for your invitation to this morning's hearing on problems in mortgage servicing. In the first portion of my testimony, I will explain our current understanding of the nature and extent of the deficiencies in mortgage documentation that have been so apparent in the robo-signing misconduct, as well as what the banking agencies are doing in support of a broader interagency effort to develop a full picture of these problems. I also want to address the issue of so-called put backs of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) to mortgage originators or securitization sponsors. Though only indirectly related to robo-signing and associated servicing flaws, financial exposure resulting from put backs could be more significant for some institutions than that from documentation flaws. In the second portion of my testimony, I will turn to the question of appropriate policy responses--with respect to specific regulated financial institutions, to supervisory practices more generally, and to the structural problems we have observed in the mortgage servicing industry, including the discouragingly sluggish pace of mortgage modifications. This last point is a matter of concern not only because of its significance for the millions of American families who are unable to maintain their mortgage payments on homes that have lost considerable value in recent years, but also because of the importance from a macroeconomic perspective of realizing as quickly and efficiently as possible a clearing of housing prices, which would help create the conditions for a market recovery. Mortgage Documentation and other Servicing IssuesForeclosure is a legal process initiated to terminate a borrower's interest in a property and is permitted only when the borrower has defaulted on the debt obligation for a specified period. The process allows the lender to sell the property and use the proceeds to satisfy the borrower's unpaid debt to the extent it is secured by the property. Foreclosure requirements are generally established by state laws and each state has its own statutes, rules, and court decisions pertaining to foreclosures. Some 23 states, known as judicial foreclosure states, require foreclosures to be reviewed and approved by a court. Nonjudicial foreclosure states have different processes for foreclosures that do not require the creditor to obtain court approval for a foreclosure, but instead impose varying waiting periods and documentation, filing, and notice requirements after a default occurs and before a foreclosure sale may take place. In nonjudicial foreclosure states, the homeowner typically has access to the court in a foreclosure matter only if the homeowner initiates a suit to stop the foreclosure process or seeks protection in a bankruptcy court. Because mortgage servicers maintain the official accounting of all amounts paid and owed by borrowers, they serve as the critical link between borrowers and mortgage holders. In addition, servicers manage loan defaults, including the negotiation of loan modification and repayment plans with borrowers. Should the servicer decide to initiate foreclosure, it would often do so as the agent for third parties, such as securitization trusts. In this regard, servicers have responsibilities to investors holding residential MBS. Servicers also have responsibilities to borrowers to maintain accurate and complete records of payments received, amounts advanced, notifications made to borrowers, and changes of payment terms with respect to any mortgage modification discussions. Foreclosure documentation typically requires an assertion that the agent bringing forth the action has the legal right to foreclose and that the loan is in default. The document filings contain details of the transactions and the amounts owed. These documents typically include attestations signed by individuals who have personal knowledge of the facts and who are properly authorized to make such assertions. In most jurisdictions, the documents must be signed by these individuals in the presence of a notary, following proper notarization procedures. Lenders and servicers are responsible for ensuring that the individuals who sign these documents are duly authorized and have appropriate knowledge of the facts and circumstances. In addition, lenders and servicers are responsible for ensuring the accuracy of records and the facts recited in the foreclosure documents. State and local laws govern the recordation process for real estate transfers and mortgage filings and assignments. Given the multiple sales and assignments of mortgage loans that often occur, concerns have been raised regarding investors' or servicers' rights to initiate foreclosure actions. Although state-by-state practices vary considerably, generally the noteholder has the right to initiate foreclosure, once default has occurred, if an original note can be produced and the current holder's ownership is verified. If there is no controversy concerning ownership of the note, but rather an inability to locate original documents, processes usually allow for foreclosure to proceed, albeit at some cost and delay. If there is some question of ownership, the investor or servicer may be required to produce evidence of ownership before a foreclosure can proceed. Since matters regarding real estate titles and foreclosures are generally governed by state law, state attorneys general are undertaking a joint review of lenders and servicers focusing on the reported problems in foreclosures. In addition, numerous federal agencies have launched investigations, including the examinations in process by the federal financial regulators. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Federal Reserve are conducting an in-depth review of practices at the largest mortgage servicing operations. The interagency examinations and reviews focus on foreclosure practices generally, but with an emphasis on the internal control breakdowns that led to inaccurate affidavits and other questionable legal documents being used in the foreclosure process. The agencies are reviewing firms' policies, procedures, and internal controls, including sampling loan files. We have also solicited the views of consumer organizations to help detect problems at specific servicers. The agencies expect the initial on-site portion of our work to be completed by the end of the year. The agencies plan to publish a summary overview in early 2011 that will describe the range of industry practices found in the examinations and identify weaknesses requiring remediation. The Federal Reserve has supervisory and regulatory authority for bank holding companies and their nonbank subsidiaries, as well as for approximately 800 state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System (state member banks), and certain other financial institutions and activities. We work with other federal and state supervisory authorities to ensure the safety and soundness of the banking industry, foster the stability of the financial system, and provide for fair and equitable treatment of consumers in their financial transactions. The Federal Reserve is engaged in both regulation, which involves establishing the rules within which banking organizations must operate, and supervision, which involves reviewing the efforts of banking organizations to abide by those rules and remain, overall, in safe and sound condition. The Federal Reserve serves as the primary federal regulator for two of the 10 largest servicers affiliated with banking organizations, one a holding company affiliate and the other a state member bank. The Federal Reserve is participating with the other federal banking agencies in examining the foreclosure policies and practices of the other large institutions. For additional information on foreclosure processes, we have sent a self-assessment questionnaire to other Federal Reserve-regulated institutions that engage in mortgage servicing but are not part of the interagency examination effort. While quite preliminary, the banking agencies' findings from the supervisory review suggest significant weaknesses in risk-management, quality control, audit, and compliance practices as underlying factors contributing to the problems associated with mortgage servicing and foreclosure documentation. We have also found shortcomings in staff training, coordination among loan modification and foreclosure staff, and management and oversight of third-party service providers, including legal services. It is for this reason that we expanded the review to include an examination of pre-foreclosure loans, or those past due but not yet in the foreclosure process, and certain third-party service providers. As examiners identify weaknesses, they will require firms to take remedial action and, when necessary, require servicers to address resource shortfalls, training and coordination problems, and control failures. It is important to recognize that the extent of these problems is not the same across all firms. Nonetheless, the problems are sufficiently widespread that they suggest structural problems in the mortgage servicing industry. The servicing industry overall has not been up to the challenge of handling the large volumes of distressed mortgages. The banking agencies have been focused for some time on the problems related to modifying mortgage loans and the large number of consumer complaints by homeowners seeking loan modifications. It has now become evident that significant parts of the servicing industry also failed to handle foreclosures properly. While we are still in the process of determining the extent of these problems and the required supervisory response, it is clear that the industry will need to make substantial investments to improve its functioning in these areas and supervisors must ensure that these improvements occur. Moreover, fixing the problems in the mortgage servicing industry may also require thinking about some fundamental structural changes to the current mortgage system. I will discuss the issue of structural solutions to these issues in more detail later in my testimony. Investor Repurchase RequestsThe cost associated with foreclosure documentation problems, including robo-signing, are not the only potential liabilities facing financial institutions in the wake of the mortgage and housing crisis. As losses in MBS have been escalating, investors in MBS and purchasers of unsecuritized whole loans are more frequently exploring, and in some cases asserting, contractual and securities law claims against the parties that originated the loans, sold the loans, underwrote securities offerings, or had other roles in the process. The essence of these claims is that mortgages in the securitization pools, or sold as unsecuritized whole loans, did not conform to representations and warranties made about their quality--specifically that the loan applications contained misrepresentations or the underwriting was not in conformance with stated standards. The potential liability associated with contract claims in securitizations is usually called put back risk because many of the relevant agreements permit the buyer of the mortgages to put them back to the seller at par. Buyers can demand that the seller or another party that makes representations repurchase the mortgages if defects are found in the underlying loan documentation or in the underwriting that conflict with the sale agreements. Although the representations and warranties in the various agreements vary considerably, they frequently require that the defect materially and adversely affect the value of the loan before put back rights can be exercised. At the time of the put back, the mortgage loan may have become seriously delinquent or entered into default. Because underperforming mortgages are typically valued substantially less than par, the put back transfers any potential loss from the buyer back to the original seller or mortgage securitizer. Given the poor performance of the mortgage assets, investors, including the Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs), have sought to pursue put back claims through various legal avenues, including requesting that mortgage servicers provide underlying mortgage files and the requisite documents. A GSE will generally buy a loan out of an MBS pool when the loan becomes 120 days delinquent. The GSE will then conduct a review of the delinquent loan file, and if it finds that the loan did not comply with its underwriting standards, it will request that the loan be repurchased by the originator/seller or that the GSE be made whole on any credit losses incurred. During the third quarter of 2010, Fannie Mae collected $1.6 billion in unpaid principal balance (UPB) from originators, and currently has $7.7 billion UPB in outstanding repurchase requests, $2.8 billion of which has been outstanding for more than 120 days. Freddie Mac has $5.6 billion UPB in outstanding repurchase requests, $1.8 billion of which has been outstanding for more than 120 days. As of the third quarter of 2010, the four largest banks held $9.7 billion in repurchase reserves, most of which is intended for GSE put backs. There are also pending claims by some investors alleging that underwriters and sponsors of securitizations failed to comply with the federal securities laws covering the offering documents and registration statements. These suits specifically reference descriptions of the risks to investors, the quality of assets in the securitization, the order in which investors would be paid, or other factors. Most of these lawsuits are in the early stages, and it is difficult to ascertain the probability that investors will be able to shift a substantial portion of the losses on defaulted mortgages back to the parties that sold the loans or underwrote the offerings. While the full extent of put back exposure is for this reason hard to specify with precision, the risk has been known for some time and has been an ongoing focus of supervisory oversight at some institutions. However, in light of recent increased investor activity, the Federal Reserve has been conducting a detailed evaluation of put back risk to financial institutions. We are asking institutions that originated large numbers of mortgages or sponsored significant MBS to assess and provide for these risks as part of their overall capital planning process. Supervisory ResponsesThe revelation of documentation flaws in foreclosure processes raise two kinds of questions for supervisors: First, what actions are appropriate and sufficient to respond to problems identified at specific regulated banking organizations? Second, what does the failure of supervisory examinations to uncover these flaws counsel for future supervisory practice? With respect to the question of actions aimed at specific institutions, the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies have significant supervisory and enforcement tools that can be used to address certain types of deficiencies in the foreclosure and mortgage transfer process. For example, numerous enforcement tools are available to address safety and soundness issues such as inadequate controls and processes, weaknesses in risk-management and quality control, and certain types of compliance weaknesses in foreclosure operations. These tools include supervisory enforcement actions that require an institution to correct deficient operations in a prescribed period of time and Civil Money Penalties (CMPs) for egregious actions. The agencies may also lower examination ratings, which can result in limiting the permissible activities and affiliations of financial firms and trigger other supervisory reviews and limitations, and restrict the ability of institutions to expand. The agencies also have the authority to assess CMPs on individuals who are responsible for violations, to issue cease and desist orders on responsible individuals, or, if the statutory criteria are met, to remove them from banking. In addition, we may make referrals to law enforcement agencies, or require institutions to file Suspicious Activity Reports, as appropriate. Although the examinations are not yet fully completed, based on what we have already learned, the Federal Reserve expects to use many or all of these tools through the course of our review of foreclosure and other mortgage matters. In particular, the Federal Reserve has already emphasized to the industry and to institutions we supervise the importance of addressing identified weaknesses in risk-management, quality control, audit, and compliance practices. The problems that are evident to date raise significant reputation and legal risk for the major mortgage servicers. These weaknesses require immediate remedial action. They will also affect the rating assigned by Federal Reserve supervisors to management of bank holding companies, even where the servicing activity was in a banking subsidiary of a holding company. In addition, the federal banking agencies expect that employees are adequately trained and have sufficient resources to appropriately review the facts and circumstances of files when preparing documents, and that legal processes are fully and properly followed. Banking organizations also must ensure quality control for third-party service providers, including legal services. With respect to future supervisory practice more generally, two points for increased emphasis are already apparent. First, this episode has underscored the importance of our using the new authority given the Federal Reserve in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act to send our examiners into non-bank affiliates of large bank holding companies, including those in large institutions that have become bank holding companies only in the last couple of years. Second, our experience suggests that the utility of examining and validating internal control processes within firms may extend beyond improvements to the specific processes subject to the exam. We have found that problems in foreclosure practices do not seem as pervasive in institutions in which we had previously examined other internal control processes, found shortcomings, and insisted on corrective action. While we would not draw strong conclusions from such a limited experience, it seems possible that a firm may improve its general approach to control processes once it has been required to remedy problems in discrete areas. If this relationship is borne out, it could be a significant advance in supervisory practice, insofar as resource constraints will always limit the number of supervisory examinations. Possible Need for Structural SolutionsBeyond remedial or punitive measures directed at specific firms and future-oriented changes in supervisory practice, structural solutions may be needed to address the range of problems associated with mortgage servicing. Similarly, the foreclosure documentation problems are another reminder of the degree to which foreclosure has been preferred to mortgage modification, notwithstanding various efforts to change this imbalance. Here again, a more structural solution may be needed The explosive growth of securitization as a vehicle for financing mortgages was accompanied by the emergence of a sizeable mortgage servicing industry--that is, a group of firms servicing mortgages that they did not own or, in many cases, that they had not originated. While there have surely been economies associated with this industry, there have also been chronic problems. It has been increasingly apparent that the inadequacy of servicer resources to deal with mortgage modifications--an area that was a point of supervisory emphasis--was actually a reflection of a larger inability to deal with the challenges entailed in servicing mortgages in many jurisdictions and dealing with a complicated investor base. For example, foreclosure procedures are specifically the province of real property law governed by the states, and can vary not only by state, but also within states and sometimes even within counties. With or without regulatory changes, it is quite probable that servicer fees to securitization trusts will increase to reflect the costs associated with the complexities of the contemporary mortgage model. The impetus for change in the mortgage servicing industry is likely only to increase as the advantages of servicing rights for regulatory capital purposes become limited after the new Basel III requirements are implemented.1It is possible that servicing issues can be satisfactorily addressed through the actions of the various primary regulators. However, in light of the range of problems already encountered, and the prospect of further changes in the industry--including the possible migration of more servicing activity to non-banking organizations--it seems reasonable at least to consider whether a national set of standards for mortgage servicers may be warranted. The case for concerted, coordinated action is much clearer with respect to the slow-moving pace of mortgage modifications. Regardless of the findings that emerge from the examinations underway, and remedial actions required to correct past mistakes, this episode has again drawn attention to what can only be described as a perverse set of incentives for homeowners with underwater mortgages. Homeowners who try to obtain a modification of the terms of their mortgages are all too frequently subject to delay and disappointment, while those who simply stop paying their mortgages have found that they can often stay in their homes rent free for a time before the foreclosure process moves ahead. Moreover, many homeowners believe, reportedly on the basis of communications from servicers, that the only way they can qualify for modifications is by stopping their mortgage payments and thus becoming delinquent. Quite apart from the impact upon families who lose their homes, the dominance of foreclosures over modifications raises macroeconomic concerns. The number of foreclosures initiated on residential properties has soared from about 1 million in 2006, the year that house prices peaked, to 2.8 million last year. Over the first three quarters of this year, we have seen a further 2 million foreclosure filings, and an additional 2.3 million homes were in foreclosure at the end of September. All told, we expect about 2.5 million foreclosure filings this year and next year and about 2.4 million more in 2012. While our outlook is for filings to decline in coming years, they will remain high by historical standards. Currently, more than 4.5 million mortgage loans are 90 days or more past due or in foreclosure. These numbers compare to just 520,000 permanent loan modifications executed under the Treasury Department's Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP) and an additional 1.6 million proprietary loan modifications by servicers participating in the HOPE NOW Alliance program.2 The Federal Reserve believes that in most cases the best way to assist struggling borrowers is a mortgage modification allowing them to retain their home with an affordable mortgage payment. In a housing market where values have declined so much, following a period in which all actors relied upon rising house prices to sustain mortgage practices, foreclosures simply do not make sense as a preferred response. Foreclosures are costly to all parties and more broadly to our economy. Lenders and investors incur financial losses arising from the litigation expenses associated with the foreclosure process and the loss on the defaulted mortgage when the foreclosed property sells at a liquidation price that is substantially less than the loan balance. Local governments must contend with lower property tax revenue and the ramifications of neglected properties that may threaten public safety. Additionally, neighbors and neighborhoods suffer potential spillover effects from foreclosure sales because foreclosures may reduce the attractiveness of the neighborhood or may signal to potential buyers a forthcoming decline in neighborhood quality. In the end, an overhang of homes awaiting foreclosure is unhealthy for the housing market and can delay a recovery in housing markets and the broader economy. Several possible explanations have been suggested for the prominence of foreclosures: the lack of servicer capacity to execute modifications, purported financial incentives for servicers to foreclose rather than modify, what until recently appeared to be easier execution of foreclosures relative to modifications, limits on the authority of securitization trustees, and conflicts between primary and secondary lien holders. Whatever the merits and relative weights of these various explanations, the social costs of this situation are huge. It just cannot be the case that foreclosure is preferable to modification for a significant proportion of mortgages where the deadweight costs of foreclosure, including a distressed sale discount, are so high. While some banks and other industry participants have stepped forward to increase the rate of modifications relative to foreclosures, many have not done enough. We need renewed attention in many quarters of government and the financial industry, and among investors in mortgage-backed securities, to the lagging incidence of modifications. ConclusionIn conclusion, I regret to say that the hangover from the housing bubble of this past decade is still very much with us, as revealed both in the inadequate capacity of mortgage servicers and the continued impact of foreclosed homes on the housing market. While bank regulatory agencies can and should respond to specific failings that are being identified in our interagency examination, there is a strong case to be made that broader solutions are needed both to address structural problems in the mortgage servicing industry and to accelerate the pace of mortgage modifications or other loss mitigation efforts. Thank you very much for your attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you might have. 1.The proposed Basel III capital rules would simultaneously introduce a specific minimum common equity ratio and define "common equity" so as to limit or exclude consideration of items that may not provide the loss absorbing capacity that common equity is supposed to represent.Return to text 2.Written testimony of Phyllis Caldwell, Chief of Homeownership Preservation Office, U.S. Department of the Treasury, before the House Financial Services Subcommittee on Housing and Community Opportunity hearing on "Robo-Signing, Chain of Title, Loss Mitigation and Other Issues in Mortgage Servicing," November 18, 2010.Return to text