The Federal Reserve Board on Friday published its annual adjustment of the dollar amount of fees that triggers additional disclosure requirements under the Truth in Lending Act and the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act of 1994 for home mortgage loans that bear rates or fees above a certain amount. The dollar amount of the fee-based trigger has been adjusted to $592 for 2011 based on the annual percentage change reflected in the Consumer Price Index that was in effect on June 1, 2010. The adjustment is effective January 1, 2011. This adjustment does not affect the rules for "higher-priced mortgage loans" adopted by the Board in July 2008. Coverage of mortgage loans under the July 2008 rules is determined using a different rate-based trigger. The Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act restricts credit terms such as balloon payments and requires additional disclosures when total points and fees payable by the consumer exceed the fee-based trigger (initially set at $400 and adjusted annually) or 8 percent of the total loan amount, whichever is larger. The Board's notice is attached. Federal Registernotice:HTML|48 KB PDF
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the proposal by Premier Commerce Bancorp, Inc., Palos Hills, Illinois, to acquire G.R. Bancorp, Ltd. and its subsidiary bank, The First National Bank of Grand Ridge, both of Grand Ridge, Illinois. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by The Toronto-Dominion Bank, Toronto, and its subsidiary bank holding companies, TD US P & C Holdings ULC, Calgary, both of Canada, and TD Bank US Holding Company, Portland, Maine, to acquire The South Financial Group, Inc. and its subsidiary bank, Carolina First Bank, both of Greenville, South Carolina. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the designation of the chairs and deputy chairs of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks for 2011. Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors. The Board of Governors in Washington appoints three of these directors and each year designates one of its appointees as chair and a second as deputy chair. Following are the names of the chairs and deputy chairs designated by the Board for 2011: BostonHenri A. Termeer, Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Genzyme Corporation, Cambridge, Massachusetts, renamed Chair. Kirk A. Sykes, President, Urban Strategy America Fund, L.P., Boston, Massachusetts, renamed Deputy Chair. New YorkLee C. Bollinger, President, Columbia University, New York, New York, named Chair. Katheryn S. Wylde, President and Chief Executive Officer, Partnership for New York City, New York, New York, named Deputy Chair. PhiladelphiaCharles P. Pizzi, President and Chief Executive Officer, Tasty Baking Company, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, renamed Chair. Jeremy Nowak, President and Chief Executive Officer, The Reinvestment Fund, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, renamed Deputy Chair. ClevelandAlfred M. Rankin, Jr., Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, NACCO Industries, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio, renamed Chair. Richard K. Smucker, Executive Chairman and Co-Chief Executive Officer, The J.M. Smucker Company, Orrville, Ohio, renamed Deputy Chair. RichmondMargaret E. McDermid, Senior Vice President and Chief Information Officer, Dominion Resources, Inc., Richmond, Virginia, named Chair. Linda D. Rabbitt, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Rand Construction Corporation, Washington, D.C., named Deputy Chair. AtlantaCarol B. Tomé, Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President, The Home Depot, Atlanta, Georgia, renamed Chair. Thomas I. Barkin, Director, McKinsey & Company, Atlanta, Georgia, renamed Deputy Chair. ChicagoWilliam C. Foote, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, USG Corporation, Chicago, Illinois, renamed Chair. Thomas J. Wilson, Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, The Allstate Corporation, Northbrook, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chair. St. LouisSteven H. Lipstein, President and Chief Executive Officer, BJC HealthCare, St. Louis, Missouri, renamed Chair. Ward M. Klein, Chief Executive Officer, Energizer Holdings, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri, renamed Deputy Chair. MinneapolisJohn W. Marvin, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Marvin Windows and Doors, Warroad, Minnesota, renamed Chair. Mary K. Brainerd, President and Chief Executive Officer, HealthPartners, Minneapolis, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chair. Kansas CityPaul DeBruce, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman/Founder, DeBruce Grain, Inc., Kansas City, Missouri, named Chair. Lu M. Cordova, Chief Executive Officer, Corlund Industries, LLC; President and General Manager, Almacen Storage Group, Boulder, Colorado, named Deputy Chair. DallasHerb Kelleher, Founder and Chairman Emeritus, Southwest Airlines, Dallas, Texas, named Chair. Myron E. Ullman III, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board, J.C. Penney Company, Inc., Plano, Texas, named Deputy Chair. San FranciscoDouglas W. Shorenstein, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Shorenstein Properties LLC, San Francisco, California, named Chair. Patricia E. Yarrington, Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, Chevron Corporation, San Ramon, California, named Deputy Chair.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced that it is seeking nominations for appointments to its Consumer Advisory Council. The Council advises the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under various consumer financial services laws and on other matters. Its membership represents the interests of consumers, communities, and the financial services industry. The group meets in Washington, D.C., three times a year. The Board plans to appoint up to ten members for terms that will begin in January 2011. Appointments are typically for three years. However, the duration of members' terms may be subject to change pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The Board will continue to use the Council's advice and expertise during the implementation of the Act. Nominations should include a résumé and the following information about nominees: Nominations should also include the nominator's name, organizational affiliation, title, address, telephone and fax numbers, and email address. Individuals may nominate themselves. Letters of nomination with complete information, including a résumé for each nominee, must be received by September 10, 2010. Nominations not received by September 10 may not be considered. Electronic nominations are preferred. The appropriate form can be accessed at: https://www.federalreserve.gov/secure/cacnomination/ If electronic submission is not feasible, the nominations may be mailed (not faxed) to Joseph Firschein, Assistant Director and Community Affairs Officer, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC 20551. For further information, contact Jennifer Kerslake, Secretary of the Council, at (202) 452-6470. Federal Registernotice:HTML|50 KB PDF
Federal agencies issued final rules today requiring residential mortgage loan originators who are employees of national and state banks, savings associations, Farm Credit System institutions, credit unions, and certain of their subsidiaries (agency-regulated institutions) to meet the registration requirements of the Secure and Fair Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (S.A.F.E. Act). The final rules are being issued by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of Thrift Supervision, Farm Credit Administration, and National Credit Union Administration (the agencies). The S.A.F.E. Act requires residential mortgage loan originators who are employees of agency-regulated institutions to be registered with the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry (registry). The registry is a database created by the Conference of State Bank Supervisors and the American Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators to support the licensing of mortgage loan originators by the states. As part of this registration process, residential mortgage loan originators must furnish to the registry information and fingerprints for background checks. The S.A.F.E. Act generally prohibits employees of agency-regulated institutions from originating residential mortgage loans unless they register with the registry. The agencies' final rules establish the registration requirements for residential mortgage loan originators employed by agency-regulated institutions and requirements for these institutions, including the adoption of policies and procedures to ensure compliance with the S.A.F.E. Act and final rules. As required by the S.A.F.E. Act, the final rules also require that each residential mortgage loan originator obtain a unique identifier through the registry that will remain with that residential mortgage loan originator, regardless of changes in employment. This will enable consumers to easily access employment and other background information about registered mortgage loan originators from the registry. Under the final rules, registered mortgage loan originators and agency-regulated institutions must provide these unique identifiers to consumers. The final rules take effect on October 1, 2010. The agencies anticipate that the registry could begin accepting federal registrations as early as January 28, 2011. Employees of agency-regulated institutions must not register until the agencies instruct them to do so. The agencies will provide an advance announcement of the date when the registry will begin accepting federal registrations, and agency-regulated institutions and their applicable employees will have 180 days from that date to comply with the initial registration requirements. The final rules appear in today'sFederal Register. TheFederal Registernotice and final rules are attached. Federal Registernotice:HTML|329 KB PDFSee also the revisedFederal Registerpreamble*:HTML|175 KB PDF *On August 23, 2010, the entire preamble (Pages 44656 through 44684, in Separate Part IV) of the original July 28, 2010 Federal Register announcement (75 FR 44656) was reprinted to correct footnote numbering.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the agenda and panelists for the second of four public hearings this year on potential revisions to Regulation C, which implements the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). The event will be held Thursday, August 5 at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. Those who want to attend the hearing shouldregister in advance online. HMDA requires lenders to provide detailed annual reports of their mortgage lending to regulators and the public. The hearings will help the Board gather information about whether its current regulations are working as intended and what changes might be needed. The full San Franciscohearing agendais available online. Panelists include representatives from community and consumer organizations, mortgage lenders, researchers, and other interested parties. Members of the public are invited to express their opinions during an open-mike period. Sign-up for the open-mike will be on a first-come, first-served basis beginning at 8:00 a.m. on the day of the event, and remarks will be limited to five minutes. Written statements of any length may be submitted for the record. Additional hearings will be held on the following dates: More information about the hearings, including instructions for submitting written comments, is available at:http://www.federalreserve.gov/communitydev/hmda_hearings.htm.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the agenda and panelists for the first of four public hearings this year on potential revisions to Regulation C, which implements the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). The event will be held July 15 at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. HMDA requires lenders to provide detailed annual reports of their mortgage lending to regulators and the public. The hearings will help the Board gather information about whether its current regulations are working as intended and what changes might be needed. The full Atlanta hearing agenda is available online at:http://www.federalreserve.gov/communitydev/hmda_agenda20100715.htm. Panelists include representatives from community and consumer organizations, mortgage lenders, researchers, and other interested parties. Members of the public are invited to express their opinions during an open-mike period. Sign up for the open-mike will be on a first-come, first-served basis the day of the event beginning at 8:00 a.m., and remarks will be limited to five minutes. Written statements of any length may be submitted for the record. Additional hearings will be held on the following dates: More information about the hearings, including instructions for submitting written comments, is available at:http://www.federalreserve.gov/communitydev/hmda_hearings.htm. Hearing details will be posted to this site they become available.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced that it had agreed with the Treasury Department that it was appropriate for Treasury to reduce from $20 billion to $4.3 billion the credit protection provided for the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) under the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). The Board had authorized up to $200 billion in TALF loans, but when the program closed on June 30, 2010, there were $43 billion in loans outstanding. Under the TALF, which began operation in March 2009, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York extended loans to investors in highly rated asset-backed securities (ABS) and commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS). By encouraging issuance of ABS and CMBS, the TALF was designed to increase credit availability and support economic activity. Although the TALF extended $70 billion in loans, many TALF loans, which have initial maturities of three or five years, have been repaid early, in part because the interest rates on TALF loans were designed to be higher than market rates in the more normal conditions that have come to prevail in a number of securitization markets. Any losses on the TALF program would first be absorbed by the accumulated excess of the TALF loan interest payments over the Federal Reserve's cost of funds and then by the TARP funds. To date, the TALF program has experienced no losses and all outstanding TALF loans are well collateralized. The Board continues to see it as highly likely that the accumulated excess interest spread will cover any loan losses that may occur without recourse to the dedicated TARP funds.
The results of the inauguralSenior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms (SCOOS), a quarterly survey providing information about the availability and terms of credit in securities financing and over-the counter (OTC) derivatives markets, will be released at 2 p.m. EDT July 13, the Federal Reserve Board said Monday. The SCOOS is modeled after the long-established Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, which provides qualitative information about changes in supply and demand for loans to households and businesses at commercial banks. The new survey collects qualitative information on credit terms and conditions in securities financing and OTC derivatives markets, which are important conduits for leverage in the financial system. The survey panel for the SCOOS includes approximately 20 dealers and may be expanded to include other firms over time. These firms account for almost all of the dealer activity in dollar-denominated securities financing and OTC derivatives markets. As discussed in the initial Federal Register notice on December 15, 2009, the survey is directed to senior credit officers responsible for maintaining a consolidated perspective on the management of credit risks. The inaugural survey was conducted in late May and early June. Results will include a narrative summary and tables showing the distribution of responses to each question.
On July 12, 2010, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $2 billion in 84-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. Following are the results of the auction: Bids at the stop-out rate were pro-rated at 1.96 percent. Resulting awards were rounded to the nearest $10,000 except that all awards below $10,000 were rounded up to $10,000. The awarded deposits will settle on July 15, 2010, and will mature on October 7, 2010. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded deposits.
On Monday, July 12, 2010, the Federal Reserve will offer $2 billion in 84-day term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of theTerm Deposit Facility. Description of Offering and Competitive Auction Parameters Competitive bids submitted at the stop-out rate will be pro-rated and will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000. Non-Competitive bids are allowed in this auction. All non-competitive bids will be automatically awarded in full at the stop-out rate of the competitive auction. The minimum amount for a non-competitive bid is $10,000; the maximum amount is $5,000,000 and should be submitted in increments of $10,000. Non-Competitive bids must be submitted between 10:00 a.m. ET and 2:00 p.m. ET on the auction date. Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by accessing theTerm Deposit Facility applicationbetween the opening time and the closing time on the auction date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on theBoard of Governors' websiteat approximately 12.00 p.m. (noon) ET on the notification date. Soon after, results will be posted on theTerm Deposit Facility Resource Center pageof the Central Bank Central website. Participant awards will be posted to the Term Deposit Facility application at approximately 12:00 p.m. ET on the notification date, and participants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application.
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Before the Subcommittee on Security and International Trade and Finance, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Bayh, Ranking Member Corker, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify today on developments in international regulatory reform and U.S. government priorities for international regulatory cooperation. When you held a hearing on this topic in the fall, I gave an overview of the Federal Reserve's role in international cooperative activities and reviewed some pertinent recent developments. In my testimony today, I will begin by enumerating the goals that should inform U.S. participation in international regulatory and supervisory activities. Then I will turn to some of the issues you identified in your invitation letter as being of interest to the Subcommittee in this hearing: the Federal Reserve's role in the international financial reform efforts--including our work on the Basel III reforms, cross-border crisis management and resolution, and incentive compensation--and a preliminary assessment of the likely effect of the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010 on international financial reform. Finally, I will close with a few thoughts on the future role of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and other international regulatory bodies as we move from the design of financial regulatory reforms to implementation of the new framework. Goals for International Cooperation in Financial Regulation and SupervisionBefore discussing some of the very important initiatives that are under way, I think it important to specify what I believe should be the U.S. goals for international cooperative efforts. First,to increase the stability of our financial system through adoption of strong, common regulatory standards for large financial firms and important financial markets. As events of the past few years have shown, financial stresses can quickly spread across national borders. Global financial stability is a critical shared goal. Second, to prevent major competitive imbalances between U.S. and foreign financial institutions. A core set of good common standards will reduce opportunities for cross-border regulatory arbitrage, even as it promotes financial stability. This goal is particularly noteworthy as the United States tightens its domestic prudential standards. Third,to make supervision of internationally active financial institutions more effective through a clear understanding of home and host country responsibilities and adequate flows of information and analysis. Fourth,beyond the supervision of individual institutions, to exchange information and analysis in an effort to identify potential sources of financial instability and to take action to help mitigate the buildup of risks in international financial markets, particularly those potentially posing systemic risks. Embracing these goals does not, of course, answer the often complex questions raised in specific initiatives, such as the degree to which rules should be standardized and the degree to which national variation or discretion is warranted in pursuing shared regulatory ends. But I do think it is useful to keep all of these goals in mind as we pursue our international agenda. Our task as U.S. regulators is to work to ensure that, together, the various international financial organizations produce reforms and practices that are consistent with U.S. interests and legal requirements. The Federal Reserve's Role in International Financial Reform EffortsAs a central bank with significant supervisory responsibilities, the Federal Reserve actively participates in both (1) central-bank-focused groups that monitor developments in global financial markets and promote sound and efficient payment systems and (2) supervisory forums, such as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (Basel Committee), which promotes high global standards for banking supervision and regulation. We also actively participate in the FSB, which is coordinating many of the initiatives undertaken in response to the financial crisis and is directly communicating with the Group of Twenty (G-20). Our contributions to these groups take advantage of the synergies between our central banking functions and our supervisory responsibilities. Our contributions combine our economic research, knowledge of financial markets, and regulatory policy experience. Interestingly, in the wake of the financial crisis, we see some other countries, notably the United Kingdom, moving back toward a more significant involvement of the central bank in supervision, presumably for these same reasons. Basel IIIThe Basel Committee is working toward new global standards for minimum bank capital levels and a new liquidity requirement--a project that has become known as Basel III. This undertaking is central to the first and second goals for international cooperation that I noted earlier. The Basel Committee aims to complete this task by the November G-20 leaders meeting in Seoul. The Federal Reserve has devoted considerable resources to this important global initiative, and we note that international bank supervisors continued to make progress at the Basel Committee meeting last week. We agree with the yardstick set forth last month by the G-20 leaders in Toronto--that minimum capital requirements should "enable banks to withstand--without extraordinary government support--stresses of a magnitude associated with the recent financial crisis."1Our view is that large institutions should be sufficiently capitalized so that they could sustain the losses associated with a systemic problem and remain sufficiently capitalized to continue functioning effectively as financial intermediaries. Meeting this standard will require a considerable strengthening of existing requirements, both with respect to the amount of capital held and to the quality of that capital. As to the former, it is particularly important that the risk weightings associated with traded instruments be substantially increased. As to the latter, the crisis confirmed what many of us have long believed--that common equity is by far the best measure of a firm's loss absorption capacity. During the crisis, regulators, counterparties, and market analysts all looked to levels of common equity as the key measure of a firm's durability in the face of extraordinary financial stress. We have conducted extensive analysis to inform our judgments on the specific rules needed to implement this standard. In this respect, the stress tests we conducted last year as part of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program have been very useful in assessing the amount of capital needed to survive a financial crisis without unusual government support. Since the Basel Committee published its proposals in a number of consultative documents, the Federal Reserve and the other U.S. federal banking agencies have been working together for a Basel III framework that produces a strong set of globally consistent capital and liquidity requirements that will promote financial stability and a level playing field for internationally active banks. We have assessed how various proposals would, or would not, achieve that aim. We have also considered carefully how to structure the transition to the new requirements so as to minimize their effect on the economy as a whole and to allow adequate time for firms to adjust their capital accounts. Although adopting a robust, common set of capital and liquidity rules for internationally active banks is critical, it is neither practical nor desirable to negotiate all details of financial regulation internationally. It is important that the United States preserves the flexibility to adopt prudential regulations that work best within the U.S. financial and legal systems. Within a common set of agreed-upon global standards, each jurisdiction will want to tailor some of its rules and supervisory practice to national conditions and preferences. Along these lines, there have been recent discussions within the FSB on the possibility of formalizing consultations among member countries to examine how each member is using its own mix of instruments to achieve particular safety and soundness ends. The Basel Committee has a number of initiatives and work programs related to capital requirements that go beyond the package of measures that we expect to be completed by the fall. These efforts include, among others, ideas for countercyclical capital buffers, contingent capital, and development of a metric for capital charges tied to systemic risk. Each of these ideas has considerable conceptual appeal, but some of the difficulties encountered in translating the ideas into practical rules mean that work on them is likely to continue into next year. Cross-Border Crisis Management and ResolutionLike stronger capital and liquidity requirements, improved resolution regimes for both banks and systemically important nonbank financial companies are a critical element of the domestic and international agenda to contain systemic risk. Internationally, the FSB is seeking to enhance cross-border cooperation both in making advanced preparations for handling severe stress at specific firms and in dealing with financial crises when they occur. The FSB is developing concrete policy recommendations for the G-20 Summit in November. Specifically, the FSB is working to identify common principles and key attributes for effective national resolution regimes, including a menu of resolution tools for authorities to draw upon in light of the varying circumstances that may be associated with distress at a particular firm. Among these are restructuring and wind-down measures for firms that will be closed down, such as arrangements for providing temporary funding or the ability to establish a bridge bank to take over essential functions. There is also considerable interest at the FSB in developing a resolution tool that could facilitate a restructuring of a firm's own capital and liquidity that would allow it to continue operating as a going concern. Specifically, the FSB is exploring whether there could be a viable mechanism for converting debt into equity through terms set out in the debt instruments. Another aspect of the FSB's work focuses on four technical areas that may affect cross-border recovery or resolution: (1) practices for booking trades in one legal entity and then transferring the market or credit risk of the trade to a different location or legal entity; (2) the use of intra-group guarantees and related cross-border implications; (3) the critical nature of global payments operations, such as cash payments or securities settlement; and (4) the adequacy of a firm's management information systems and service level agreements. The FSB is exploring ways to mitigate challenges related to these four areas. Firm-specific crisis management working groups composed of home and host supervisory authorities are working to identify specific issues and barriers to coordinated action that may arise in handling severe stress at identified firms. This process should culminate in recovery plans--developed by the individual firms--that outline options for an institution to recover from a severe distress without extraordinary official sector actions, and resolution plans--developed by the official sector--intended to identify options that would result in an orderly wind-down. Domestically, we have formed crisis management groups to cover the key internationally active U.S. banking organizations. In addition to the Federal Reserve, the groups include representatives from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Securities and Exchange Commission, and relevant foreign supervisors and central banks. The firms are each internally identifying and assessing their options and strategies to lower risk in the event of stress, including selling portfolios or business lines, restructuring liabilities and implementing contingency funding plans. The objective is to ensure that each firm has a concrete and viable plan to reduce riskiness, ensure the continuity of critical financial services, preserve liquidity, and make up cash flow shortages under severely adverse conditions. They are individually working with their own crisis management group to isolate key impediments to recovery and are focusing on work that should be undertaken in the near term to enhance recovery options. These plans will have to be dynamic to ensure they remain relevant and appropriate in light of changing business and economic conditions. Despite the progress that is being made through the FSB work and domestic efforts, comprehensive solutions to cross-border crisis management difficulties will not be easy to achieve. Enhancing cross-jurisdictional synchronization of resolution options and recovery processes would be a meaningful step in the right direction. At least for the foreseeable future, a focus on regulatory coordination and supervisory cooperation and planningbeforea large firm's failure becomes a real possibility is likely to yield the greatest benefit. Incentive CompensationIn the last two years, compensation has been a regular topic of discussion at meetings of international regulatory groups, culminating in the FSB's agreement last year on principles to guide incentive compensation.2The principles specify that compensation practices at major financial institutions should properly account for risk, that boards of directors and risk managers at such firms should ensure they do so, that supervisors should provide effective oversight, and that firms' disclosures should be sufficient to inform stakeholders about compensation and risk. In addition to these principles, a number of specific projects are in progress or have recently been completed by international regulatory working groups. The FSB conducted a peer review of G-20 nations' progress toward implementing the principles, which found that progress is being made but more work is needed. Other projects include work by the Basel Committee, expected by end-2010, on practices that would improve the soundness of risk-taking incentives, and a proposal for disclosure of compensation information under Pillar 3 of Basel 2. While the views of national supervisory authorities have in many respects converged on such matters as the sources and effects of incentive problems and some methods for better aligning the risk-taking incentives of employees at major financial institutions with the interests of shareholders and the financial system, different nations have taken different approaches in implementing the FSB principles. We have adopted an approach that requires large financial organizations to establish and maintain internal governance and management systems to implement principles for assuring that incentive compensation arrangements are risk-appropriate. These principles, and the process by which we proposed that they be implemented, were issued by the Federal Reserve for public comment in October. The final supervisory guidance, which was jointly issued with the other banking agencies, was released last month.3We chose a principles-based approach because of the substantial variation in the actual incentives and risks associated with the thousands of executives and other employees within and among banking organizations. Our view continues to be that a uniform or formulaic approach to all such employees would be neither efficient in motivating and compensating employees nor effective in preventing excessively risky activity, particularly among non-executives such as traders. In contrast, this month the European Parliament approved a directive that has the potential to lead to a number of formula-based restrictions on employee compensation at financial services firms operating in the European Union (EU).4This approach is consonant with views expressed by some EU members to the effect that formula setting--for example, putting a floor on the portion of an employee's salary that must be deferred--is the surest way to produce changes in bank practice. However, many of the details are left to be set by the European Commission, the Committee of European Bank Supervisors, and other entities. While both approaches have merit, we believe the option we have chosen is likely to be more successful in promoting risk-appropriate compensation practices. As already noted, we fear that a formula-based approach applicable to all covered employees may spawn efforts to circumvent the rules through creative new compensation practices, whereas our requirement that the banks internalize sound principles for incentive compensation and apply them to all such arrangements places a continuing responsibility on the firms themselves. Of course, considerable oversight is needed to ensure that a principles-based approach is implemented rigorously. We have already conducted an extensive horizontal review of compensation practices at 25 large U.S. financial holding companies and have sent detailed assessments to each firm commenting on their proposals for implementing the principles. It may well be that over time the two approaches will converge somewhat. For example, we may determine on the basis of experience with many firms that there are certain best practices that should at least presumptively be applicable to certain classes of employees. Similarly, the EU may find that more attention to internalization of the principles and customization of appropriate practices is necessary, particularly as applied to non-executive employees. We intend to continue information sharing and discussions through the FSB and the Basel Committee. For now, though, there is indeed a difference in approach, one that illustrates the point I made earlier that there need not be complete harmonization in all prudential regulation and supervision, even where there is agreement on basic goals. Effect of the Dodd-Frank ActOf course, concurrent with the efforts of the Federal Reserve and other U.S. agencies to advance the goals of international regulatory reform, the U.S. Congress has debated and passed the Dodd-Frank Act, creating a comprehensive package of domestic financial reforms. Many elements of the Dodd-Frank Act align closely with the efforts of the G-20 leaders, the FSB, and the Basel Committee. For example, the act provides the federal government with the authority to subject all financial firms that present outsized systemic risks--regardless of whether they own an insured depository institution--to a common framework of supervision and regulation by the Federal Reserve. In addition, the act creates a special resolution regime that gives the government the capacity to unwind or break apart major non-bank financial firms in an orderly fashion with less collateral damage to the system. Moreover, the act strengthens the resiliency of the financial market infrastructure by mandating increased central clearing and transparency for over-the-counter derivative transactions and stronger prudential regulation of bank and nonbank derivatives dealers. The act also provides for the registration of advisers to hedge funds and other private investment funds, improved regulation of credit rating agencies, and more-consistent oversight of systemically important financial market utilities. At the same time, there are aspects of the Dodd-Frank Act that are unlikely to become part of the international financial regulatory framework. For example, the act generally prohibits U.S. banking firms (and the U.S. operations of foreign banking firms) from engaging in proprietary trading and from investing in or sponsoring private investment funds. The act also prohibits U.S. depository institutions from entering into certain types of derivatives transactions. In the United States, activity restrictions have long been a part of the bank regulatory regime, serving to constrain risk-taking by banking firms, prevent the spread of the market distortions caused by the federal bank safety net to other parts of the economy, and mitigate potential conflicts of interest generated by the combination of banking and certain other businesses within a single firm. Many other countries follow a universal banking model and are unlikely to adopt the sorts of activity restrictions contained in the act. Similarly, the Dodd-Frank Act expands the existing 10 percent deposit cap in U.S. law by preventing the Federal Reserve from approving a material acquisition by a financial firm if the resulting firm would have liabilities that exceed 10 percent of the total liabilities of the broader U.S. banking system. Other countries with more concentrated banking systems are unlikely to impose this type of concentration limit on financial firms in their jurisdiction. Again, not all elements of financial reform can be designed on a national level in a way that is perfectly consistent across countries. The characteristics of each country's financial system differ, sometimes significantly. Our challenge is to strike the right balance between achieving global consistency on the core reforms necessary to protect financial stability and provide a workably level playing field, and at the same time providing the flexibility necessary to supplement the common standards with elements tailored to national financial systems, legal structures, and policy preferences. Current and Future Focus of International Regulatory GroupsAs my testimony makes clear, the international regulatory groups remain focused on responding to the crisis. The FSB is pursuing financial reform and working with the relevant standard-setting bodies to ensure that detailed proposals are developed in a timely manner. In some cases, the importance of the issues and the drive to respond quickly to the crisis have led to a proliferation of international working groups whose mandates may overlap. While this reaction is natural in the wake of a crisis, we will need to rationalize the activities of these groups as our focus shifts from policy development to implementation. So, too, we will need to ensure that the relatively new members of these groups are fully and effectively integrated into their activities, including in leadership positions. It is also important that we not lose sight of the third and fourth goals I suggested for our international cooperative efforts. While much of the effort in the international groups has recently been focused on negotiating rules and principles to reform financial regulation, it would be unfortunate going forward if negotiations were to become the dominant mode of international financial cooperation. We would not want to crowd out the other valuable aspects of international regulatory cooperation, including sharing supervisory perspectives on internationally active financial institutions and analyzing latent risks to financial stability. The FSB itself has a valuable role to play by bringing together the international standard-setting bodies and key national authorities responsible for financial stability in the G-20 member jurisdictions. Its role might usefully be conceived as roughly paralleling the role to be played by the Financial Stability Oversight Council in the United States under the Dodd-Frank Act. The FSB can facilitate discussion and analysis of emerging risks to financial stability that cut across sectors or across the jurisdiction of more than one regulator. Because it consists of senior officials from finance ministries, regulatory agencies, and central banks, it is well positioned not only to identify cross-cutting risks or regulatory gaps, but also to take action to address those risks. Finally, I believe that it will be important for standard-setting bodies such as the Basel Committee to enhance monitoring of the implementation of the sometimes complex agreements reached internationally. Where it is difficult for market analysts and other outside observers to determine if, for example, Basel III capital rules are being vigorously implemented and enforced, the international standard setters must themselves develop appropriate monitoring mechanisms. These mechanisms must go beyond examining whether international standards have been duly incorporated into domestic law to consider whether financial institutions are complying with those standards. Thank you for again giving me the opportunity to share our thoughts on the evolving issues in international financial cooperation. I would be pleased to answer any questions you may have. 1.G-20 (2010), "The G-20 Toronto Summit Declaration," Financial Sector Reform, item 18, G-20 Toronto Summit held June 26-27 in Toronto, Canada.Return to text 2.See Financial Stability Board (2009),FSB Principles for Sound Compensation Practices (87 KB PDF)(Basel, Switzerland: FSB, September).Return to text 3.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2010), "Federal Reserve, OCC, OTS, FDIC Issue Final Guidance on Incentive Compensation," joint press release, June 21.Return to text 4.More information on this directive is available on the European Parliament website atwww.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?type=TA&reference=P7-TA-2010-0274&language=EN.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from May 24 through June 21, 2010. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on June 22-23, 2010 and of the conference call held on May 9, 2010. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the June 22-23, 2010 meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. Summaries of economic projections are released on an approximately quarterly schedule. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 9 andJune 22-23, 2010:338 KB PDF|HTML
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Public Hearing on Potential Revisions to the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act, Atlanta, Georgia On behalf of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, I'd like to welcome the participants to today's hearing. I'd also like to express my appreciation to President Lockhart and our colleagues at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta for hosting us today. I am pleased to be here at the first in a series ofpublic hearings regarding changes to the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). The Board has scheduled these hearings to assess the adequacy of the current mortgage data requirements and examine the need to collect additional data from lenders. I would point out that since we began planning these hearings, changes to the HMDA data requirements have been included in the regulatory reform bill currently being considered by the Congress. We look forward to hearing your comments regarding the implementation of the changes specified in that legislation, as well as changes you might recommend based on your experience. The proposed legislation also would transfer authority for HMDA rulemaking from the Board of Governors to the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). All information gleaned from these hearings will inform our rulewriting work. When rulemaking authority transfers to the CFPB, be assured that we will hand over the most current thinking about changes to Regulation C. Over the course of four public hearings, held throughout the country, we will hear from key players in the home mortgage market: lenders and other market participants, academics and researchers, consumer advocacy and community development organizations, data experts, regulators, and other public officials. Although they play different roles, all share a common goal: to ensure that the mortgage market is responsible, transparent, efficient, and serves the needs of consumers and market participants alike. Clearly, the recent mortgage crisis has highlighted the potential ramifications of a mortgage market that isnotfunctioning well. Data do not create the market, but they do help us understand what is happeninginthe market. HMDA data cannot solve all market problems, but the time is ripe for reviewing and revising the data elements, standards, and reporting formats. With the benefit of hindsight, we can now answer the question: Do policymakers have adequate and reliable data sufficient to assess market conditions and craft policy responses? HMDA has three purposes. One purpose is to provide the public and government officials with data that will help show whether lenders are serving the housing needs of the neighborhoods and communities in which they are located. A second is to help government officials target public investment to promote private investment where it is needed. A third purpose is to provide data to assist in identifying possible discriminatory lending patterns and facilitate the enforcement of anti-discrimination laws, such as the Equal Credit Opportunity Act. Today's hearing is intended to serve as a venue to: discuss whether or not the 2002 revisions to Regulation C provided useful and accurate information about the mortgage market; gather information that will help assess the need for additional data elements or improvements; and identify emerging issues in the mortgage market that may require additional research. As I said earlier, we are also interested in any comments on the implementation of the HMDA elements of the regulatory reform legislation. We have gathered this morning an impressive array of panelists representing a spectrum of vantage points. We look forward to the comments of our panelists today and at the upcoming hearings in San Francisco, Chicago, and Washington. This input, together with written comments submitted from the public, will be carefully considered as we consider changes to Regulation C.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a Consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Cecil Bank, Elkton, Maryland, a state member bank. Cecil Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires Cecil Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $21,945, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of a Prompt Corrective Action Directive with the consent of Home Valley Bank, Grants Pass, Oregon, a state-chartered member bank. A copy of the Directive is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a Prompt Corrective Action Directive against Pacific State Bank, Stockton, California, a state-chartered member bank. A copy of the Directive is attached.
The federal financial regulatory agencies and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (the regulators) issued a statement today to assist financial institutions and their customers affected by the Deepwater Horizon Mobile Offshore Drilling Unit explosion and oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico. The regulators' statement emphasizes that financial institutions are encouraged to work with their customers and consider measures to assist creditworthy borrowers affected by the Gulf oil spill. Such measures can help customers recover financially and be better positioned to honor their obligations. In the affected areas, these efforts can also contribute to the health of local communities and the long-term interests of institutions and their customers. Consistent with the regulators' longstanding practice of assessing the financial condition of institutions directly affected by natural and other disasters, examiners will consider the unusual circumstances of banks and credit unions in affected areas in determining the appropriate supervisory response to safety-and-soundness issues. The regulators are committed to working with the industry to respond to issues that arise in the aftermath of the Gulf oil spill and to minimize disruption and the burden on banks and credit unions in affected areas. Attachment:Interagency Statement on Financial Institutions Affected by the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill(23 KB PDF)
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Federal Reserve Meeting Series: “Addressing the Financing Needs of Small Businesses,” Washington, D.C. Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Let me begin by thanking the staff of the Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, especially the Division's director Sandra Braunstein, for the hard work they have done to prepare for today's discussion about improving access to credit for sound small businesses. And thanks also to the many partners who helped us organize today's event, particularly the Small Business Administration and the Treasury's Community Development Financial Institutions Fund. I am pleased to welcome all of you to the Federal Reserve Board. This gathering, "Addressing the Financing Needs of Small Businesses," serves as a capstone for a series of more than 40 meetings.They were conducted across the country, starting in February, by the Federal Reserve System's community affairs offices. These meetings provided forums for small business owners; trade associations; lenders; bank supervisors; federal, state, and local government officials; and other stakeholders to exchange ideas about the challenges facing small businesses, both in the near term and in the longer run. Some of these meetings were small-group discussions, while others were larger sessions that addressed specific topics, such as minority entrepreneurship or guaranteed loan programs. For example, I attended a meeting in Detroit that combined a general discussion of small business credit issues with a session focusing on the specific case of suppliers to the auto industry, many of which are small or medium-sized firms. Participants in that session highlighted the interconnectedness of the auto supply chain and the crucial role of stable financing for small businesses ranging from parts suppliers to independent automobile dealers in the recovery of the auto industry as a whole. This was, of course, just one meeting in one city. A meeting in Miami focused on the needs of Hispanic-owned businesses. Similarly informative discussions took place in cities such as New York, San Francisco, and Chicago, among many others, including Omaha, Nebraska; Morgantown, West Virginia; Toledo, Ohio; and Little Rock, Arkansas. Our objective in organizing this series was to gather information that we and others can use to help develop policies that will support the flow of loans to creditworthy small businesses--for instance, by identifying and addressing specific credit gaps or impediments to lending or improving the access of small businesses to critical support services, including assistance in filing loan applications. This information serves as the basis for today's discussion of the next steps that policymakers and stakeholders can undertake to ensure that small businesses are able to participate in and contribute to the economic recovery. Before we get to the next steps, however, I would like to provide context by briefly discussing the importance of small businesses to job creation and the economic recovery, reviewing the actions that the Federal Reserve has taken to support small business financing, and offering some observations about what we heard during this small business meeting series. Small businesses are central to creating jobs in our economy; they employ roughly one-half of all Americans and account for about 60 percent of gross job creation.1Newer small businesses, those less than two years old, are especially important: Over the past 20 years, these start-up enterprises accounted for roughly one-quarter of gross job creation even though they employed less than 10 percent of the workforce.2 The formation and growth of small businesses depends critically on access to credit. Unfortunately, those businesses report that credit conditions remain very difficult. For example, the net percentage of survey respondents telling the National Federation of Independent Business that credit conditions have tightened over the prior three months has remained extremely elevated by historical standards.3And one measure of banks' loans to small businesses dropped from more than $710 billion in the second quarter of 2008 to less than $670 billion in the first quarter of 2010.4An important but difficult-to-answer question is, How much of this reduction has been driven by weaker demand for loans from small businesses, how much by a deterioration in the financial condition of small businesses during the economic downturn, and how much by restricted credit availability? No doubt all three factors have played a role.5Clearly, though, to support the recovery, we need to find ways to ensure that creditworthy borrowers have access to needed loans. Over the past two years, the Federal Reserve and other agencies have made a concerted effort to stabilize our financial system and our economy. These efforts, importantly, have included working to facilitate the flow of credit to viable small businesses. At the Federal Reserve, we helped bring capital from the securities markets to small businesses through the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility--the TALF program. More than 850,000 small business loans were financed in part by securities whose issuance was supported by TALF. We have also been focused on strengthening the nation's banks, so that they can resume normal lending as quickly as possible. For example, the stress tests that we conducted last year helped restore confidence in the banking system, allowing banks to raise the capital they need to help offset credit losses and, ultimately, to provide the basis for new lending. We have heard the often-expressed concern that bank examiners have prevented banks from making good loans. We take this issue very seriously. The Federal Reserve has worked assiduously with the other banking regulators to develop interagency policy statements on this issue, aimed at both banks and examiners. Our message is clear: Consistent with maintaining appropriately prudent standards, lenders should do all they can to meet the needs of creditworthy borrowers.6Doing so is good for the borrower, good for the lender, and good for our economy. To ensure that this message is being heard and acted upon, we have conducted extensive training programs for our bank examiners as well as outreach with bankers, and we will continue to seek feedback from bankers and borrowers. Though we believe that our and others' efforts are making a difference, we also know more must be done, and that additional effective action requires hearing firsthand from knowledgeable people who can speak from diverse perspectives about the challenges facing small businesses. The insights we obtained from small business owners, lenders, and others in this series of meetings have given us a more nuanced understanding of the problem and will help us identify areas where we might be able to do more. Not surprisingly, these meetings confirmed that facilitating small business financing is not a simple or straightforward matter. Notably, the term "small business" encompasses a heterogeneous mix of enterprises, ranging from pizzerias to start-up technology firms, and each small business faces a unique combination of local economic conditions and complex relationships with customers, suppliers, and creditors. Hence we should be wary of one-size-fits-all solutions. One of the most important themes underscored during the meetings is that solving the issues faced by small businesses will require collaboration. The meeting series itself served as a model of collaboration, interactive discussion, and cooperative problem solving. Participants included community affairs officers, bank supervisors, economists, and policymakers from the Federal Reserve. We involved our fellow bank regulators, the Small Business Administration, and the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund. And, of course, small businesses and lenders played a central role. The meetings fostered stimulating conversations. Lenders heard from small business owners about their frustrations over tightened credit. Likewise, lenders were able to explain the considerations that go into making a small business loan. And regulators heard, in detail, concerns expressed about the effect their procedures and guidance would have on small business lending. Some common themes emerged from the sessions. Business owners frequently noted that the declining value of real estate and other collateral securing their loans poses a particularly severe challenge. As one business owner at the Detroit meeting I attended put it, "If you thought housing had declined in value, take a look at what equipment is worth." Business owners cited credit lines and working capital as their most critical financial needs, followed by refinancing products that would permit them to take advantage of low interest rates. Many reported having had to resort to borrowing through their personal credit cards or from their retirement accounts. Several mentioned the need for small-value loans in amounts less than $200,000 as well as the need for "patient capital" from investors willing to commit funds for 5 to 10 years without an expectation of immediate returns. Some of the lenders that participated in our meetings expressed the view that current lending conditions don't represent credit tightening as much as a return to more traditional underwriting standards following a period of too-lax standards. But, though some lenders said they were emphasizing cash flow and relying less on collateral values in evaluating creditworthiness, it seems clear that some creditworthy businesses--including some whose collateral has lost value but whose cash flows remain strong--have had difficulty obtaining the credit that they need to expand, and in some cases, even to continue operating. The challenge ahead for lenders will be to determine how to assess the credit quality of businesses in an uncertain and difficult economic environment. It is in lenders' interest, after all, to lend to creditworthy borrowers; ultimately, that's how they earn their profits. Regulators, for their part, need to continue to work with lenders to help them do all that they prudently can to meet the needs of creditworthy small businesses. Making credit accessible to sound small businesses is crucial to our economic recovery and so should be front and center among our current policy challenges. We are pleased that you have accepted our invitation to participate in today's discussion of next steps in the effort to promote small business finance. You each bring valuable insights and perspectives to this issue, and I would like to thank you all for your willingness to share your ideas. 1.Small businesses are defined here as firms with fewer than 500 employees.Return to text 2.See John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2010), "Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large vs. Young," working paper (February); and the U.S. Census Bureau's Business Dynamics Statistics database for statistics on job creation for new and small businesses.Return to text 3.William C. Dunkelberg and Holly Wade (2010),NFIB Small Business Economic Trends (310 KB PDF)(Nashville: NFIB Research Foundation, June).Return to text 4.Data are from the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income(Call Report), where loans to small businesses, as stated in the reporting forms FFIEC 031 and 041, schedule RC-C, part II, are defined as loans with original amounts of $1 million or less that are secured by nonfarm nonresidential properties or are commercial and industrial loans.Correction: On July 27, 2010, this footnote was revised to remove "plus loans with original balances of $500,000 or less that are secured by farmland or are for agricultural production."Return to text 5.Charge-offs have also contributed to the decline in outstanding credit.Return to text 6.For example, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Office of Thrift Supervision, and Conference of State Bank Supervisors (2010), "Regulators Issue Statement on Lending to Creditworthy Small Businesses," joint press release, February 5.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Bernanke presented identical remarks before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on July 22, 2010 Chairman Dodd, Senator Shelby, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the Federal Reserve's semiannualMonetary Policy Report to the Congress. Economic and Financial DevelopmentsThe economic expansion that began in the middle of last year is proceeding at a moderate pace, supported by stimulative monetary and fiscal policies. Although fiscal policy and inventory restocking will likely be providing less impetus to the recovery than they have in recent quarters, rising demand from households and businesses should help sustain growth. In particular, real consumer spending appears to have expanded at about a 2-1/2 percent annual rate in the first half of this year, with purchases of durable goods increasing especially rapidly. However, the housing market remains weak, with the overhang of vacant or foreclosed houses weighing on home prices and construction. An important drag on household spending is the slow recovery in the labor market and the attendant uncertainty about job prospects. After two years of job losses, private payrolls expanded at an average of about 100,000 per month during the first half of this year, a pace insufficient to reduce the unemployment rate materially. In all likelihood, a significant amount of time will be required to restore the nearly 8-1/2 million jobs that were lost over 2008 and 2009. Moreover, nearly half of the unemployed have been out of work for longer than six months. Long-term unemployment not only imposes exceptional near-term hardships on workers and their families, it also erodes skills and may have long-lasting effects on workers' employment and earnings prospects. In the business sector, investment in equipment and software appears to have increased rapidly in the first half of the year, in part reflecting capital outlays that had been deferred during the downturn and the need of many businesses to replace aging equipment. In contrast, spending on nonresidential structures--weighed down by high vacancy rates and tight credit--has continued to contract, though some indicators suggest that the rate of decline may be slowing. Both U.S. exports and U.S. imports have been expanding, reflecting growth in the global economy and the recovery of world trade. Stronger exports have in turn helped foster growth in the U.S. manufacturing sector. Inflation has remained low. The price index for personal consumption expenditures appears to have risen at an annual rate of less than 1 percent in the first half of the year. Although overall inflation has fluctuated, partly reflecting changes in energy prices, by a number of measures underlying inflation has trended down over the past two years. The slack in labor and product markets has damped wage and price pressures, and rapid increases in productivity have further reduced producers' unit labor costs. My colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and I expect continued moderate growth, a gradual decline in the unemployment rate, and subdued inflation over the next several years. In conjunction with the June FOMC meeting, Board members and Reserve Bank presidents prepared forecasts of economic growth, unemployment, and inflation for the years 2010 through 2012 and over the longer run. The forecasts are qualitatively similar to those we released in February and May, although progress in reducing unemployment is now expected to be somewhat slower than we previously projected, and near-term inflation now looks likely to be a little lower. Most FOMC participants expect real GDP growth of 3 to 3-1/2 percent in 2010, and roughly 3-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent in 2011 and 2012. The unemployment rate is expected to decline to between 7 and 7-1/2 percent by the end of 2012. Most participants viewed uncertainty about the outlook for growth and unemployment as greater than normal, and the majority saw the risks to growth as weighted to the downside. Most participants projected that inflation will average only about 1 percent in 2010 and that it will remain low during 2011 and 2012, with the risks to the inflation outlook roughly balanced. One factor underlying the Committee's somewhat weaker outlook is that financial conditions--though much improved since the depth of the financial crisis--have become less supportive of economic growth in recent months. Notably, concerns about the ability of Greece and a number of other euro-area countries to manage their sizable budget deficits and high levels of public debt spurred a broad-based withdrawal from risk-taking in global financial markets in the spring, resulting in lower stock prices and wider risk spreads in the United States. In response to these fiscal pressures, European leaders put in place a number of strong measures, including an assistance package for Greece and €500 billion of funding to backstop the near-term financing needs of euro-area countries. To help ease strains in U.S. dollar funding markets, the Federal Reserve reestablished temporary dollar liquidity swap lines with the ECB and several other major central banks. To date, drawings under the swap lines have been limited, but we believe that the existence of these lines has increased confidence in dollar funding markets, helping to maintain credit availability in our own financial system. Like financial conditions generally, the state of the U.S. banking system has also improved significantly since the worst of the crisis. Loss rates on most types of loans seem to be peaking, and, in the aggregate, bank capital ratios have risen to new highs. However, many banks continue to have a large volume of troubled loans on their books, and bank lending standards remain tight. With credit demand weak and with banks writing down problem credits, bank loans outstanding have continued to contract. Small businesses, which depend importantly on bank credit, have been particularly hard hit. At the Federal Reserve, we have been working to facilitate the flow of funds to creditworthy small businesses. Along with the other supervisory agencies, we issued guidance to banks and examiners emphasizing that lenders should do all they can to meet the needs of creditworthy borrowers, including small businesses.1We also have conducted extensive training programs for our bank examiners, with the message that lending to viable small businesses is good for the safety and soundness of our banking system as well as for our economy. We continue to seek feedback from both banks and potential borrowers about credit conditions. For example, over the past six months we have convened more than 40 meetings around the country of lenders, small business representatives, bank examiners, government officials, and other stakeholders to exchange ideas about the challenges faced by small businesses, particularly in obtaining credit. A capstone conference on addressing the credit needs of small businesses was held at the Board of Governors in Washington last week.2This testimony includes anaddendumthat summarizes the findings of this effort and possible next steps. Federal Reserve PolicyThe Federal Reserve's response to the financial crisis and the recession has involved several components. First, in response to the periods of intense illiquidity and dysfunction in financial markets that characterized the crisis, the Federal Reserve undertook a range of measures and set up emergency programs designed to provide liquidity to financial institutions and markets in the form of fully secured, mostly short-term loans. Over time, these programs helped to stem the panic and to restore normal functioning in a number of key financial markets, supporting the flow of credit to the economy. As financial markets stabilized, the Federal Reserve shut down most of these programs during the first half of this year and took steps to normalize the terms on which it lends to depository institutions. The only such programs currently open to provide new liquidity are the recently reestablished dollar liquidity swap lines with major central banks that I noted earlier. Importantly, our broad-based programs achieved their intended purposes with no loss to taxpayers. All of the loans extended through the multiborrower facilities that have come due have been repaid in full, with interest. In addition, the Board does not expect the Federal Reserve to incur a net loss on any of the secured loans provided during the crisis to help prevent the disorderly failure of systemically significant financial institutions. A second major component of the Federal Reserve's response to the financial crisis and recession has involved both standard and less conventional forms of monetary policy. Over the course of the crisis, the FOMC aggressively reduced its target for the federal funds rate to a range of 0 to 1/4 percent, which has been maintained since the end of 2008. And, as indicated in the statement released after the June meeting, the FOMC continues to anticipate that economic conditions--including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations--are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period.3 In addition to the very low federal funds rate, the FOMC has provided monetary policy stimulus through large-scale purchases of longer-term Treasury debt, federal agency debt, and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS). A range of evidence suggests that these purchases helped improve conditions in mortgage markets and other private credit markets and put downward pressure on longer-term private borrowing rates and spreads. Compared with the period just before the financial crisis, the System's portfolio of domestic securities has increased from about $800 billion to $2 trillion and has shifted from consisting of 100 percent Treasury securities to having almost two-thirds of its investments in agency-related securities. In addition, the average maturity of the Treasury portfolio nearly doubled, from three and one-half years to almost seven years. The FOMC plans to return the System's portfolio to a more normal size and composition over the longer term, and the Committee has been discussing alternative approaches to accomplish that objective. One approach is for the Committee to adjust its reinvestment policy--that is, its policy for handling repayments of principal on the securities--to gradually normalize the portfolio over time. Currently, repayments of principal from agency debt and MBS are not being reinvested, allowing the holdings of those securities to run off as the repayments are received. By contrast, the proceeds from maturing Treasury securities are being reinvested in new issues of Treasury securities with similar maturities. At some point, the Committee may want to shift its reinvestment of the proceeds from maturing Treasury securities to shorter-term issues, so as to gradually reduce the average maturity of our Treasury holdings toward pre-crisis levels, while leaving the aggregate value of those holdings unchanged. At this juncture, however, no decision to change reinvestment policy has been made. A second way to normalize the size and composition of the Federal Reserve's securities portfolio would be to sell some holdings of agency debt and MBS. Selling agency securities, rather than simply letting them run off, would shrink the portfolio and return it to a composition of all Treasury securities more quickly. FOMC participants broadly agree that sales of agency-related securities should eventually be used as part of the strategy to normalize the portfolio. Such sales will be implemented in accordance with a framework communicated well in advance and will be conducted at a gradual pace. Because changes in the size and composition of the portfolio could affect financial conditions, however, any decisions regarding the commencement or pace of asset sales will be made in light of the Committee's evaluation of the outlook for employment and inflation. As I noted earlier, the FOMC continues to anticipate that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. At some point, however, the Committee will need to begin to remove monetary policy accommodation to prevent the buildup of inflationary pressures. When that time comes, the Federal Reserve will act to increase short-term interest rates by raising the interest rate it pays on reserve balances that depository institutions hold at Federal Reserve Banks. To tighten the linkage between the interest rate paid on reserves and other short-term market interest rates, the Federal Reserve may also drain reserves from the banking system. Two tools for draining reserves from the system are being developed and tested and will be ready when needed. First, the Federal Reserve is putting in place the capacity to conduct large reverse repurchase agreements with an expanded set of counterparties. Second, the Federal Reserve has tested a term deposit facility, under which instruments similar to the certificates of deposit that banks offer their customers will be auctioned to depository institutions. Of course, even as the Federal Reserve continues prudent planning for the ultimate withdrawal of extraordinary monetary policy accommodation, we also recognize that the economic outlook remains unusually uncertain. We will continue to carefully assess ongoing financial and economic developments, and we remain prepared to take further policy actions as needed to foster a return to full utilization of our nation's productive potential in a context of price stability. Financial Reform LegislationLast week, the Congress passed landmark legislation to reform the financial system and financial regulation, and the President signed the bill into law this morning. That legislation represents significant progress toward reducing the likelihood of future financial crises and strengthening the capacity of financial regulators to respond to risks that may emerge. Importantly, the legislation encourages an approach to supervision designed to foster the stability of the financial system as a whole as well as the safety and soundness of individual institutions. Within the Federal Reserve, we have already taken steps to strengthen our analysis and supervision of the financial system and systemically important financial firms in ways consistent with the new legislation. In particular, making full use of the Federal Reserve's broad expertise in economics, financial markets, payment systems, and bank supervision, we have significantly changed our supervisory framework to improve our consolidated supervision of large, complex bank holding companies, and we are enhancing the tools we use to monitor the financial sector and to identify potential systemic risks. In addition, the briefings prepared for meetings of the FOMC are now providing increased coverage and analysis of potential risks to the financial system, thus supporting the Federal Reserve's ability to make effective monetary policy and to enhance financial stability. Much work remains to be done, both to implement through regulation the extensive provisions of the new legislation and to develop the macroprudential approach called for by the Congress. However, I believe that the legislation, together with stronger regulatory standards for bank capital and liquidity now being developed, will place our financial system on a sounder foundation and minimize the risk of a repetition of the devastating events of the past three years. Thank you. I would be pleased to respond to your questions. 1.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Office of Thrift Supervision, and Conference of State Bank Supervisors (2010), "Regulators Issue Statement on Lending to Creditworthy Small Businesses," joint press release, February 5.Return to text 2.For more information, see Ben S. Bernanke (2010), "Restoring the Flow of Credit to Small Businesses," speech delivered at "Addressing the Financing Needs of Small Businesses," a forum sponsored by the Federal Reserve Board, Washington, July 12.Return to text 3.See Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2010), "FOMC Statement," press release, June 23.Return to text Addendum Addressing the Financing Needs of Small BusinessesSummary of Key Themes for the Federal Reserve System's Small Business Meeting Series Introduction The Federal Reserve System's Community Affairs Offices hosted more than 40 meetings in 2010 as part of an initiative titled "Addressing the Financing Needs of Small Businesses."1The goal was to gather information and perspectives to help the Federal Reserve and other stakeholders address the immediate and intermediate credit needs of small businesses. Some of the meetings took the form of small focus groups or listening sessions. Other meetings were on a larger scale, with more formal agendas focusing on a particular aspect of small business financing, such as minority entrepreneurship, the role of Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs), or federal guarantee loan programs. Several meetings focused on a specific industry, such as auto suppliers. Whether small or large, all of the meetings brought together small business owners, small business trade groups, financial institutions and other private lenders, bank supervision officials, CDFIs, and other small business support service providers to discuss ways to improve credit flow to viable small businesses. Through this initiative, the Federal Reserve sought to deepen its understanding of the dynamics of the supply of and demand for small business credit, to identify specific credit gaps, and to learn of promising practices and suggestions for improvement. This summary aims to capture the key issues that emerged from the meetings and offer examples of how those issues were reflected in different parts of the country and in different industries. It is not intended to be a comprehensive compilation of all the ideas and views that were expressed. We have grouped the comments under the categories of credit supply, credit demand, and credit gaps. In addition, we have included key recommendations for potential next steps that were identified by participants at the July 12 capstone event at the Board of Governors as well as throughout the System's series of meetings. Factors Impacting the Supply of Small Business CreditSmall businesses and banks generally reported that lending contracted significantly during the recession for a variety of reasons. These comments are consistent with data indicating that outstanding loans to small businesses dropped from more than $710 billion in the second quarter of 2008 to less than $670 billion in the first quarter of 2010.2In addition, some banks noted that some of the contraction in lending is related to broader concerns about capital adequacy. Comments related to the supply of credit to small businesses fell into four broad categories: 1) tighter bank underwriting standards; 2) resource constraints on lending; 3) impact of regulatory guidance; and 4) utilization of alternative funding sources. Underwriting standards –At most meetings, both small businesses and banks acknowledged that underwriting standards had tightened. Some small businesses reported that underwriting changes made access to credit more difficult, but not impossible, while others found the changes to be a significant hurdle to obtaining credit. Many banks acknowledged that lending standards had become more flexible prior to the economic downturn and that they since have returned to more traditional underwriting practices. Recurring issues related to underwriting standards included the following: Resource Constraints– In addition to capital challenges, banks pointed to a number of other constraints on their lending resources, such as the following: Regulatory Environment– Some banks cited examination-related concerns as an important factor in credit availability for small businesses. In addition to general statements attributing tightened credit to increased regulatory scrutiny in light of recent economic conditions, concerns were raised about examiner assessments and the uncertainty surrounding classification of assets. Use of Alternative Funding Sources– Meeting participants noted that small businesses that are denied, or perceive they will be denied, credit by banks have turned to alternative sources of financing, which often carry a higher cost. Factors Impacting the Demand for Small Business CreditSmall businesses and bank participants noted that the economic downturn has diminished sales for many small businesses, weakening balance sheets and asset values and thus dampening small business loan demand. Some financial institutions reported weaker quality in loan applications from small businesses. Comments related to credit demand by small businesses included issues of reduced credit quality, reduced confidence, a need for additional technical assistance, and interest in government contracting and entrepreneurship. Reduced credit quality– Banks generally attributed the decrease in overall lending to small businesses to their declining sales and asset valuations. They reported lower overall demand for credit from creditworthy businesses. Some financial institutions also noted that applications for small business credit generally have become weaker as the challenging economic environment continues. Still, as noted previously, many credit unions and CDFIs cited an increase in demand for small business loans from viable small businesses. Reduced confidence –A number of small businesses reported that declining sales made them more cautious about seeking credit. Some commented that the danger in waiting too long was that, by the time they sought a loan, their financial position had deteriorated to a point that raised underwriting concerns. Many small businesses expressed uncertainty about business prospects in the near future, affecting current credit and business decisions. Some owners reported making decisions based on the perception of tight credit without having explored credit options. Increased demand for technical assistance– Small businesses described the challenges associated with operating under distressed economic conditions. Many described working with reduced staff and the impact of labor reductions on the resources necessary to manage the credit process. Several bankers indicated that small businesses need help locating suitable lenders and technical assistance to prepare business plans and loan applications. Technical assistance providers indicated that a growing portion of their clients are existing businesses and the long-time unemployed who hope to start a business. Meeting participants also noted the need for technical assistance among minority-owned businesses, which face particular challenges in accessing credit. Interest in government contracting –Participants at several meetings mentioned that government contracting is an opportunity for minority-owned businesses, yet they need access to credit to fulfill the contracts. Minority-owned businesses often do not have the working capital needed to make up-front purchases or to sustain operations during the significant payment lag with government contracts. Interest in entrepreneurship– The high-unemployment environment is generating demand as more individuals who are jobless seek to start their own business. Identified Credit GapsA combination of disruptions on the supply and demand sides of the small business credit market, as discussed above, has resulted in notable credit gaps. Identified RecommendationsThe following are key recommendations for potential next steps that were identified by participants at the July 12 capstone event at the Board of Governors as well as throughout the System's series of meetings. In addition, the Reserve Banks are planning a variety of efforts for the remainder of 2010 to follow up on the information and recommendations from the previous meetings or to hold further meetings in other locations. Attachment B contains a list of some of these activities. Regulatory and Legislative Environment SBA-Related Issues Lender-Related Issues CDFI-Related Issues Small Business Support Services Research and Data Attachment A: List of Federal Reserve System Small Business Meetings Attachment B: Planned Reserve Bank Community Affairs Activities on Small BusinessThe information below describes key activities that Community Affairs Offices of Federal Reserve Banks are planning for the remainder of 2010 in response to issues that were raised at the Federal Reserve System's regional small business meetings or as a way to expand those meetings to other locations. This does not represent a comprehensive list of all Reserve Bank Community Affairs small business activities in 2010. Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank of New York Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 1.A list of meeting locations, dates, and topics can be found in Attachment A.Return to text 2.Data are from the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income(Call Report), where loans to small businesses, as reported in the reporting forms FFIEC 031 and 041, schedule RC-C, part II, are defined as loans with original amounts of $1 million or less that are secured by nonfarm nonresidential properties or are commercial and industrial loans.Correction: On July 27, 2010, this footnote was revised to remove "plus loans with original balances of $500,000 or less that are secured by farmland or are for agricultural production."Return to text 3.Relating to this topic, the Federal Reserve and other federal financial institution regulatory agencies issued apolicy statementsupporting prudent commercial real estate (CRE) loan workouts in October 2009. The Federal Reserve complemented these issuances with training programs for examiners and outreach to the banking industry to underscore the importance of sound lending practices. Further, the Federal Reserve recently hosted an "Ask the Fed" session in May 2010, which had participation from more than 1,400 bankers and state bank commissioners, to discuss CRE-related issues, such as credit workouts and troubled debt restructurings. The Interagency Guidance on Lending to Creditworthy Small Business Borrowers raised a similar topic, stating that examiners will not criticize institutions for working in a prudent and constructive manner with small business borrowers.Return to text 4.To address this issue and others relating to small business lending, the Federal Reserve and other federal financial institution regulatory agencies issued apolicy statementsupporting prudent lending to small business borrowers in February 2010. The guidance states that lenders should understand the long-term viability of the borrower's business, focus on the strength of a borrower's business plan, and analyze a borrower's performance over a reasonable range of future conditions, rather than overly optimistic or pessimistic cases.Return to text
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Federal Reserve Meeting Series: "Addressing the Financing Needs of Small Businesses," Washington, D.C. Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Good afternoon. I want to thank all of you for participating in today's discussion about the financing needs of small businesses. I particularly want to thank Karen Mills, the Small Business Administration (SBA) Administrator, for her remarks and our distinguished panelists for helping us to better understand the dynamics of small business lending in these difficult economic times. I would also like to thank everyone who participated in the more than 40 regional meetings that led up to today's conference and to thank the Reserve Banks for their sponsorship and organization of those meetings. They brought together small businesses, lenders, technical assistance providers, bank examiners and others involved in small business credit to help identify barriers to small business credit access and to suggest potential solutions. As many of you know, I came to the Federal Reserve after many years as a community banker. Quite a number of those years were spent lending to the small businesses that were the backbone of my local economy. That experience gives me a deep appreciation for the importance of credit to economic growth and the particular importance of small business lending to job creation in local communities. So, as you might imagine, the recent decline in availability of credit to small businesses concerns me. It also concerns my colleagues across the Federal Reserve System. When the mortgage crisis first broke a few years ago, we were able to build a body of data and an understanding of relevant issues through a series of meetings convened by the Federal Reserve Banks across the country on topics such as foreclosure or neighborhood stabilization. As we started hearing more about problems encountered by small businesses in accessing credit, we again tapped the broad footprint of the Reserve Bank system and the web of local contacts they have developed to help us better understand the issues surrounding loans to small business. I attended one of the regional meetings in June and was pleased to see firsthand the quality of the conversation that took place. Today we have seen evidence that the conversations were equally rich across the country. The information gathered through this kind of outreach is invaluable as we consider our policy options, and I hope that you have found it similarly helpful. Today's agenda was organized around the common issues identified in those regional meetings. We looked at small business credit issues from the perspective of the private, public, and nonprofit sectors. We also looked at the implications of data and information gaps on our understanding of the dynamics of small business lending. And, perhaps most important, we identified some promising next steps to ensure that creditworthy small businesses have the access to capital that they need. Today's meeting has been referred to as a capstone because it summarized the information we gathered. But our conversation today makes it clear that this is just the beginning. There is no single step that can be taken to cure what is ailing the small business lending market. As we have heard, the causes for credit tightening are many and complex. Equally numerous are the challenges facing small businesses and limiting their demand for credit. These issues have evolved over time, and it only makes sense that implementing solutions will be equally difficult and will take time. This has been a full day and I want to commend you for your stamina, your insights, and your commitment to helping us identify those next steps that all of us--public policymakers, small business lenders, nonprofits, and small business owners--can take to facilitate small businesses' access to credit. I hope we can also count on you to continue the effort, for it will take all of us working together to fully restore a healthy credit environment for the small businesses that are so important to our economy. As we think about taking the next steps, I would like to especially note the success of the Federal Reserve's small business meeting series in fostering collaboration among numerous federal agencies, including the other financial regulatory agencies, the Treasury's Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI) Fund, and the Small Business Administration. Collaboration will continue to be the key to crafting solutions to small business financing issues, both in Washington and in the field. Today we identified several areas where we can work together to improve the lending conditions for small businesses. Before we adjourn, let me briefly review what we heard today. Private Sector SolutionsWe consistently heard about the impact of credit tightening and banks' ability and willingness to lend to small businesses. If we assume, as I do, that bankers are predisposed to lending, because without lending there can be no profit, then it is important to understand what stands in the way of lending to small businesses. Some banks are limited in their ability to lend due to weaknesses in their balance sheet, such as low capital or liquidity. Others might have the balance sheet capacity to lend but are restricted in some loan categories due to problems or concentrations in their own loan portfolios. Because small business lending relationships are built through repeated interactions over time, customers of weakened institutions may find their available credit under existing relationships reduced and have trouble replicating those relationships with a new bank. In addition, a number of small businesses are feeling the effects of tightened credit because the value of their collateral has dropped. Businesses that have maintained strong cash flows through the recession are particularly concerned about the potential for devalued collateral to reduce their credit access and, in some cases, to create an additional strain on balance sheets as cash and other assets are required to shore up collateral positions that no longer meet underwriting standards. In addition, small businesses and banks alike attribute a significant portion of the tightened credit environment to regulatory uncertainty and, in particular, to concern about the classification of assets by bank examiners. I do not believe it is appropriate or even possible for regulators to urge banks to make loans that are outside their risk tolerance or that would be unsafe or unsound. But we can and should be sure that supervisory policies do not impede the flow of credit to all eligible borrowers. That's why the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies have worked so hard during the past few years to ensure that while banks appropriately recognize loan problems they also can continue to make loans that are safe and sound. The financial regulators have issued guidance to provide clarity and consistency regarding the supervisory treatment of new loans, problem loans, and different loan workout approaches because we understand how important regulatory certainty is to bankers, who must make decisions about whether and to whom they should lend. The interagency guidance stressed the importance of continuing to make prudent loans to creditworthy customers;1clarified standards for commercial real estate (CRE) loans and workouts;2and, most recently, restated supervisory views on lending to small businesses.3 At the Federal Reserve, we have complemented the guidance with training programs for examiners and outreach to the banking industry that underscores the importance of sound lending practices. In January, Federal Reserve staff instituted a Systemwide examiner training initiative that is reaching Federal Reserve and state examiners all across the United States. In addition, in May more than 1,400 bankers and state bank commissioners from across the country participated in an "Ask the Fed" conference call to discuss CRE-related issues, such as credit workouts and troubled debt restructurings. The session was an effective way to help clarify the guidance and allowed us to hear more about concerns of people in the industry. But we are not finished. The Federal Reserve is also working to develop better ways to measure the effectiveness of the lending guidance we have issued. After all, if these sorts of issuances don't work, we need to know that so we can figure out a better way to get our messages across. For example, before issuing the CRE guidance last year, Federal Reserve staff surveyed examiners to gain a better understanding of the banks' workout practices. That information is serving as a baseline for assessing the impact of the supervisory guidance. We are asking examiners to capture, where possible, information on troubled debt restructurings and other types of loan workouts and dispositions as part of the ongoing examination process. We are also exploring the feasibility of more-formal statistical approaches for measuring and evaluating the effectiveness of the CRE workout and restructuring policy statement. An encouraging sign of banks' responsiveness to borrowers' concerns was the discussion in several meetings about the importance of second look programs. Some lenders have robust second look programs to ensure that applications for small business credit receive appropriate consideration. These programs are particularly helpful at a time when traditional underwriting standards, such as reviewing three years' worth of financial statements, may not be as reliable an indicator as they were before the recession. Similarly, in the meeting I attended in Tampa, there was a lively give and take between borrowers and lenders about permitting borrowers to talk directly to underwriters so borrowers can understand the reasoning behind credit decisions and perhaps offer additional information or explanation. Public and Nonprofit Sector SolutionsPart of the ongoing debate about whether we have a supply or demand problem with small business lending is based on the fact that bankers and small business owners have different ideas about what a creditworthy small business looks like. We heard a lot of discussion from bankers and small business owners about the need for technical assistance to help businesses understand and prepare the documentation necessary to obtain credit. Business owners might require technical assistance to help them repair their credit, rethink their cash flow structures, develop business plans, or just present their information in a more organized way. In addition, many technical assistance providers, such as small business development centers, can help businesses tap into non-bank sources of credit or better utilize available trade credit. We found that many banks and small businesses were unaware of the assistance that nonprofit technical assistance providers could offer in such cases. The demand for technical assistance is most acute among start-up businesses, but it continues to be important for businesses that are trying to grow. Small businesses voiced their concern over the dearth of products suited to their specific credit needs, particularly small-dollar loans. We heard that many financial institutions have reduced or curtailed small-dollar loans altogether because of the time and resources required to make them. CDFIs and some community banks and credit unions are uniquely situated to provide small-dollar loans and other products tailored to small business customers, but funding, capacity, and certain regulatory constraints have hindered their ability to fully meet the demand for these loans. Several ideas to help CDFIs, community banks, and credit unions meet the increased demand for small business loans were discussed today, and we are committed to following up on them. CDFIs are especially useful to small businesses for loans that many traditional creditors view as too risky or too small to be profitable. Moreover, CDFIs complement their lending products with training and technical assistance for their customers, either directly or through partnerships with nonprofit organizations. This combination enhances a borrower's capacity and mitigates the risks of default. Successful borrowers often graduate to conventional financing as their needs grow, freeing up resources to help new businesses. Much of our outreach at the Federal Reserve has focused on the particular needs of minority small businesses. While all small businesses are vulnerable to economic downturns, this recession has hit minority small businesses particularly hard. At our meetings, we heard a number of comments citing a comparative lack of capitalization, weaker collateral values, and lower credit scores for many minority small businesses, which leave these firms with less ability to absorb economic shocks. For example, in Los Angeles, we heard that the decline in residential property values has had a significantly adverse impact on businesses owned by Asian Pacific Islanders who relied heavily on home equity for financing. We heard about the same issue with respect to many African American- and Hispanic-owned businesses around the country. In other cases where efforts such as government procurement programs were instituted to help minority small businesses, we heard that the inability to secure credit to fulfill contracts makes these programs out of reach for many potential participants. It is also clear that minority-owned businesses would benefit from improved access to technical assistance and resources such as training in financial management, mentoring, and assistance with loan documentation that may not be in a business owner's native language. But there are also hopeful examples of successful collaboration to address these issues. While in Minneapolis, I toured the Midtown Global Market, a multicultural marketplace that serves as an inspirational reminder of what can be accomplished when public and private resources combine to support minority businesses. Research and Data ImprovementsFinally, we spent some time today discussing the need for better data and analysis to monitor and understand small business credit flows. As a research institution, the Federal Reserve is always looking for opportunities to improve data, and we already have taken a number of steps in this direction. First, while banks do not report loans to small businesses separately, they do report information on business loans less than $1 million and farm loans less than $500,000. The history of this data can be used as a proxy for small business lending. So in order to monitor lending to small business more closely, beginning with the first quarter of 2010, we have increased the frequency of this Call Report requirement from an annual to a quarterly basis. Second, researchers from around the Federal Reserve System will gather at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis later this summer to compare notes on the research currently being conducted in the area of small business financing, identify any gaps, and develop ideas for future areas of inquiry. In addition, the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and Dallas have partnered with the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation to co-host a research conference,Small Business, Entrepreneurship, and Economic Recovery: A Focus on Job Creation and Economic Stabilization, which will take place October 26 and 27 in Atlanta. Through paper presentations and policy roundtables, the conference will help us gain a better understanding of the implications of various existing, new, and proposed policies related to small business and entrepreneurship, including new and expanded SBA and CDFI programs. Lastly, it is important to note that this meeting today and the regional meetings that led to it have introduced us to potential partners for furthering our research efforts in this area, and we look forward to expanding our horizons in this respect. ConclusionI wish I could conclude this wrap-up with a list of the three or four things we could do to immediately unlock small business lending. But the problems are numerous and complex and they will require creativity and persistence to solve. Just because the solutions are hard to find does not mean that we shouldn't keep trying. Finding solutions to small business financing issues is not only an important component of the economic recovery, it is also important to the restoration of communities that have been hard-hit by foreclosures and job losses. What we have accomplished is a good beginning. We have identified some specific credit gaps and generated some ideas to tackle them. We have brought together a network of people with different perspectives and resources but a shared commitment to improving credit conditions. And we have sparked numerous research projects to further understanding of the current and ongoing credit needs of small businesses. If we continue to work together, I am sure that we can alleviate some of the problems that small businesses face. The more we do now, the better prepared our small businesses and lending institutions will be when economic growth and consumer demand pick up. Thank you, again, for your participation today. 1.For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers," press release, November 12.Return to text 2.For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Adopts Policy Statement Supporting Prudent Commercial Real Estate (CRE) Loan Workouts," press release, October 30.Return to text 3.For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), "Regulators Issue Statement on Lending to Creditworthy Small Businesses," press release, February 5.Return to text
Statement by Chairman Ben S. Bernanke: The financial reform legislation approved by the Congress today represents a welcome and far-reaching step toward preventing a replay of the recent financial crisis. It strengthens the consolidated supervision of systemically important financial institutions, gives the government an important additional tool to safely wind down failing financial firms, creates an interagency council to detect and deter emerging threats to the financial system, and enhances the transparency of the Federal Reserve while preserving the political independence that is crucial to monetary policymaking. Even before passage of reform legislation, the Federal Reserve has been overhauling its supervision and regulation of banking organizations and working to strengthen financial market infrastructures and practices. We will be focused and diligent in carrying out our responsibilities under the new law.
Louise L. Roseman, Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems Before the Subcommittee on Domestic Monetary Policy and Technology, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Watt, Ranking Member Paul, and members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to appear before you on behalf of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to discuss Federal Reserve activities related to currency and coin. I plan to touch on currency developments and management of coin distribution. Roles in Currency and Coin DistributionFirst, it may be helpful to describe briefly the Federal Reserve's role in currency and coin distribution. The Board issues the nation's currency in the form of Federal Reserve notes. The Federal Reserve Banks distribute currency and coin for general circulation through depository institutions. The Reserve Banks also receive deposits of currency and coin from these institutions. Currently, thirty Reserve Bank cash offices provide cash services to approximately 9,200 banks, savings and loans, and credit unions in the United States. The remaining depository institutions obtain currency and coin from correspondent banks rather than directly from the Federal Reserve. Each year, the Board projects the need for new currency, which it acquires from the Department of the Treasury's Bureau of Engraving and Printing (BEP) at approximately the cost of production. Our new-currency budget for 2010 is $703 million. The Federal Reserve issues notes at face value, which are recorded as liabilities on the Reserve Banks' balance sheets. The Reserve Banks, as required by law, pledge collateral (principally U.S. Treasury, federal agency, and government-sponsored enterprise securities) equal to the value of currency in circulation. This collateral produces a substantial portion of the earnings that Reserve Banks distribute to the Treasury each year. In the years preceding the recent increases to the Reserve Bank balance sheets, when currency represented the large majority of Reserve Bank liabilities, the annual distributions to the Treasury generally ranged from $20 to $30 billion. In 2009, the Reserve Banks distributed $47.4 billion to the Treasury. The Federal Reserve monitors trends in and publishes statistics on noncash transactions such as checks, credit and debit cards, and other electronic payments, but it does not publish statistics on individuals' use of cash.1Obtaining reliable data on cash transactions is more difficult because, unlike noncash payment methods, cash transactions do not flow through centralized systems at institutions that specialize in payments processing such as depository institutions and payment networks. Data on cash transactions would have to come from alternative sources, such as consumers or businesses, from whom representative data may be difficult to collect. Despite the difficulty of direct measurement of cash transactions, the Federal Reserve does monitor and study cash use in the United States through the information it collects in its role as currency processor, and from consumers and businesses. Although there is no direct information on trends in cash use, statistics on the growth in the use of noncash payment methods suggest some substitution away from cash in recent years. In addition, discussions Federal Reserve officials have had with select retailers suggest that cash transactions continue to grow although at a much slower rate than electronic forms of payment. The Federal Reserve's role in coin operations is more limited than its role in currency operations. The United States Mint issues circulating coins that the Reserve Banks purchase at face value and record as assets on their balance sheets.2The Reserve Banks distribute new and circulated coin to depository institutions to meet the public's demand and take as deposits coin that exceeds the public's needs. The United States Mint determines annual coin production; however, the Reserve Banks influence the process by providing the Mint with monthly coin orders and a 12-month, rolling coin-order forecast. The Mint transports the coin from its production facilities for circulating coin in Philadelphia and Denver to the Reserve Banks' offices and offsite locations. While the Reserve Banks store some coin in their vaults, they also contract with coin terminals to store, process, and distribute coin on their behalf.3Armored carrier companies generally operate the coin terminals, which have improved the efficiency of the coin-distribution system. Today, 174 coin terminals store about 37 percent of the Federal Reserve's coin inventory volume, but account for about 88 percent of Reserve Bank daily distributional activity.4The value of U.S. coins in circulation as of May 31, 2010, was approximately $40.4 billion, or about 4.3 percent of total currency and coin in circulation. Currency DevelopmentsTrends in Currency DemandThe Federal Reserve measures demand for U.S. currency by the amount of currency in circulation. From 1980 to 2009, currency in circulation increased an average of 7.0 percent per year from $124.8 billion to $888.3 billion, as shown inchart 1.5Domestic demand for currency is largely based on the use of currency for transactions and is influenced primarily by income levels, prices of goods and services, the availability of alternative payment methods, and the opportunity cost of holding currency in lieu of an interest-bearing asset. In the United States, demand (in terms of number of notes) for smaller denominations ($1s through $20s) exceeds demand for larger denominations ($50s and $100s). Consumers frequently use smaller-denomination notes for small transactions and alternative payment methods (for example, debit and credit cards) for larger purchases. In contrast, foreign demand is influenced primarily by the political and economic uncertainties associated with certain foreign currencies, which contrast with the U.S. dollar's historically relatively high degree of stability. Because U.S. currency is held abroad primarily as savings, foreigners tend to hold high-denomination notes. The Federal Reserve estimates that as much as two-thirds of currency in circulation is held abroad.6 The foreign component of currency in circulation is estimated to have increased significantly beginning in the late 1980s and continues to grow today. In the 1990s, currency in circulation grew at an average annual growth rate of approximately 7.7 percent, resulting primarily from increases in foreign demand and a surge in demand at the end of the decade.7As shown inchart 2, during the decade beginning in 2000, the average annual growth rate of currency in circulation moderated to about 5.3 percent (which is a rate consistent with growth during the 1960s). As reflected inchart 3, however, annual growth rates began to decline in 2001 and significantly declined to below one percent in 2008 (through August). Demand slowed over this period partly because the value of the dollar decreased against many other major currencies; international markets gained trust in their own economies and national currencies; electronic payments displaced some cash usage; and the effect of the recent recession. This decline was reversed, however, beginning in September 2008, as currency demand increased significantly as a result of the financial crisis. Currency growth increased substantially, from 0.8 percent year-to-date through August 2008 to 7.7 percent for full-year 2008. As the effects of the financial crisis persisted, strong growth continued in 2009; currency in circulation increased from $775 billion at the end of 2007 to almost $900 billion by year-end 2009. As of May 31, 2010, the value of currency in circulation was $902.2 billion, or about 95.7 percent of total currency and coin in circulation. The effects of the financial crisis on currency in circulation domestically were less significant than on currency in circulation internationally. Although domestic demand appears to have increased briefly in the fall of 2008, the increase of the FDIC deposit insurance limit and other government actions to address the crisis allayed domestic concerns and demand seems to have returned quickly to normal levels. The majority of the growth rate increase was driven by demand for $100 notes internationally. The Federal Reserve requested that the BEP accelerate the Board's print order for $100 notes during this period so that the Reserve Banks could continue meeting international demand.8Although payments of $100 notes abroad have returned to normal levels, most of the currency the Reserve Banks paid into circulation during the financial crisis remains in circulation as Reserve Bank receipts from circulation remain historically weak. Evolving Currency Designs of Federal Reserve NotesThe U.S. government redesigns U.S. currency to improve its security and protect the public from counterfeiters. Through an interagency cooperative agreement of the Treasury Department and its Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Federal Reserve System, and the United States Secret Service, the Board participates on the Advanced Counterfeit Deterrence Steering Committee (ACD) and recommends U.S. currency design changes to the Secretary of the Treasury, who has sole statutory authority to approve new currency designs. Decisions about the redesign of each denomination are guided by the ACD's evaluation of the range of ongoing counterfeit threats from digital technology and traditional printing processes, and advancements in banknote security features.9 Through this cooperative effort, in 1996, the United States produced the first significant redesign of U.S. currency in 65 years (the Series-1996 design family). This redesign began with the $100 note in March 1996 and concluded with the $5 and $10 notes issued together in May 2000. The 1996-design family incorporated portrait watermarks, embedded security threads, and color-shifting ink to combat the predominant threat of the traditional counterfeiter. To address a phenomenon known as "opportunistic counterfeiting," which is the use of digital technology available in the home by non-professional or casual counterfeiters, the ACD recommended another redesign of the currency, which began with the $20 note in October 2003, followed by the $50 note in 2004, the $10 note in 2006, and the $5 note in 2008. The final denomination in the 2004-design family, the $100 note, was unveiled on April 21. The unveiling of the $100 note was the first step in a multi-agency program to educate consumers, businesses, banks, and governmental entities around the world about the new $100 note before it begins circulating. Under the auspices of the ACD, we conducted extensive qualitative and quantitative research to understand better how domestic and international users verify the authenticity of the $100 note. Through this research, three major points emerged: (1) those who use U.S. currency do not want drastic changes when we introduce new designs and prefer only a few security features that are easy to use; (2) the security features in the current-design $100 note are considered effective; and (3) it was important to some users that any new security features can be used discreetly.10Building on the currency-design efforts that began in 2003, this note reflects what we learned from the research and includes new, state-of-the-art security features such as the 3-D security ribbon and the color-shifting bell in the ink well. The Federal Reserve will begin distributing the new $100 note on February 10, 2011. Management of Coin DistributionThe Federal Reserve has been working for some time to improve the efficiency of the Reserve Banks' coin activities by implementing a program to manage coin distribution from a national perspective. Before the Federal Reserve moved to centralized management of coin distribution, each Reserve Bank made independent ordering and distributional decisions. Today, the Reserve Banks' national Cash Product Office (CPO) manages coin nationally for the Federal Reserve System, taking into account the Reserve Banks' input regarding local estimates of coin demand. The CPO produces a consolidated monthly coin order on behalf of the Reserve Banks for the United States Mint. Along with the order, the CPO provides the Mint with a rolling, 12-month order forecast for planning purposes. The key element of the CPO's forecast is predicting net payments to circulation--the difference between payments to and receipts from circulation. The order and forecast are based on expected net payments relative to Reserve Banks' inventory levels. The Reserve Banks ensure sufficient inventories are positioned at each office and coin terminal to meet the forecasted demand. As a result of improved inventory management, over the past five years, the Reserve Banks have increasingly used previously circulated pennies, nickels, and dimes to fill orders from depository institutions while decreasing their orders for these coins from the United States Mint by almost 31 percent, compared with the average orders over the previous five years, as shown inchart 5. This has reduced Reserve Bank inventories of pennies, nickels, and dimes as of May 31, 2010, to their lowest levels since early 2000, although they are still sufficient to meet demand.11The Reserve Banks have not experienced surpluses or shortages of pennies, nickels, or dimes since 1999 when they experienced a temporary shortage of pennies. Commemorative Circulating CoinsDemand for coin for transactional purposes can be met by any design of a denomination. For example, a retailer that orders quarters from its bank typically does not care what design(s) it receives. Demand for a commemorative circulating coin by collectors, however, is design-specific. In the early years of the 50 State Quarters program, the Reserve Banks ordered more new quarters than were necessary to meet demand in order to fill many depository institution orders with new coins rather than with available inventories of circulated quarters. The residual coins from each release, plus the excess quarters redeposited by depository institutions, created excessive inventories at the Reserve Banks. The Reserve Banks were able to reduce those inventories because of regular demand for quarters.12Because of low transactional demand for $1 coins, however, the Federal Reserve's experience with commemorative circulating $1 coin programs has differed significantly. For previous $1 coin programs, the Reserve Banks have encountered large excess inventories for much longer periods, and our experience with the Presidential $1 Coin Program is consistent with those programs.13 Presidential $1 Coin ProgramBefore the Presidential $1 Coin Program began in 2007, demand for $1 coins, measured in Reserve Banks' net payments to circulation, was about $60 million per year (for comparison, net payments of $1 notes to circulation in 2006 were $289 million). Reserve Banks' payments to circulation increased significantly in the first year of the Presidential $1 Coin Program but have consistently declined since that time, while receipts from circulation have significantly increased.14With Reserve Bank payments to circulation decreasing and receipts increasing each year of the program, Reserve Banks' inventories of $1 coins are growing substantially. As shown inchart 7, previous $1 coin supplies, plus the excess $1 coins returned by depository institutions, have elevated total Reserve Banks' inventories of all $1 coins to almost $1 billion as of May 31, 2010, compared with $67 million before the start of the program. At the current rate of inventory growth, the Federal Reserve estimates that it could hold as many as $2 billion by the time the program is expected to end.15This inventory growth, in large part, is because a requirement in the Presidential $1 Coin Act requires the Federal Reserve to make each new design available to the public in unmixed quantities for an introductory period. Therefore, the Reserve Banks must order each new design from the Mint even though the Reserve Banks have ample inventories of $1 coins. Banking industry and armored carrier representatives have indicated that transactional demand for $1 coins has not increased materially since the start of the Presidential $1 Coin Program and that overall demand continues to come primarily from collectors. They have also indicated, however, that the program is working very well from their perspectives, that the coins are easy to order, and that our communication about program details is effective.16Most representatives did not believe that demand would increase significantly for future coin releases, with the possible exception of the coins commemorating the most popular former Presidents. Native American $1 Coin ProgramThe Native American $1 Coin Act requires that at least 20 percent of all $1 coins minted and issued in any year be Native American $1 coins. Because the Reserve Banks already have excessive inventories of $1 coins, the Reserve Banks do not plan to purchase Native American $1 coins unless needed to meet demand.17As a result of the legislative requirement to issue these coins, the Mint began paying Native American $1 coins (and some Presidential $1 coins) directly to circulation through its Direct Ship program, which allows the public to order boxes of $1 coins in $250 increments. The Mint indicates that it paid to circulation $12 million $1 coins in 2008 and $121 million in 2009.18 Total Demand for $1 CoinsTaking into consideration the Reserve Banks' net payments to circulation and the Mint's direct payments to circulation, total demand for $1 coins in 2009 was nearly triple that of 2006, before the start of the Presidential $1 Coin Program. This increase, however, was from a very low base of only $60 million per year. Demand has declined by two-thirds since the initial year of the Presidential $1 Coin Program.19It is unclear what portion of $1 coin demand is for transactional versus collector purposes, or where demand for $1 coins will ultimately stabilize. What is clear, however, is that the legislative requirements associated with these programs are resulting in steadily rising Reserve Bank inventories and the attendant costs of dealing with those inventories. Metal Content of CoinsAs the issuing authority for currency, the Federal Reserve appreciates the importance of identifying and incorporating cost-effective materials into the production of our nation's money. We commend the United States Mint for seeking solutions to the problem of higher raw material costs. Changing the metal content of pennies and nickels, even if doing so changes the weight and electronic signature, would not have a material adverse effect on the operations of the Reserve Banks. The Reserve Banks stopped routinely weighing penny and nickel deposits in 2003 after determining that the costs exceeded the benefits of doing so. Instead, the Reserve Banks give depository institutions credit on deposits of coin on a "said to contain" basis. As a result, we do not anticipate significant internal operational challenges associated with any such changes. Changing the metal content of dimes, quarters, half-dollars, and $1 coins, if it affects the respective weights, could affect Reserve Bank coin terminal operations. Coin terminal operators weigh incoming deposits of these denominations. If a change in metal content changes a coin's weight or electronic signature, it could materially affect businesses that use coin-accepting machines, such as the vending industry, or other businesses that rely on these characteristics. While such a change probably would not be a material issue with respect to pennies, which are generally not accepted in vending equipment, it may be for larger-denomination coins. Those businesses are better placed to comment on the extent to which they would be required to make changes to their equipment to recognize coins of the same denomination that have different weights and electronic signatures. ConclusionThe Federal Reserve will continue to work to meet demand for currency and coin efficiently and effectively. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss these issues with you and would be happy to answer your questions. 1.The Federal Reserve publishes currency in circulation data in its weekly H.4.1 report. In addition, the Federal Reserve also reports Reserve Banks' payments and receipts of currency and coin into and from circulation.Return to text 2.Coins held by the Reserve Banks are non-interest-earning assets on their books.Return to text 3.These armored carrier companies do not charge the Reserve Banks a fee for these services. In the 1990s, the Federal Reserve and the armored carrier companies reached a mutually beneficial agreement that the armored carriers would provide coin services on behalf of the Federal Reserve at no cost in exchange for access at the armored carrier terminals to Reserve Bank coin inventories, which significantly reduced the transportation expenses incurred by the armored carriers in obtaining the coin from Reserve Bank locations.Return to text 4.The armored carrier companies are most interested in storing coin that is routinely used in cash transactions (primarily pennies, nickels, dimes, and quarters) because they can charge fees to the depository institutions for providing coin services in preparing the coin for sale to their customers.Return to text 5.The value of currency in circulation was $242.3 billion at year-end 1989; $601.2 billion at year-end 1999; and $888.3 billion at year-end 2009.Return to text 6.In addition to being used as a store of value, U.S. currency is also used broadly for transactional purposes in officially dollarized countries, such as Panama, Ecuador, El Salvador, and East Timor, and in other countries where the U.S. dollar co-circulates with local currencies.Return to text 7.In preparation for the century date change, currency in circulation increased 22.1 percent from its December 1998 level. Uncertainty associated with the century date change increased the public's precautionary demand for cash, but as the event passed without incident, the public returned much of the currency it had amassed to depository institutions.Return to text 8.Chart 4shows the Federal Reserve's annual currency print orders from the BEP from 1990 through 2010.Return to text 9.The ACD has set as general policy guidance that currency will be redesigned every 7 to 10 years depending on specific counterfeiting threats and experience related to a particular denomination. The first Series-2004 design family of notes was issued about seven years after the first Series-1996 note was issued.Return to text 10.The two primary security features (portrait watermark and embedded security thread) in the current-design $100 note require the user to hold the note up to light to check for authenticity. Although these features will remain in the new-design $100 note, new security features have been added that will require only slight movements of the note to authenticate.Return to text 11.As of May 31, 2010, the Reserve Banks held about 1.5 billion pennies, 343 million nickels, and 546 million dimes.Return to text 12.The Reserve Banks' quarter inventories reached a peak of 3.0 billion pieces in January 2003 and declined to 2.1 billion by year-end 2007. Inventories increased significantly in 2008 and 2009, however, because of considerably lower payments to circulation during the recession. The Reserve Banks expect to reduce those inventories once again, as demand improves. During 2010 through May, improved demand enabled the Reserve Banks to reduce inventories by almost 500 million pieces, or a 13 percent reduction since year-end 2009. As of May 31, 2010, the Reserve Banks held 3.3 billion quarters.Return to text 13.Because there is almost no transactional demand, Reserve Bank inventories of half-dollar coins also increase each year. Since 2001, Reserve Banks' inventories have increased by 110 million pieces even though the Reserve Banks have only ordered 24 million pieces over that time period.Return to text 14.As chart 6indicates, depository institution demand has decreased for each successive Presidential $1 coin design. About 70 percent of $1 coin payments to circulation occur during the special ordering periods for each new release.Return to text 15.Because of the reluctance of most armored carrier companies to hold excess inventories of $1 coins that have low transactional demand and Reserve Banks' vault storage contraints, the Federal Reserve is investigating additional options to store these coins. The Reserve Banks have currently identified additional storage options at estimated one-time costs of about $6 million.Return to text 16.The Federal Reserve meets at least annually with representatives of depository institutions with the largest cash volumes, community bankers, and armored carriers to gather feedback about demand and potential obstacles to the circulation of $1 coins.Return to text 17.See 2007 Annual Report to the Congress on the Presidential $1 Coin Program, page 24. http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/RptCongress/dollarcoin/dollarcoin.htm.Return to text 18.The Mint is not currently charging shipping and handling fees for this program.Return to text 19.Considering both the Reserve Banks' net payments and the Mint's direct payments, total $1 coin demand was $513 million in 2007, $235 million in 2008, and $171 million in 2009.Return to text Accessible Version
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between A. E. Bancorp, Inc., Buffalo Grove, Illinois, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Bank of Whitman Employee Stock Ownership Plan, Colfax, Washington, a registered bank holding company, Whitman Bancorporation, Inc., Colfax, Washington, a registered bank holding company, Bank of Whitman, Colfax, Washington, a state-chartered member bank, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Bank VI, Salina, Kansas, a state-chartered member bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, and the Kansas Office of the State Bank Commissioner. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Bannister Bancshares, Inc., Kansas City, Missouri, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between BCB Holding Company, Inc., Mobile, Alabama, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among BOV Holding Company, Versailles, Missouri, a registered bank holding company, Bank of Versailles, Versailles, Missouri, a state-chartered member bank, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
Note: The Written Agreement attached to the July 2 press release contained clerical errors. On November 10, 2010, it was replaced with the corrected version of the Written Agreement. It is attached. The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Cecil Bancorp, Inc., Elkton, Maryland, a registered bank holding company, its subsidiary bank, Cecil Bank, Elkton, Maryland, a state-chartered member bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, and the State of Maryland Commissioner of Financial Regulation. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Central Pacific Financial Corporation, Honolulu, Hawaii, a registered bank holding company, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, and the Hawaii Division of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Central Virginia Bancshares, Inc., Powhatan, Virginia, a registered bank holding company, its subsidiary bank, Central Virginia Bank, Powhatan, Virginia, a state-chartered member bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, and the Virginia State Corporation Commission, Bureau of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached. This release has been corrected to reflect the correct name of the state regulator.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Commonwealth Bankshares, Inc., Norfolk, Virginia, a registered bank holding company, and its subsidiary bank, Bank of the Commonwealth, Norfolk, Virginia, a state-chartered member bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, and the Virginia State Corporation Commission, Bureau of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Community Valley Bancorp, Chico, California, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Dickinson Financial Corporation II, Kansas City, Missouri, Dickinson Financial Corporation, Kansas City, Missouri, registered bank holding companies, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Farmers State Bank, Faith, South Dakota, a state member bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, and the State of South Dakota Department of Revenue and Regulation, Division of Banking. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between First Olathe Bancshares, Inc., Overland Park, Kansas, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Greensburg Bancshares, Inc., Greensburg, Louisiana, a registered bank holding company, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and the Louisiana Office of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Macatawa Bank Corporation, Holland, Michigan, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Metro North Bancshares, Inc., Elk River, Minnesota, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between NBN Corporation, Newport, Tennessee, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between North State Bancshares, Inc., Shakopee, Minnesota, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between NOVA Financial Holdings, Inc., Berwyn, Pennsylvania, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Pilot Bancshares, Inc., Tampa, Florida, a registered bank holding company, Pilot Bank, Tampa, Florida, a state-chartered member bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and the State of Florida Office of Financial Regulation. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Premier Bank Holding Company, Tallahassee, Florida, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Premier Financial Bancorp, Inc., Huntington, West Virginia, a registered bank holding company, Abigail Adams National Bancorp, Inc., Washington, D.C., a registered bank holding company, Consolidated Bank and Trust Company, Richmond, Virginia, a state-chartered member bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, and the Virginia State Corporation Commission Bureau of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Star Bancorp, Inc., Scottsdale, Arizona, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.