The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the approval of an application by ABN AMRO Bank N.V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application by The Warehouse Trust Company LLC ("Warehouse Trust"), New York, New York, to become a member of the Federal Reserve System. Warehouse Trust proposes to operate a central trade registry for credit default swap contracts and to offer related services, including the processing of life-cycle events for the contracts and facilitation of payments settlement. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies and the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund will be hosting the 2010 National Interagency Community Reinvestment Conference in New Orleans, Louisiana, from March 14 to 18, 2010. This biennial conference is designed to offer participants from around the country the opportunity to learn about the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) and its regulations, as well as the chance to network with colleagues, and to discuss best practices and emerging challenges in community development. The conference will feature four tracks on CRA Compliance, Investments, Community Development, and the National Community Development Lending School. The agenda will cover how CRA loans, investments, and services can have a positive and lasting impact in low- and moderate-income communities. The conference will also include volunteer opportunities and tours exploring revitalization projects in New Orleans. Attendees may also register for a one-day Advanced Investments conference on Thursday, March 18. For the full agenda and to register for the conference online, go to:http://www.frbsf.org/community/conference2010.html.
Ben S. Bernanke was formally sworn in for a second four-year term as Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System at a ceremony Wednesday afternoon in the atrium of the Board's main building in Washington. The oath was administered by Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn in a ceremony attended by Board employees. Witnesses included Chairman Bernanke's wife, Anna Bernanke. Chairman Bernanke began his second term on February 1 following his confirmation by the Senate on January 28 and a hearing on December 3 by the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs. President Obama announced his intention to nominate Chairman Bernanke on August 25. He originally took office as Chairman on February 1, 2006. Chairman Bernanke's new term as Chairman ends January 31, 2014, and his 14-year term as a member of the Board ends on January 31, 2020. A copy of Chairman Bernanke's remarks areattached.
Bank account overdraft fees can be a source of unexpected costs for consumers. A new online Federal Reserve Board publication will help consumers better understand rules that provide additional protection when a debit card or automated teller machine (ATM) transaction causes an account to be overdrawn. Federal Reserve Board rules that take effect on July 1, 2010, prohibit financial institutions from charging overdraft fees for ATM and one-time debit card transactions unless a consumer consents, or opts in, to the overdraft service for those types of transactions.What You Need to Know: New Overdraft Rules for Debit and ATM Cardsprovides an explanation of how the rules will affect existing and new account holders. It contains basic information about types and typical costs of overdraft services and defines common terms consumers may encounter in communications from their bank about overdrafts. Under the Board's rules, financial institutions must provide consumers a notice that explains the financial institution's overdraft services, including the fees associated with the service, and the consumer's choices. Institutions will soon begin providing these notices, and this publication will help consumers understand how to use the information to make the best choices regarding overdraft services. The publication is available online at:http://www.federalreserve.gov/consumerinfo/wyntk_overdraft.htm.
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo Before the Subcommittee on Security and International Trade and Finance, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Bayh, Ranking Member Corker, and other members of the Committee, thank you for inviting me to testify today. I also want to thank all of you for taking the time to explore a subject that is easily overlooked in the public debate around financial reform, but that will be central to ensuring a more stable financial system in the future. The recent financial crisis revealed important gaps in data collection and systematic analysis of institutions and markets. Remedies to fill those gaps are critical for monitoring systemic risk and for enhanced supervision of systemically important financial institutions, which are in turn necessary to decrease the chances of such a serious crisis occurring in the future. The Federal Reserve believes that the goals of agency action and legislative change should be (1) to ensure that supervisory agencies have access to high-quality and timely data that are organized and standardized so as to enhance their regulatory missions, and (2) to make such data available in appropriately usable form to other government agencies and private analysts so that they can conduct their own analyses and raise their own concerns about financial trends and developments. In my testimony this morning I will first review the data collection and analysis activities of the Federal Reserve that are relevant to systemic risk monitoring and explain why we believe additional data should be collected by regulatory authorities with responsibility for financial stability. Next I will set forth some principles that we believe should guide efforts to achieve the two goals I have just noted. Finally, I will describe current impediments to these goals and suggest some factors for the Congress to consider as it evaluates potential legislation to improve the monitoring and containment of systemic risk. The Federal Reserve and Macro-Prudential SupervisionThe Federal Reserve has considerable experience in data collection and reporting in connection with its regulation and supervision of financial institutions, monetary policy deliberations, and lender-of-last-resort responsibilities. The Federal Reserve has made large investments in quantitative and qualitative analysis of the U.S. economy, financial markets, and financial institutions. The Federal Reserve also has recently initiated some new data collection and analytical efforts as it has responded to the crisis and in anticipation of new financial and economic developments. For supervision of the largest institutions, new quantitative efforts have been started to better measure counterparty credit risk and interconnectedness, market risk sensitivities, and funding and liquidity. The focus of these efforts is not only on risks to individual firms, but also on concentrations of risk that may arise through common exposures or sensitivity to common shocks. For example, additional loan-level data on bank exposures to syndicated corporate loans are now being collected in a systematic manner that will allow for more timely and consistent measurement of individual bank and systemic exposures to these sectors. In addition, detailed data obtained from firms' risk-management systems allow supervisors to examine concentration risk and interconnectedness. Specifically, supervisors are aggregating, where possible, the banks' largest exposures to other banks, nonbank financial institutions, and corporate borrowers, which could be used to reveal large exposures to individual borrowers that the banks have in common or to assess the credit impact of a failure of a large bank on other large banks. Additional time and experience with these data will allow us to assess the approach's ability to signal adverse events, and together they will be a critical input to designing a more robust and consistent reporting system. Furthermore, we are collecting data on banks' trading and securitization risk exposures as part of an ongoing, internationally coordinated effort to improve regulatory capital standards in these areas. Moreover, analysis of liquidity risk now incorporates more explicitly the possibility of marketwide shocks to liquidity. This effort also is an example of the importance of context and the need to understand the firms' internal risk models and risk-management systems in designing data collection requirements. Data that only capture a set of positions would not be sufficient since positions would not incorporate behavioral assumptions about firms, based on information about firms' business models and practices. The Federal Reserve's responsibilities for monetary policy are also relevant for systemic risk monitoring. Systemic risk involves the potential for financial crises to result in substantial adverse effects on economic activity. As the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve assesses and forecasts the U.S. and global economies using a wide variety of data and analytical tools, some based on specific sectors and others on large-scale models. In the wake of the crisis, research has been expanded to better understand the channels from the financial sector to the real economy. For example, building on lessons from the recent crisis, the Federal Reserve added questions to the Survey of Professional Forecasters to elicit from private-sector forecasters their subjective probabilities of forecasts of key macroeconomic variables, which provides to us, and to the public, better assessments of the likelihood of severe macroeconomic outcomes. The Federal Reserve has made substantial investments in data and analytical staff for financial market monitoring. Each day, the Trading Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York analyzes and internally distributes reports on market developments, focusing on those markets where prices and volumes are changing rapidly, where news or policy is having a major effect, or where there are special policy concerns. Those analyses begin with quantitative data, supplemented with information obtained through conversations with market participants and reviews of other analyses available in the market. Over the past few years, the Desk has worked closely with our research staff in developing new quantitative tools and new data sources. This ongoing monitoring requires continual evaluation of new data sources and analytical tools to develop new data as new markets and practices develop. For example, information on market volumes and prices can be collected from new trading platforms and brokers, data on instruments such as credit default swaps, or CDS, are provided by vendors or market participants, and fresh insights are gained from new methods of extracting information from options data. In some cases, publication of data by the private sector may be mandated by legislation (such as, potentially, trade data from over-the-counter derivatives trade repositories); in other cases, the Federal Reserve or other government agencies or regulators require or encourage the gathering and publication of data. Our experiences with supervision, monetary policy, and financial market monitoring suggest that market data gathering and market oversight responsibilities must continuously inform one another. In addition, efforts to identify stresses in the system are not a matter of running a single model or focusing on a single risk. Rather, it is the assembly of many types of analysis in a systematic fashion. The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) for large financial institutions--popularly known as the "stress test" when it was conducted early last year--illustrates the importance of combining analysis by credit experts, forecasts and scenario design by macroeconomists, and hands-on judgments by supervisors in assessing the financial condition and potential vulnerabilities of large financial institutions. While considerable steps have been made in the wake of the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve intends to do a good deal more. The Federal Reserve also will continue to strengthen and expand its supervisory capabilities with a macro-prudential approach by drawing on its considerable data reporting, gathering, and analytical capabilities across many disciplines. In the areas in which we are collecting data through the supervisory process on measures of interlinkages and common exposures among the largest financial firms we supervise, we are developing new analytical tools that may lead us to change our information requests from supervised firms. The Federal Reserve is exploring how to develop analytically sophisticated measures of leverage and better measures of maturity transformation from information that we can collect from the supervised firms in the supervisory process and from other available data and analysis. We envision developing a robust set of key indicators of emerging risk concentrations and market stresses that would both supplement existing supervisory techniques and assist in the early identification of early trends that may have systemic significance and bear further inquiry. This kind of approach will require data that are produced more frequently than the often quarterly data gathered in regulatory reports, although not necessarily real-time or intraday, and reported soon after the fact, without the current, often long, reporting lags. These efforts will need to actively seek international cooperation as financial firms increasingly operate globally. The Potential Benefits of Additional DataImproved data are essential for monitoring systemic risk and for implementing a macro-prudential approach to supervision. The financial crisis highlighted the existence of interlinkages across financial institutions and between financial institutions and markets. Credit risks were amplified by leverage and the high degree of maturity transformation, especially outside of traditional commercial banking institutions. Moreover, supervision traditionally has tended to focus on the validity of regulated firms' private risk-management systems, which did not easily allow comparisons and aggregation across firms. One key feature of the recent crisis was the heavy reliance on short-term sources of funds to purchase long-term assets, which led to a poor match between the maturity structure of the firms' assets and liabilities. Such maturity transformation is inherently fragile and leaves institutions and entire markets susceptible to runs. Indeed, a regulatory, supervisory, and insurance framework was created during the Great Depression to counter this problem at depository institutions. However, in recent years a significant amount of maturity transformation took place outside the traditional banking system--in the so-called shadow banking system--through the use of commercial paper, repurchase agreements, and other instruments. Our ability to monitor the size and extent of maturity transformation has been hampered by the lack of high-quality and consistent data on these activities. Better data on the sources and uses of maturity transformation outside of supervised banking organizations would greatly aid macro-prudential supervision and systemic risk regulation. Another feature of the recent crisis was the extensive use of leverage, often in conjunction with maturity transformation. The consequences of this combination were dramatic. When doubts arose about the quality of the assets on shadow banking system balance sheets, a classic adverse feedback loop ensued in which lenders were increasingly unwilling to roll over the short-term debt that was used as funding. Liquidity-constrained institutions were forced to sell assets at increasingly distressed prices, which accelerated margin calls for leveraged actors and amplified mark-to-market losses for all holders of the assets, including regulated firms. Here, too, government regulators and supervisors had insufficient data to determine the degree and location of leverage in the financial system. More generally, the crisis revealed that regulators, supervisors, and market participants could not fully measure the extent to which financial institutions and markets were linked. A critical lesson from this crisis is that supervisors and investors need to be able to more quickly evaluate the potential effects, for example, of the possible failure of a specific institution on other large firms through counterparty credit channels; financial markets; payment, clearing, and settlement arrangements; and reliance on common sources of short-term funding. A better system of data collection and aggregation would have manifold benefits, particularly if the data are shared appropriately among financial regulators and with a systemic risk council if one is created. It would enable regulators and a council to assess and compare risks across firms, markets, and products. It would improve risk management by firms themselves by requiring standardized and efficient collection of relevant financial information. It also would enhance the ability of the government to wind down systemically important firms in a prompt and orderly fashion by providing policymakers a clearer view of the potential impacts of different resolution options on the broader financial system. Additional benefits would result from making data public to the degree consistent with protecting firm-specific proprietary and supervisory information. Investors and analysts would have a more complete picture of individual firms' strengths and vulnerabilities, thereby contributing to better market discipline. Other government agencies, academics, and additional interested parties would be able to conduct their own analyses of financial system developments and identify possible emerging stresses and risks in financial markets. One area in which better information is particularly important is the web of connections among financial institutions though channels such as interbank lending, securities lending, repurchase agreements, and derivatives contracts. Regulators also need more and better data on the links among institutions through third-party sponsors, liquidity providers, credit-support providers, and market makers. Knowledge of such network linkages is a necessary first step to improve analysis of how shocks to institutions and markets can propagate through the financial system. Principles for Developing a System of Effective Data and Analytical ToolsMoving from the recognition of the need for more data to an efficient data system is not an easy task. Data collection entails costs in collection, organization, and utilization for government agencies, reporting market participants, and other interested parties. Tradeoffs may need to be faced where, for example, a particular type of information would be very costly to collect and would have only limited benefits. The Internet and other applications of information technologies have made us all too aware of the potential for information overload, a circumstance in which relevant information is theoretically available, but the time and expense of retrieving it or transforming it into a usable form make it unhelpful in practical terms. Collection of more data just for its own sake also can raise systemic costs associated with moral hazard if investors view data collection from certain firms, products, and markets as suggesting implicit support. It is thus particularly worth emphasizing the importance of having data available readily and in a form that is appropriate for the uses to which it will be put. With these considerations in mind, we have derived a number of guiding principles for a system of new data and analytical tools for effectively supervising large institutions and monitoring systemic risk. First, the priorities for new data efforts should be determined by the nature of regulatory and supervisory missions. In particular, the data need to be sufficiently timely and to cover a sufficient range of financial institutions, markets, instruments, and transactions to support effective systemic risk monitoring and macro-prudential supervision, as well as traditional safety-and-soundness regulation. The events of the past few years have painfully demonstrated that regulators, financial institutions, and investors lacked ready access to data that would have allowed them to fully assess the value of complex securities, understand counterparty risks, or identify concentrations of exposures. The data needed for systemic risk monitoring and supervision are not necessarily "real-time" market data--information about trades and transactions that can be reported at high frequency when the events occur--but certainly data would need to be "timely." What is considered to be "timely" will depend on its purpose, and decisions about how timely the data should be should not ignore the costs of collecting and making the data usable. For many supervisory needs, real-time data would be impractical to collect and analyze in a meaningful way and unnecessary. For example, while supervisors may indeed need to be able to quickly value the balance sheets of systemically important financial institutions, very frequent updates as transactions occur and market prices change could lead to more volatility in values than fundamental conditions would indicate and would be extraordinarily expensive to provide and maintain. Certainly, real-time data could be needed for regulators responsible for monitoring market functioning, and daily data would be helpful to measure end-of-day payment settlements and risk positions among the largest firms. But for supervising market participants, real-time market data could require enormous investments by regulators, institutions, and investors in order to be usable while yielding little net benefit. As policymakers consider redesign of a system of data collection, the goal should be data that are timely and best suited to the mission at hand. A second principle is that data collection be user-driven. That is, data on particular markets and institutions should be collected whenever possible by the regulators who ultimately are responsible for the safety and soundness of the institutions or for the functioning of those markets. Regulators with supervisory responsibilities for particular financial firms and markets are more likely to understand the relevance of particular forms of standardized data for risk management and supervisory oversight. For example, supervisors regularly evaluate the ability of individual firms' own risk measures, such as internal ratings for loans, and of liquidity and counterparty credit risks, to signal potential problems. As a result, these supervisors have the expertise needed to develop new reporting requirements that would be standardized across firms and could be aggregated. Third, greater standardization of data than exists today is required. Standardized reporting to regulators in a way that allows aggregation for effective monitoring and analysis is imperative. In addition, the data collection effort itself should encourage the use of common reporting systems across institutions, markets, and investors, which would generally enhance efficiency and transparency. Even seemingly simple changes, such as requiring the use of a standardized unique identifier for institutions (or instruments), would make surveillance and reporting substantially more efficient. Fourth, the data collected and the associated reporting standards and protocols should enable better risk management by the institutions themselves and foster greater market discipline by investors. Currently, because the underlying data in firms' risk-management systems are incomplete or are maintained in nonstandardized proprietary formats, compiling industry-wide data on counterparty credit risk or common exposures is a challenge for both firms and supervisors. Further, institutions and investors cannot easily construct fairly basic measures of common risks across firms because they may not disclose sufficient information. In some cases, such as disclosure of characteristics of underlying mortgages in a securitized pool, more complete and interoperable data collection systems could enhance market discipline by allowing investors to better assess the risks of the securities without compromising proprietary information of the lending institution. Fifth, data collection must be nimble, flexible, and statistically coherent. With the rapid pace of financial innovation, a risky new asset class can grow from a minor issue to a significant threat faster than government agencies have traditionally been able to revise reporting requirements. For example, collateralized debt obligations based on asset-backed securities grew from a specialized niche product to the largest source of funding for asset-backed securities in just a few years. Regulators, then, should have the authority to collect information promptly when needed, even when such collections would require responses from a broad range of institutions or markets, some of which may not be regulated or supervised. In addition, processes for information collection must meet high standards for reliability, coherence, and representativeness. Sixth, data collection and aggregation by regulatory agencies must be accompanied by a process for making the data available to as great a degree as possible to fellow regulators, other government entities, and the public. There will, of course, be a need to protect proprietary and supervisory information, particularly where specific firm-based data are at issue. But the presumption should be in favor of making information widely available. Finally, any data collection and analysis effort must be attentive to its international dimensions and must seek appropriate participation from regulators in other nations, especially those with major financial centers. Financial activities and risk exposures are increasingly globalized. A system without a common detailed taxonomy for securities and counterparties and comparable requirements for reporting across countries would make assembling a meaningful picture of the exposures of global institutions very difficult. Efforts to improve data collection are already under way in the European Union, by the Bank of England and the Financial Services Authority, and the European Central Bank, which has expressed support for developing a unified international system of taxonomy and reporting. The Financial Stability Board, at the request of the G-20, is initiating an international effort to develop a common reporting template and a process to share information on common exposures and linkages between systemically important global financial institutions. Barriers to Effective Data Collection for AnalysisLegislation will be needed to improve the ability of regulatory agencies to collect the necessary data to support effective supervision and systemic risk monitoring. Restrictions designed to balance the costs and benefits of data collection and analysis have not kept pace with rapid changes in the financial system. The financial system is likely to continue to change rapidly, and both regulators and market participants need the capacity to keep pace. Regulators have been hampered by a lack of authority to collect and analyze information from unregulated entities. But the recent financial crisis illustrated that substantial risks from leverage and maturity transformation were outside of regulated financial firms. In addition, much of the Federal Reserve's collection of data is based on voluntary participation. For example, survey data on lending terms and standards at commercial banks, lending by finance companies, and transactions in the commercial paper market rely on the cooperation of the surveyed entities. Moreover, as we have suggested, the data collection authority of financial regulators over the firms they supervise should be expanded to encompass macro-prudential considerations. The ability of regulators to collect information should similarly be expanded to include the ability to gather market data necessary for monitoring systemic risks. Doing so would better enable regulators to monitor and assess potential systemic risks arising directly from the firms or markets under their supervision or from the interaction of these firms or markets with other components of the financial system. The Paperwork Reduction Act also can at times impede timely and robust data collection. The act generally requires that public notice be provided, and approval of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) be obtained, before any information requirement is applied to more than nine entities. Over the years, the act's requirement for OMB approval for information collection activity involving more than nine entities has discouraged agencies from undertaking many initiatives and can delay the collection of important information in a financial crisis. For example, even a series of informal meetings with more than nine entities designed to learn about emerging developments in markets may be subject to the requirements of the act. While the principle of minimizing the burdens imposed on private parties is an important one, the Congress should consider amending the act to allow the financial supervisory agencies to obtain the data necessary for financial stability in a timely manner when needed. One proposed action would be to increase the number of entities from which information can be collected without triggering the act; another would be to permit special data requests of the systemically important institutions could be conducted more quickly and flexibly. The global nature of capital markets seriously limits the extent to which one country acting alone can organize information on financial markets. Many large institutions have foreign subsidiaries that take financial positions in coordination with the parent. Accordingly, strong cooperative arrangements among domestic and foreign authorities, supported by an appropriate statutory framework, are needed to enable appropriate sharing of information among relevant authorities. Strong cooperation will not be a panacea, however, as legal and other restrictions on data sharing differ from one jurisdiction to the next, and it is unlikely that all such restrictions can be overcome. But cooperation and legislation to facilitate sharing with foreign authorities appears to be the best available strategy. Significant practical barriers also exist that can, at times, limit the quality of data collection and analysis available to support effective supervision and regulation, which include barriers to sharing data that arise from policies designed to protect privacy. For example, some private-sector databases and bank's loan books include firms' tax identification (ID) numbers as identifiers. Mapping those ID numbers into various characteristics, such as broad geographic location or taxable income measures, can be important for effective analysis and can be done in a way that does not threaten privacy. However, as a practical matter, a firm may have multiple ID numbers or they may have changed, but the Internal Revenue Service usually cannot share the information needed to validate a match between the firm and the ID number, even under arrangements designed to protect the confidentiality of the taxpayer information obtained. In addition, a significant amount of financial information is collected by private-sector vendors seeking to profit from the sale of data. These vendors have invested in expertise and in the quality of data in order to meet the needs of their customers, and the Federal Reserve is a purchaser of some of these data. However, vendors often place strong limitations on the sharing of such data with anyone, including among federal agencies, and on the manner in which such data may be used. They also create systems with private identifiers for securities and firms or proprietary formats that do not make it easy to link with other systems. Surely it is important that voluntary contributors of data be able to protect their interests, and that the investments and intellectual property of firms be protected. But the net effect has been a noncompatible web of data that is much less useful, and much more expensive, to both the private and the public sector, than it might otherwise be. Protecting privacy and private-sector property rights clearly are important policy objectives; they are important considerations in the Federal Reserve's current data collection and safeguarding. Protecting the economy from systemic risk and promoting the safety and soundness of financial institutions also are important public objectives. The key issue is whether the current set of rules appropriately balances these interests. In light of the importance of the various interests involved, the Congress should consider initiating a process through which the parties of interest may exchange views and develop potential policy options for the Congress's consideration. Organization Structure for Data Collection and Developing Analytical ToolsIn addition to balancing the costs and benefits of enhanced data and analytical tools, the Congress must determine the appropriate organizational form for data collection and development of analytical tools. Budget costs, production efficiencies, and the costs of separating data collection and analysis from decision-making are important considerations. Any proposed form of organization should facilitate effective data sharing. It also should increase the availability of data, including aggregated supervisory data as appropriate, to market participants and experts so that they can serve the useful role of providing independent perspectives on risks in the financial system. The current arrangement, in which different agencies collect and analyze data, cooperating in cases where a consensus exists among them, can certainly be improved. The most desirable feature of collection and analysis under the existing setup is that it satisfies the principle that data collection and analysis should serve the end users, the regulatory agencies. Each of the existing agencies collects some data from entities it regulates or supervises, using its expertise to decide what to collect under its existing authorities and how to analyze it. Moreover, the agencies seek to achieve cost efficiencies and to reduce burdens on the private sector by cooperating in some data collection. An example is the Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income, or Call Reports, collected by the bank regulatory agencies from both national and state-chartered commercial banks. The content of the reporting forms is coordinated by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, which includes representatives of both state and federal bank regulatory agencies. A standalone independent data collection and analysis agency might be more nimble than the current setup because it would not have to reach consensus with other agencies. It might also have the advantage of fostering an overall assessment of financial data needs for all governmental purposes. However, there would also be some substantial disadvantages to running comprehensive financial data collection through a separate independent agency established for this purpose. A new agency would entail additional budget costs because the agency would likely need to replicate many of the activities of the regulatory agencies in order to determine what data are needed. More importantly, because it would not be involved directly in supervision or market monitoring, such an agency would be hampered in its ability to understand the types of information needed to effectively monitor systemic risks and conduct macro-prudential supervision. Data collection and analysis are not done in a vacuum; an agency's duties will inevitably reflect the priorities, experience, and interests of the collecting entity. Even regular arms-length consultations among agencies might not be effective, because detailed appreciation of the regulatory context within which financial activities that generate data and risks is needed. The separation of data collection and regulation could also dilute accountability if supervisors did not have authority to shape the form and scope of reporting requirements by regulated entities in accordance with supervisory needs. An alternative organizational approach would be available if the Congress creates a council of financial regulators to monitor systemic risks and help coordinate responses to emerging threats, such as that contemplated in a number of legislative proposals. Under this approach, the supervisory and regulatory agencies would maintain most data collection and analysis, with some enhanced authority along the lines I have suggested. Coordination would be committed to the council, which could also have authority to establish information collection requirements beyond those conducted by its member agencies when necessary to monitor systemic risk. This approach might achieve the benefits of the current arrangement and the proposed independent agency, while avoiding their drawbacks. The council would be directed to seek to resolve conflicts among the agencies in a way that would preserve nimbleness, and it could recommend that an agency develop new types of data, but it would leave the details of data collection and analysis to the agencies that are closest to the relevant firms and markets. And while this council of financial supervisors could act independently if needed to collect information necessary to monitor the potential buildup of systemic risk, it would benefit directly from the knowledge and experience of the financial supervisors and regulators represented on the council. The council could also have access to the data collected by all its agencies and, depending on the staffing decisions, could either coordinate or conduct systemic risk analyses. ConclusionLet me close by thanking you once again for your attention to the important topic of ensuring the availability of the information necessary to monitor emergent systemic risks and establish effective macro-prudential supervisory oversight. As you know, these tasks will not be easy. However, without a well-designed infrastructure of useful and timely data and improved analytical tools--which would be expected to continue to evolve over time--these tasks will only be more difficult. We look forward to continued discussion of these issues and to a development of a shared agenda for improving our information sources. I would be happy to answer any questions you might have.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday launched a new interactive website to help consumers better understand the new credit card protections that will take effect on February 22. These rules ban several harmful practices and require greater transparency in the disclosure of the terms and conditions of credit card accounts. The site, which can be found atwww.federalreserve.gov/creditcard, summarizes the main provisions of the rules and explains how they will affect credit card users. Two interactive features will allow consumers to learn more about the terms and fees of credit card offers and about the new features of their monthly statements. "These online tools and resources will help consumers make well-informed decisions about their use of credit," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Elizabeth A. Duke. "We will update the site regularly to provide the most useful and current information." Information about recent changes in credit card rules forms the core of the site, but basic facts about common credit card options, interest rates, and fees are also provided. Consumers will find a glossary of common credit card terms for quick reference. A list of federal credit protection laws provides a basic guide for those who want to learn more about their rights. The site also provides information about common credit card problems--such as lost or stolen cards--and links to resources for consumers who are experiencing problems with their accounts. Some of the material on the site, such as the "5-Tips" publications, is available in Spanish. The Board will continue to build the site during the coming months to include additional credit card information, features, and Spanish translations. The web address for the Federal Reserve's guide to credit cards will appear on the solicitations consumers receive from credit card issuers.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday proposed clarifications to aspects of its November 2009 final rule under Regulation E (Electronic Fund Transfers) and its December 2008 final rule under Regulation DD (Truth in Savings) pertaining to overdraft services. The proposals are intended to address questions that have arisen and to provide further guidance regarding compliance with certain aspects of the final overdraft rules. In particular, the proposals would clarify that the prohibition in Regulation E on assessing overdraft fees without the consumer's affirmative consent applies to all institutions, including those with a policy and practice of declining automated teller machine (ATM) and one-time debit card transactions when an account has insufficient funds. The proposals would also make certain technical corrections and conforming amendments. The Federal Register notices are attached. Comments on the proposals must be submitted within 30 days after publication in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. Federal Registernotices:Regulation E:HTML|68 KB PDF Regulation DD:HTML|62 KB PDF
On February 8, 2010, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $50 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: The awarded loans will settle on February 11, 2010, and will mature on March 11, 2010. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EST on February 9, 2010. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on February 9, 2010, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced that in light of continued improvement in financial market conditions it had unanimously approved several modifications to the terms of its discount window lending programs. Like the closure of a number of extraordinary credit programs earlier this month, these changes are intended as a further normalization of the Federal Reserve's lending facilities. The modifications are not expected to lead to tighter financial conditions for households and businesses and do not signal any change in the outlook for the economy or for monetary policy, which remains about as it was at the January meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). At that meeting, the Committee left its target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and said it anticipates that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. The changes to the discount window facilities include Board approval of requests by the boards of directors of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks to increase the primary credit rate (generally referred to as the discount rate) from 1/2 percent to 3/4 percent. This action is effective on February 19. In addition, the Board announced that, effective on March 18, the typical maximum maturity for primary credit loans will be shortened to overnight. Primary credit is provided by Reserve Banks on a fully secured basis to depository institutions that are in generally sound condition as a backup source of funds. Finally, the Board announced that it had raised the minimum bid rate for the Term Auction Facility (TAF) by 1/4 percentage point to 1/2 percent. The final TAF auction will be on March 8, 2010. Easing the terms of primary credit was one of the Federal Reserve's first responses to the financial crisis. On August 17, 2007, the Federal Reserve reduced the spread of the primary credit rate over the FOMC's target for the federal funds rate to 1/2 percentage point, from 1 percentage point, and lengthened the typical maximum maturity from overnight to 30 days. On December 12, 2007, the Federal Reserve created the TAF to further improve the access of depository institutions to term funding. On March 16, 2008, the Federal Reserve lowered the spread of the primary credit rate over the target federal funds rate to 1/4 percentage point and extended the maximum maturity of primary credit loans to 90 days. Subsequently, in response to improving conditions in wholesale funding markets, on June 25, 2009, the Federal Reserve initiated a gradual reduction in TAF auction sizes. As announced on November 17, 2009, and implemented on January 14, 2010, the Federal Reserve began the process of normalizing the terms on primary credit by reducing the typical maximum maturity to 28 days. The increase in the discount rate announced Thursday widens the spread between the primary credit rate and the top of the FOMC's 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate to 1/2 percentage point. The increase in the spread and reduction in maximum maturity will encourage depository institutions to rely on private funding markets for short-term creditand to use the Federal Reserve's primary credit facility only as a backup source of funds. The Federal Reserve will assess over time whether further increases in the spread are appropriate in view of experience with the 1/2 percentage point spread.
The Federal Reserve on Monday launched a website to help new bank directors learn how they can work to ensure the safety and soundness of their institutions. The website, BankDirectorsDesktop.org, also provides a refresher course for experienced board members. BankDirectorsDesktop.orgis tailored to directors of community banks and features online training and other resources to help directors better understand the issues and challenges associated with serving on a bank's board. The website includes links to the "Training for Bank Directors" interactive course and the latest edition ofBasics for Bank Directors, a comprehensive guide to directors' roles and responsibilities. "Many people who are asked to serve on bank boards have little training or experience to prepare them for their new roles," said Patrick M. Parkinson, director of the Federal Reserve Board's Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation. "This website has been developed with new directors in mind, but there is plenty of useful information for those who have already spent time on bank boards."
On February 8, 2010, the Federal Reserve will offer $50 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction Parameters Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EST on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. EST on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Statement as prepared for delivery. The hearing was postponed due to inclement weather. Chairmen Frank and Watt, Ranking Members Bachus and Paul, and other members of the Committee and Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve's strategy for exiting from the extraordinary lending and monetary policies that it implemented to combat the financial crisis and support economic activity. Broadly speaking, the Federal Reserve's response to the crisis and the recession can be divided into two parts. First, our financial system during the past 2-1/2 years has experienced periods of intense panic and dysfunction, during which private short-term funding became difficult or impossible to obtain for many borrowers. The pulling back of private liquidity at times threatened the stability of major financial institutions and markets and severely disrupted normal channels of credit. In its role as liquidity provider of last resort, the Federal Reserve developed a number of programs to provide well-secured, mostly short-term credit to the financial system. These programs, which imposed no cost on the taxpayer, were a critical part of the government's efforts to stabilize the financial system and restart the flow of credit.1As financial conditions have improved, the Federal Reserve has substantially phased out these lending programs. Second, after reducing short-term interest rates nearly to zero, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) provided additional monetary policy stimulus through large-scale purchases of Treasury and agency securities. These asset purchases, which had the additional effect of substantially increasing the reserves that depository institutions hold with the Federal Reserve Banks, have helped lower interest rates and spreads in the mortgage market and other key credit markets, thereby promoting economic growth. Although at present the U.S. economy continues to require the support of highly accommodative monetary policies, at some point the Federal Reserve will need to tighten financial conditions by raising short-term interest rates and reducing the quantity of bank reserves outstanding. We have spent considerable effort in developing the tools we will need to remove policy accommodation, and we are fully confident that at the appropriate time we will be able to do so effectively. Liquidity ProgramsWith the onset of the crisis in the late summer and fall of 2007, the Federal Reserve aimed to ensure that sound financial institutions had sufficient access to short-term credit to remain sufficiently liquid and able to lend to creditworthy customers, even as private sources of liquidity began to dry up. To improve the access of banks to backup liquidity, the Federal Reserve reduced the spread over the target federal funds rate of the discount rate--the rate at which the Fed lends to depository institutions through its discount window--from 100 basis points to 25 basis points, and extended the maximum maturity of discount window loans, which had generally been limited to overnight, to 90 days. Many banks, however, were evidently concerned that if they borrowed from the discount window, and that fact somehow became known to market participants, they would be perceived as weak and, consequently, might come under further pressure from creditors. To address this so-called stigma problem, the Federal Reserve created a new discount window program, the Term Auction Facility (TAF). Under the TAF, the Federal Reserve has regularly auctioned large blocks of credit to depository institutions. For various reasons, including the competitive format of the auctions, the TAF has not suffered the stigma of conventional discount window lending and has proved effective for injecting liquidity into the financial system.2 Liquidity pressures in financial markets were not limited to the United States, and intense strains in the global dollar funding markets began to spill over to U.S. markets. In response, the Federal Reserve entered into temporary currency swap agreements with major foreign central banks. Under these agreements, the Federal Reserve provided dollars to foreign central banks in exchange for an equally valued quantity of foreign currency; the foreign central banks, in turn, lent the dollars to banks in their own jurisdictions. The swaps helped reduce stresses in global dollar funding markets, which in turn helped to stabilize U.S. markets. Importantly, the swaps were structured so that the Federal Reserve bore no foreign exchange risk or credit risk.3 As the financial crisis spread, the continuing pullback of private funding contributed to the illiquid and even chaotic conditions in financial markets and prompted runs on various types of financial institutions, including primary dealers and money market mutual funds.4To arrest these runs and help stabilize the broader financial system, the Federal Reserve used its emergency lending authority under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act--an authority not used since the Great Depression--to provide short-term backup funding to certain nondepository institutions through a number of temporary facilities.5For example, in March 2008 the Federal Reserve created the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, which lent to primary dealers on an overnight, overcollateralized basis. Subsequently, the Federal Reserve created facilities that proved effective in helping to stabilize other key institutions and markets, including money market mutual funds, the commercial paper market, and the asset-backed securities market. As was intended, use of many of the Federal Reserve's lending facilities has declined sharply as financial conditions have improved.6Some facilities were closed over the course of 2009, and most other facilities expired at the beginning of this month. As of today, the only facilities still in operation that offer credit to multiple institutions, other than the regular discount window, are the TAF (the auction facility for depository institutions) and the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF), which has supported the market for asset-backed securities, such as those that are backed by auto loans, credit card loans, small business loans, and student loans. These two facilities will also be phased out soon: The Federal Reserve has announced that the final TAF auction will be conducted on March 8, and the TALF is scheduled to close on March 31 for loans backed by all types of collateral except newly issued commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) and on June 30 for loans backed by newly issued CMBS.7 In addition, the Federal Reserve is in the process of normalizing the terms of regular discount window loans. We have reduced the maximum maturity of discount window loans to 28 days, from 90 days, and we will consider whether further reductions in the maximum loan maturity are warranted. Also, before long, we expect to consider a modest increase in the spread between the discount rate and the target federal funds rate. These changes, like the closure of a number of lending facilities earlier this month, should be viewed as further normalization of the Federal Reserve's lending facilities, in light of the improving conditions in financial markets; they are not expected to lead to tighter financial conditions for households and businesses and should not be interpreted as signaling any change in the outlook for monetary policy, which remains about as it was at the time of the January meeting of the FOMC. In summary, to help stabilize financial markets and to mitigate the effects of the crisis on the economy, the Federal Reserve established a number of temporary lending programs. Under nearly all of the programs, only short-term credit, with maturities of 90 days or less, was extended, and under all of the programs credit was overcollateralized or otherwise secured as required by law. The Federal Reserve believes that these programs were effective in supporting the functioning of financial markets and in helping to promote a resumption of economic growth. The Federal Reserve has borne no loss on these operations thus far and anticipates no loss in the future. The exit from these programs is substantially complete: Total credit outstanding under all programs, including the regular discount window, has fallen sharply from a peak of $11/2 trillion around year-end 2008 to about $110 billion last week. Separately, to prevent potentially catastrophic effects on the U.S. financial system and economy, and with the support of the Treasury Department, the Federal Reserve also used its emergency lending powers to help avoid the disorderly failure of two systemically important financial institutions, Bear Stearns and American International Group. Credit extended under these arrangements currently totals about $116 billion, or about 5 percent of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. The Federal Reserve expects these exposures to decline gradually over time. The Board continues to anticipate that the Federal Reserve will ultimately incur no loss on these loans as well. These loans were made with great reluctance under extreme conditions and in the absence of an appropriate alternative legal framework. To preclude any future need for the Federal Reserve to lend in similar circumstances, we strongly support the establishment of a statutory regime for the safe resolution of failing, systemically important nonbank financial institutions. Monetary Policy and Asset PurchasesIn addition to supporting the functioning of financial markets, the Federal Reserve also applied an extraordinary degree of monetary policy stimulus to help counter the adverse effects of the financial crisis on the economy. In September 2007, the Federal Reserve began reducing its target for the federal funds rate from an initial level of 5-1/4 percent. By late 2008, this target reached a range of 0 to 1/4 percent, essentially the lowest feasible level. With its conventional policy arsenal exhausted and the economy remaining under severe stress, the Federal Reserve decided to provide additional stimulus through large-scale purchases of federal agency debt and mortgage-backed securities (MBS) that are fully guaranteed by federal agencies. In March 2009, the Federal Reserve expanded its purchases of agency securities and began to purchase longer-term Treasury securities as well. All told, the Federal Reserve purchased $300 billion of Treasury securities and currently anticipates concluding purchases of $1.25 trillion of agency MBS and about $175 billion of agency debt securities at the end of March. The Federal Reserve's purchases have had the effect of leaving the banking system in a highly liquid condition, with U.S. banks now holding more than $1.1 trillion of reserves with Federal Reserve Banks. A range of evidence suggests that these purchases and the associated creation of bank reserves have helped improve conditions in private credit markets and put downward pressure on longer-term private borrowing rates and spreads. The FOMC anticipates that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. In due course, however, as the expansion matures the Federal Reserve will need to begin to tighten monetary conditions to prevent the development of inflationary pressures. The Federal Reserve has a number of tools that will enable it to firm the stance of policy at the appropriate time. Most importantly, in October 2008 the Congress gave the Federal Reserve statutory authority to pay interest on banks' holdings of reserve balances. By increasing the interest rate on reserves, the Federal Reserve will be able to put significant upward pressure on all short-term interest rates, as banks will not supply short-term funds to the money markets at rates significantly below what they can earn by holding reserves at the Federal Reserve Banks. Actual and prospective increases in short-term interest rates will be reflected in turn in longer-term interest rates and in financial conditions more generally.8 The Federal Reserve has also been developing a number of additional tools it will be able to use to reduce the large quantity of reserves held by the banking system. Reducing the quantity of reserves will lower the net supply of funds to the money markets, which will improve the Federal Reserve's control of financial conditions by leading to a tighter relationship between the interest rate on reserves and other short-term interest rates. One such tool is reverse repurchase agreements (reverse repos), a method that the Federal Reserve has used historically as a means of absorbing reserves from the banking system. In a reverse repo, the Federal Reserve sells a security to a counterparty with an agreement to repurchase the security at some date in the future. The counterparty's payment to the Federal Reserve has the effect of draining an equal quantity of reserves from the banking system. Recently, by developing the capacity to conduct such transactions in the triparty repo market, the Federal Reserve has enhanced its ability to use reverse repos to absorb very large quantities of reserves. The capability to carry out these transactions with primary dealers, using our holdings of Treasury and agency debt securities, has already been tested and is currently available. To further increase its capacity to drain reserves through reverse repos, the Federal Reserve is also in the process of expanding the set of counterparties with which it can transact and developing the infrastructure necessary to use its MBS holdings as collateral in these transactions. As a second means of draining reserves, the Federal Reserve is also developing plans to offer to depository institutions term deposits, which are roughly analogous to certificates of deposit that the institutions offer to their customers. The Federal Reserve would likely auction large blocks of such deposits, thus converting a portion of depository institutions' reserve balances into deposits that could not be used to meet their very short-term liquidity needs and could not be counted as reserves. A proposal describing a term deposit facility was recently published in theFederal Register, and we are currently analyzing the public comments that have been received. After a revised proposal is reviewed by the Board, we expect to be able to conduct test transactions this spring and to have the facility available if necessary shortly thereafter. Reverse repos and the deposit facility would together allow the Federal Reserve to drain hundreds of billions of dollars of reserves from the banking system quite quickly, should it choose to do so. The Federal Reserve also has the option of redeeming or selling securities as a means of applying monetary restraint. A reduction in securities holdings would have the effect of further reducing the quantity of reserves in the banking system as well as reducing the overall size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. The sequencing of steps and the combination of tools that the Federal Reserve uses as it exits from its currently very accommodative policy stance will depend on economic and financial developments. One possible sequence would involve the Federal Reserve continuing to test its tools for draining reserves on a limited basis, in order to further ensure preparedness and to give market participants a period of time to become familiar with their operation. As the time for the removal of policy accommodation draws near, those operations could be scaled up to drain more significant volumes of reserve balances to provide tighter control over short-term interest rates. The actual firming of policy would then be implemented through an increase in the interest rate paid on reserves. If economic and financial developments were to require a more rapid exit from the current highly accommodative policy, however, the Federal Reserve could increase the interest rate paid on reserves at about the same time it commences significant draining operations. I currently do not anticipate that the Federal Reserve will sell any of its security holdings in the near term, at least until after policy tightening has gotten under way and the economy is clearly in a sustainable recovery. However, to help reduce the size of our balance sheet and the quantity of reserves, we are allowing agency debt and MBS to run off as they mature or are prepaid. The Federal Reserve is currently rolling over all maturing Treasury securities, but in the future it may choose not to do so in all cases. In the long run, the Federal Reserve anticipates that its balance sheet will shrink toward more historically normal levels and that most or all of its security holdings will be Treasury securities. Although passively redeeming agency debt and MBS as they mature or are prepaid will move us in that direction, the Federal Reserve may also choose to sell securities in the future when the economic recovery is sufficiently advanced and the FOMC has determined that the associated financial tightening is warranted. Any such sales would be at a gradual pace, would be clearly communicated to market participants, and would entail appropriate consideration of economic conditions. As a result of the very large volume of reserves in the banking system, the level of activity and liquidity in the federal funds market has declined considerably, raising the possibility that the federal funds rate could for a time become a less reliable indicator than usual of conditions in short-term money markets. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve is considering the utility, during the transition to a more normal policy configuration, of communicating the stance of policy in terms of another operating target, such as an alternative short-term interest rate. In particular, it is possible that the Federal Reserve could for a time use the interest rate paid on reserves, in combination with targets for reserve quantities, as a guide to its policy stance, while simultaneously monitoring a range of market rates. No decision has been made on this issue; we will be guided in part by the evolution of the federal funds market as policy accommodation is withdrawn. The Federal Reserve anticipates that it will eventually return to an operating framework with much lower reserve balances than at present and with the federal funds rate as the operating target for policy.9 ConclusionTo sum up, in response to severe threats to our economy, the Federal Reserve created a series of special lending facilities to stabilize the financial system and encourage the resumption of private credit flows. As market conditions and the economic outlook have improved, many of these programs have been terminated or are being phased out. The Federal Reserve also promoted economic recovery through sharp reductions in its target for the federal funds rate and through purchases of securities. The economy continues to require the support of accommodative monetary policies. However, we have been working to ensure that we have the tools to reverse, at the appropriate time, the currently very high degree of monetary stimulus. We have full confidence that, when the time comes, we will be ready to do so. 1.Indeed, when the final accounting is complete, these programs are likely to generate significant positive returns for taxpayers. Of course, stabilization of the financial system, not profit, was the principal goal of the programs.Return to text 2.Another possible reason that the TAF has not suffered from stigma is that auctions are not settled for several days, which signals to the market that auction participants do not face an immediate shortage of funds.Return to text 3.In particular, foreign central banks, not the Federal Reserve, bore the credit risk associated with the foreign central banks' dollar-denominated loans to financial institutions.Return to text 4.Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.Return to text 5.Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act authorizes Reserve Banks to lend to individuals, partnerships, and corporations in "unusual and exigent circumstances" as determined by the Board of Governors. The Federal Reserve invoked Section 13(3) on two occasions during the 1960s to establish lending facilities for savings associations; however, no credit was extended through either facility.Return to text 6.In designing its facilities, the Federal Reserve in many cases incorporated features--such as pricing that was unattractive under normal financial conditions--aimed at encouraging borrowers to reduce their use of the facilities as financial conditions returned to normal. In the case of other facilities, particularly those that made available fixed amounts of credit through auctions, the Federal Reserve has gradually reduced offered amounts.Return to text 7.The TALF extends three- and five-year loans, which will remain outstanding after the facility closes for new loans. The extension of the CMBS portion of the facility reflects the Board's assessment that conditions in that sector remain highly stressed, as well as the fact that CMBS securitizations are more complex and take longer to arrange than other types.Return to text 8.Increases in the interest rate paid on reserves are unlikely to prove a net subsidy to banks, as the higher return on reserve balances will be offset by similar increases in banks' funding costs. Indeed, on balance, banks' net interest margins will likely decline when short-term rates rise.Return to text 9.The authority to pay interest on reserves is likely to be an important component of the future operating framework for monetary policy. For example, one approach is for the Federal Reserve to bracket its target for the federal funds rate with the discount rate above and the interest rate on excess reserves below. Under this so-called corridor system, the ability of banks to borrow at the discount rate would tend to limit upward spikes in the federal funds rate, and the ability of banks to earn interest at the excess reserves rate would tend to contain downward movements. Other approaches are also possible. Given the very high level of reserve balances currently in the banking system, the Federal Reserve has ample time to consider the best long-run framework for policy implementation. The Federal Reserve believes it is possible that, ultimately, its operating framework will allow the elimination of minimum reserve requirements, which impose costs and distortions on the banking system.Return to text
Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, New York It is a pleasure to participate in this year's U.S. Monetary Policy Forum. To begin the discussion of regulatory reform, I will first explain my view that the imperative for financial regulatory reform has much deeper roots than the imprudent mortgage lending, tightly wound wholesale financing channels, and other factors that were direct contributors to the recent financial crisis. Next, I will summarize the status of the reform proposals to address systemic risk, as well as the changes that are already in train, before ending with a few observations on the relationship between the scope of the systemic risk problem and the reform agenda. The Roots of the Financial CrisisIt is interesting and important to inquire carefully into the immediate causes of the financial crisis. But an appropriately tailored response must begin by recognizing that the crisis arose following profound changes in both the organization and regulation of financial markets that began in the 1970s. Starting in 1933, the New Deal established a regulatory system that largely confined commercial banks to traditional lending activities within a circumscribed geographic area, with attendant limits on price competition and a federal deposit insurance backstop meant to forestall bank runs. This approach fostered a commercial banking system that was, for the better part of 40 years, quite stable and reasonably profitable, though not particularly innovative in meeting the needs of depositors and borrowers. The turbulent macroeconomic developments of the 1970s, along with technological and business innovations, helped produce an increasingly tight squeeze on the traditional commercial banking business model. The squeeze came on both the liability side of bank balance sheets, in the form of more-attractive savings vehicles such as money market mutual funds, and on the asset side, with the growth of public capital markets and international competition. Large commercial banks reacted, among other ways, by seeking removal or relaxation of the regulations that confined bank activities, affiliations, and geographic reach--a request to which supervisory agencies and legislators were generally sympathetic because of the potential threat to the viability of the traditional commercial banking system. The period of relative legal and industry stability that followed the New Deal legislation thus gave way in the 1970s to a nearly 30-year period during which many prevailing restrictions on banks were relaxed, both through administrative action by the bank regulatory agencies and through a series of legislative changes culminating in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999. By the turn of the century, the Depression-era cluster of restrictions on commercial banks had been replaced by a regulatory environment in which they could operate nationally, conduct a much broader range of activities, and affiliate with virtually any kind of financial firm. These changes enabled a series of acquisitions that resulted in a number of very large, highly complex financial holding companies centered on large commercial banks. At the same time, independent investment banks had grown into a group of very large, complex, and highly leveraged firms. Of course, financial engineering had been rapidly changing the character of the financial services sector as a whole. Among other things, securitization and associated derivative instruments were merging capital markets and traditional lending activities, thereby fueling the growth of the shadow banking system. The regulatory system had also evolved, notably through progressively more detailed capital requirements and increasing demands that banking organizations enhance their own risk-management systems. Supervisors counted on capital and risk management to be supple tools that could ensure stability even as financial activities changed rapidly. Truthfully, though, there was no wholesale transformation of financial regulation to match the dramatic changes in the structure and activities of the financial industry. In particular, the regulatory system did not come close to adequately accounting for the effects of securitization and other capital market activities on both traditional banking and systemic risk. Meanwhile, as shown by the intervention of the government when Bear Stearns and American International Group were failing, and by the repercussions from the failure of Lehman Brothers, the universe of financial firms that appeared too big to fail during periods of stress included more than insured depository institutions and, indeed, reached beyond the circle of firms subject to mandatory prudential regulation. The extension of funds by the Treasury Department from the Troubled Asset Relief Program and of guarantees by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) from the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program to each of the nation's largest institutions revealed the government's conclusion in the fall of 2008 that a very real threat to the nation's entire financial system was best addressed by shoring up the largest financial firms. Regulatory Reform: The Consensus to DateThe crisis thus arose against the backdrop of a regulatory system that had not adjusted to the extensive integration of traditional lending with capital market activities, which had created new sources of systemic risk. The already significant too-big-to-fail problem was further amplified by the government's actions in 2008 to prevent a complete collapse of the financial system. The internal information and risk-management systems of many financial firms were revealed as inadequate to the task of identifying the scope of market and credit risks, much less ensuring the soundness of those firms, in a period of severe stress. Proposed reforms to counteract systemic risk should, both individually and as a whole, be evaluated by reference to these quite fundamental deficiencies in the regulatory system. Despite substantial disagreements over some reform proposals--such as the creation of an independent consumer financial services protection agency and the possible reallocation of responsibilities among the regulatory agencies--a fair degree of consensus has been reached on some elements of a legislative reform package. Accordingly, and with full recognition that there are still important differences on the specifics of the legislation, my summary of the reform agenda as it has evolved to this point will include some proposed legislative elements, as well as various administrative measures being pursued by the regulatory agencies under existing statutory authority. It is perhaps instructive to organize this agenda by reference to the "three pillars" of financial regulation enunciated by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision--minimum prudential requirements, supervisory oversight, and market discipline. Although the Basel Committee formulated the three-pillar approach in the context of the Basel II arrangement for capital requirements, this frame of reference can also be applied to the broader set of reform measures. As tominimum prudential rules, U.S. banking agencies are joining with our international counterparts in the Basel Committee to modify capital and liquidity requirements. Increased capital requirements for trading activities and securitization exposures have already been agreed. A consultative paper issued late last year advances additional capital proposals, including improvements in the quality of capital used to satisfy minimum capital rules, with a particular emphasis on the importance of common equity, and a first set of measures designed to reduce the traditional pro-cyclicality of capital requirements.1Additional work on capital requirements for market risk is also under way. Finally, the bank regulatory agencies are implementing strengthened guidance on liquidity risk management and weighing proposals for quantitative liquidity requirements. To a considerable extent, these changes strengthen rules that existed prior to the crisis and thus build on existing approaches, even as they underscore the problems with the pre-crisis regulatory regime. Several potential regulatory devices with a more direct systemic focus have also garnered substantial interest, both here and abroad. Prominent among them are proposals to (1) impose special taxes or capital charges on firms based on their systemic importance, (2) require systemically important firms to issue or maintain contingent capital instruments that would convert to common equity in periods of stress, and (3) reduce pro-cyclical tendencies by establishing special capital buffers that would be built up in boom times and drawn down as conditions deteriorate. Each of these ideas has substantial appeal, but, as has become clear, each also presents considerable challenges in the transition from a good idea to a fully elaborated regulatory mechanism. Many legislative proposals would extend the perimeter of regulation so that rules designed to promote financial stability would apply to firms that currently are not subject to prudential regulation because they do not own a commercial bank. The legislation passed by the House, for example, would subject any firm whose failure could have serious systemic consequences to consolidated supervision, including minimum capital and liquidity requirements. Supervisory oversightis being reoriented in several notable ways. As I mentioned earlier, the crisis revealed the serious shortcomings in the risk-management systems of many large firms. As we found during the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program that the Federal Reserve led early last year, the risk-management prerequisite of good information management was simply lacking at many firms. Accordingly, we are placing increased emphasis on the ability of firms to assess their own capital needs, particularly in periods of stress, both to supplement minimum capital requirements and to ensure that relevant information on firm risks is readily available to supervisors. More fundamentally, the supervisory perspective of the Federal Reserve has been refocused by modifying the scope of consolidated supervision and by coordinating much more closely the supervision of our largest financial institutions. In the years preceding the crisis, supervision of bank holding companies was principally focused on protecting the commercial banks within a holding company. Too little attention was paid to the risks faced, and created, by the entire holding company, including in affiliates principally involved in trading and other capital market activities. Supervisory attention is now focused on the risks that may develop anywhere within large holding companies, regardless of whether there is an immediate threat to the federally insured bank. Legislative proposals to remove the Gramm-Leach-Bliley constraints placed on the Federal Reserve's ability to obtain information from, and address unsafe and unsound practices in, the subsidiaries of bank holding companies would make this supervisory reorientation more effective. We are also instituting a more closely coordinated system for supervising some of the largest holding companies that will, in effect, establish a cross-firm, horizontal perspective as an ongoing organizing supervisory principle. This new approach will have a macroprudential dimension as well. To advance both macroprudential and microprudential goals, we are instituting a quantitative surveillance mechanism (QSM) for large, complex financial organizations. The QSM will use supervisory information, firm-specific data analysis, and market-based indicators to identify developing strains and imbalances that may affect multiple institutions, as well as emerging risks to specific firms. Periodic scenario analyses across large firms will enhance our understanding of the potential effects of adverse changes in the operating environment on individual firms and on the system as a whole. Market disciplinehas been an underdeveloped policy tool despite numerous ideas put forth over the years. Yet it is hard to imagine a practical counterstrategy to the undesirable consequences of too-big-to-fail perceptions that does not include a credible alternative to the current Hobson's choice of bailout or disorderly bankruptcy. Consequently, most regulatory reform proposals have prominently featured a special resolution mechanism that would raise the real prospect of losses for investors and counterparties of even the largest failing institutions. At present, of course, the law provides the FDIC with authority to resolve failed insured depository institutions, but there is no parallel authority for the holding companies of which these banks are a part or for other systemically important financial firms. Regulatory Reform: The Ongoing DebateThe rough consensus around the reform elements just described has hardly meant an end to the debate for at least three reasons. First, as already noted, there is considerable continuing disagreement over the key features of some of these proposals, even when the basic idea is accepted. The significant differences over the best form of resolution mechanism provide one example. Second, as also mentioned earlier, some ideas that may be promising ideas in concept--such as special charges calibrated to the systemic importance of a firm--are not easy to develop and put into practice effectively. Until more-detailed proposals are generated, judgments on the likely efficacy of these ideas will obviously be difficult to make. Third, many participants in the public policy debate who would agree with some form of this consensus agenda nonetheless believe that it falls short of what is needed to ensure financial stability. Those who believe that additional regulatory measures are necessary have mostly turned to structural measures, as distinguished from the prudential requirements, supervisory initiatives, and market discipline proposals that constitute the bulk of the consensus reform agenda. One approach is to reverse the 30-year trend that allowed progressively more financial activities within commercial banks and more affiliations with nonbank financial firms. The idea, promoted by former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker and now endorsed by the Administration, is to insulate insured depository institutions from proprietary trading or similar capital market activities that are thought to pose unusually high risks for institutions or, more precisely, for the federal safety net provided to insured banks. A second approach is to directly regulate more financial products and practices, whether or not the firms involved in the transactions are subject to prudential supervision. To an extent, this approach is reflected in the House bill and other proposals that would require standardized over-the-counter derivatives to be cleared through central counterparties or traded on exchanges. Some proponents favor going beyond this market requirement to prohibit or significantly constrain the use of other products or practices. A third approach is to attack the bigness problem head-on by limiting the size or interconnectedness of financial institutions. The more muscular forms of this approach would break up some existing institutions in a manner somewhat reminiscent of breakups of AT&T in 1982 or Standard Oil in 1911 under the antitrust laws. A somewhat less sweeping variant would prevent firms from growing beyond a certain size or in a way that would significantly increase their systemic importance, including through acquisitions. The Administration's recent proposals contain an example of the second form, with a cap on the percentage of total financial industry liabilities that could be held by any one firm. The House bill has examples of both forms, as it grants authority to a newly created council of financial regulators to dismantle a firm that poses a "grave threat" to systemic stability and to individual banking regulators to prevent acquisitions that would increase systemic risk. Regulatory Reform in PerspectiveLet me now offer a few observations on the overall effort to revamp our financial regulatory system.First, the reform process cannot be judged a success unless it substantially reduces systemic risk generally and, in particular, the too-big-to-fail problem. In using the Basel II three-pillar metaphor to classify the consensus reform agenda, I meant to underscore that this agenda is in many respects a program to build out and improve the regulatory approaches that prevailed before the crisis. The important intellectual question is whether the limitations of these approaches that have been revealed in the past can be sufficiently overcome, either within each pillar or through their combination. The fact that support for reforms of the structural variety has been growing during the past year's policy debate suggests to me that many thoughtful people have given at least a tentative negative answer to that question. Of course, the specifics of a good number of these proposals have yet to be formulated, and judgment of the merits must await their further development, insofar as the details will determine whether a proposal is likely both to be effective and to have manageable unintended consequences. Speaking personally, however, I think that we should not become unrealistically demanding in seeking specification of such proposals, particularly when a proposal itself provides for ongoing refinement. For example, my sense is that the provision in the House bill that would empower banking regulators to prevent acquisitions that would increase systemic risk could be sensibly and effectively elaborated over time. We should also be thinking more seriously about ensuring that safety and soundness requirements for some types of activities--residential mortgage lending comes to mind--apply throughout the financial system, without regard to the regulated status of the lender. Second,having just noted the promise of measures beyond what I have termed the consensus agenda, I also want to emphasize the importance of its elements. Without better capital requirements, a horizontal approach to supervising the largest financial institutions, and a sophisticated macroprudential complement to traditional bank and bank holding company supervision, the regulatory system is unlikely to deliver on a promise of greater financial stability. Similarly, legislative proposals to make a workable resolution mechanism and prudential regulation applicable to all systemically important firms are necessary to achieving the same goal. Indeed, the resolution mechanism is critical to strengthening market discipline sufficiently so that it can truly take its place alongside rules and supervisory oversight as a strong third pillar of the financial regulatory system. Third, having made the case for extensive change, I want to add a cautionary note. Even as we improve and reorient regulation, we must not lose sight of the ultimate goal. Today we are all mindful of the economic devastation that can ensue when a financial system goes badly awry. But financial stability alone is not the aim of financial regulation. It is instead a stable financial system within which capital is efficiently directed to creditworthy consumers and businesses who need it, as well as a system that offers good savings and investment vehicles for individuals and organizations. The implications of this caution are several. I will mention two. One, which we regulators have already taken to heart, is that the effect of new capital and liquidity requirements on lending, and thus on economic recovery and growth, must be carefully taken into account. This is why we urged--successfully, I am pleased to say--that the Basel Committee analyze the whole package of capital changes under consideration from a macroeconomic, as well as a microprudential, perspective before those changes are finalized. Another implication is that it will be unnecessary to apply some regulatory changes to the smaller financial institutions that are far from being able to create systemic risk on their own. ConclusionIn closing, let me say that regulatory reform will not come to a close once we have enacted our new regulations and legislation. The work of containing systemic risk and the too-big-to-fail problem will need to be adaptive. The perspectives, ideas, and criticisms of those outside the regulatory agencies will remain essential to this work, even if they can sometimes cause some discomfort for those of us within. 1.Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2009),Strengthening the Resilience of the Banking Sector--Consultative Document(Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, December).Return to text
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and other members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss incentive compensation practices in banking and financial services. Compensation practices were not the sole cause of the financial crisis, but they certainly were a contributing cause--a fact recognized by 98 percent of the respondents to survey of banking organizations engaged in wholesale banking activities conducted in 2009 by the Institute of International Finance.1 Importantly, problematic compensation practices were not limited to the most senior executives at financial firms. Compensation practices can incent even non-executive employees, either individually or as a group, to undertake imprudent risks that can significantly and adversely affect the risk profile of the firm. Moreover, the problems caused by improper compensation practices were not limited to U.S. financial firms, but were evident at major financial institutions worldwide, a fact recognized by international bodies such as the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the Senior Supervisors Group.2 Having witnessed the painful consequences that can result from misaligned incentives, many financial firms are now reexamining their compensation structures with the goal of better aligning the interests of managers and other employees with the long-term health of the firms. And we, as supervisors, have been reminded that risk-management and internal control systems alone may not be sufficient to constrain excessive risk-taking if a firm's compensation structure provides managers and employees with strong financial incentives to take undue risks. Building off of these lessons, in October of last year the Federal Reserve proposed supervisory guidance to help ensure that incentive compensation policies at banking organizations supervised by the Federal Reserve do not encourage excessive risk-taking and are consistent with the safety and soundness of the organization.3We have received helpful public comment on our guidance and expect to issue final guidance shortly. We also have commenced two supervisory initiatives designed to complement and reinforce the important goals of the guidance. One initiative is focused on large, complex banking organizations (LCBOs) and the other is tailored to smaller and regional organizations. Our actions derive from our statutory mandate to protect the safety and soundness of the banking organizations we supervise. At the same time, that mission establishes the parameters for the Federal Reserve's action in this area. Because our guidance and initiatives are focused on safety and soundness, our actions are intended to help promote the financial strength of all banking organizations over the long term, not just those that have received financial assistance from the government. The incentive compensation provisions of H.R. 4173, the Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2009, would reinforce these objectives and expand the authority of the federal banking agencies, as well as the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), to act in this key area. Importantly, H.R. 4173 would promote the uniform application of sound incentive compensation principles across large financial institutions supervised by the federal banking agencies, SEC, and FHFA. In this way, the bill would help ensure a level playing field, which is critical to the effectiveness of reforms. In my testimony, I will review how compensation practices can undermine the safety and soundness of financial institutions and how prudential supervisors can help guard against such outcomes. In addition, I will review the main principles embodied in the Federal Reserve's proposed guidance on incentive compensation and provide an update on our related supervisory initiatives that are designed to help ensure that incentive compensation programs at banking organizations do not encourage excessive risk-taking. Compensation and the Role of Prudential SupervisorsCompensation arrangements are critical tools in the successful management of financial institutions. These arrangements serve several important and worthy objectives, including attracting skilled staff, promoting better firm and employee performance, promoting employee retention, providing retirement security to employees, and allowing a firm's personnel costs to move along with revenues. It is clear, however, that compensation arrangements can provide executives and employees with incentives to take excessive risks that are not consistent with the long-term health of the organization. For example, offering large payments to managers or employees to produce sizable increases in short-term revenue or profit--without regard for the potentially substantial short- or long-term risks associated with that revenue or profit--can encourage managers or employees to take risks that are beyond the capability of the financial institution to manage and control. Prudential supervisors can play an important and constructive role in helping ensure that incentive compensation practices do not threaten the safety and soundness of financial institutions. First, supervisors can provide a common prudential foundation for incentive compensation arrangements across banking organizations. In this way, supervisors can help address collective action, or "first mover," problems that may make it difficult for individual firms to act alone in addressing misaligned incentives. The owners or managers of a single firm may be unwilling to make unilateral changes to the firm's compensation arrangements--even if they believe changes are warranted--because doing so might mean losing valuable employees and business to other firms. Second, supervisors can constructively add to the impetus for improvement in compensation practices that is already coming from shareholders. However, aligning the interests of shareholders and employees is not always sufficient to protect the safety and soundness of a banking organization. Due to the existence of the federal safety net, shareholders of a banking organization in some cases may be willing to tolerate a degree of risk that is inconsistent with the organization's safety and soundness. Thus, supervisory reviews of incentive compensation practices at banking organizations from a safety and soundness perspective are needed to protect the public's interest and the federal safety net. Federal Reserve GuidanceThe Federal Reserve has worked actively to incorporate the lessons learned from the financial crisis into our supervision activities and to promote needed improvements to incentive compensation practices within the banking industry. As mentioned earlier, in October 2009, the Federal Reserve issued, and requested public comment on, proposed supervisory guidance on incentive compensation practices at banking organizations. This guidance, which would apply to all banking organizations supervised by the Federal Reserve, is designed to help protect the safety and soundness of banking organizations and to promote the prompt improvement of incentive compensation practices throughout the banking industry.4The guidance builds on, and is consistent with, thePrinciples for Sound Compensation Practicesissued by the FSB in April 2009, as well as the implementation standards for those principles issued by the FSB in September 2009.5The Federal Reserve was instrumental in helping develop the principles and standards articulated by the FSB, and we continue to believe strongly that international consistency on this issue is important because competition among financial institutions--both for business and talent--is increasingly global in nature. The Board's guidance is based on three key principles for incentive compensation arrangements at banking organizations: (1) The arrangements should not provide employees incentives to take risks that are beyond the organization's ability to effectively identify and manage; (2) those arrangements should be compatible with effective controls and risk management; and (3) they should be supported by strong corporate governance, including active and effective oversight by the organization's board of directors. Because compensation arrangements for executive and non-executive employees alike may pose safety and soundness risks if not properly structured, these principles and our guidance would apply both to senior executives and more broadly to other employees who, either individually or as part of a group, may expose the banking organization to material risks. Let me discuss each of the three principles in a bit more detail. Balanced Risk-Taking IncentivesFirms must understand how their compensation structures create incentives and affect behavior; they also need to find ways to ensure that short-term profits are not encouraged at the expense of short- and longer-term risks to the firm. Compensation practices should not reward employees with substantial financial awards for meeting or exceeding volume, revenue, or other performance targets without due regard for the risks of the activities that allow those targets to be met. One key to achieving a more balanced approach between compensation and risk is for financial institutions to adjust compensation so that employees bear some of the risk associated with their activities and don't just share in increased profit or revenue. Employees are less likely to take an imprudent risk, for example, if their incentive payments are reduced or eliminated for activity that ends up imposing higher-than-expected losses on the firm. To be fully effective, these adjustments should take account of the full range of risks that the employees' activities may pose for the firm, including credit, market, compliance, operational, reputational, and liquidity risks. Moreover, these adjustments must be implemented in practice so that actual payments vary based on risks or risk outcomes. Firms should not only provide rewards when performance standards are met or exceeded, they should also reduce compensation when standards are not met. If senior executives or other employees are paid substantially all of their potential incentive compensation when risk outcomes are materially worse than expected, employees may be encouraged to take large risks in the hope of substantially increasing their personal compensation, knowing that their downside risks are limited. Simply put, incentive compensation arrangements should not create a "heads I win, tails the firm loses" expectation. The Board's guidance highlights several methods that banking organizations can use to adjust incentive compensation awards or payments to take account of risk. For example, one approach involves deferring some or all of an incentive compensation award and reducing the amount ultimately paid if the earnings from the transactions or business giving rise to the award turn out to be less than had been projected. Another way to improve the risk sensitivity of compensation is to take explicit account of the risk associated with a business line or employees' activities--such as loan origination or trading activities--in the performance measures or allocation methodologies that determine the amount of incentive compensation initially awarded. As the guidance recognizes, each of these methods has advantages and disadvantages. Accordingly, a banking organization may need to use more than one method to ensure that an incentive compensation arrangement does not encourage excessive risk-taking. In addition, activities and risks may vary significantly across banking organizations and across employees within a particular banking organization. For this reason, the methods used to achieve appropriately risk-sensitive compensation arrangements likely will differ across and within firms, and use of a single, formulaic approach likely will provide at least some employees with incentives to take excessive risks. For example, incentive compensation arrangements for senior executives at large, complex organizations are likely to be better balanced if they involve deferral of a substantial portion of the executives' incentive compensation over a multiyear period, with payment made in the form of stock or other equity-based instruments and with the number of instruments ultimately received dependent on the performance of the firm during the deferral period. Deferral, however, may not be effective in constraining the incentives of employees who may have the ability to expose the firm to long-term or "bad tail" risks, as these risks are unlikely to be realized during a reasonable deferral period.6Similarly, the use of equity-based incentive compensation may not be effective in aligning the incentives of mid- and lower-level employees with the interests of the firm because these employees may view the outcomes of their decisions as unlikely to have much effect on the firm or its stock price. These differences highlight the need for flexibility in approaches by financial institutions. As in many areas, one size certainly does not fit all. Indeed, there is no generally accepted view as to the optimal way to make incentive compensation arrangements appropriately risk sensitive at an individual firm or across the financial sector. The perfect, however, must not stand in the way of the good. There are many ways that large organizations can improve the risk sensitivity of their incentive compensation arrangements and move forward with improvements that are best suited to the individual firm's activities, strategy, and overall risk-management and internal control frameworks. Compatibility with Effective Controls and Risk ManagementOne important lesson learned from recent experience is that institutions can no longer view incentive compensation as being unrelated to risk management. Rather, institutions must integrate their approaches to incentive compensation arrangements with their risk-management and internal control frameworks to better monitor and control the risks these arrangements may create for the organization. Accordingly, the guidance provides that banking organizations should ensure that risk-management personnel have an appropriate role in designing incentive compensation arrangements and assessing whether the arrangements may encourage excessive risk-taking. In addition, banking organizations should track incentive compensation awards and payments, risks taken, and actual risk outcomes to determine whether incentive compensation payments to employees are reduced to reflect adverse risk outcomes If the firm's incentive compensation system is not effectively balancing risks, the firm must act quickly to adjust its compensation practices. Strong Corporate GovernanceThe board of directors of a banking organization is ultimately responsible for ensuring that the organization's incentive compensation arrangements do not jeopardize the safety and soundness of the organization. Accordingly, the board of directors must play an informed and active role in making sure that the firm's compensation arrangements strike the proper balance between risk and profit not only at the initiation of a compensation program, but on an ongoing basis. Thus, the guidance provides that the board of directors of an organization should review and approve the key elements of the firm's compensation system, receive and review periodic evaluations of whether the firm's compensation systems are achieving their risk-mitigation objectives, and directly approve the incentive compensation arrangements for senior executives. For firms that have a separate compensation committee of the board, these functions should be the primary responsibility of the compensation committee. To make this engagement most effective, the guidance provides that relevant members of the board of directors should have, or have access to, the experience, knowledge, and resources to understand and address the interactions and incentives created by compensation programs firmwide. Next StepsThe Federal Reserve has received more than 30 comments on the proposed guidance from a wide range of sources, including large and small banking organizations, labor organizations, organizations representing institutional shareholders, and individuals. Most commenters supported the guidance, although many also recommended that the guidance be modified or clarified in various ways. For example, several commenters expressed concern that the guidance could impose undue burden on small banking organizations, which typically do not use incentive compensation arrangements as extensively as large, complex organizations. We currently are working on finalizing the guidance, taking into account the comments received, and are coordinating these efforts with the other federal banking agencies. In doing so, we recognize the importance of avoiding unnecessary regulatory burden on small banking organizations. Indeed, this is why, as I will discuss in a moment, the Federal Reserve is developing a special, tailored supervisory initiative for small and regional banking organizations. Supervisory InitiativesAs a complement to our guidance, the Federal Reserve also has commenced two supervisory initiatives to spur and monitor progress toward safe and sound incentive compensation arrangements, identify emerging best practices, and advance the state of practice more generally in the industry. The first of these initiatives involves a special "horizontal" review of incentive compensation practices at the large, complex banking organizations under the Federal Reserve's supervision.7Under the second supervisory initiative, the Federal Reserve will review the incentive compensation practices of small and regional banking organizations as part of the regular risk-focused examination process for these organizations. This two-tier approach is designed to take account of the real differences between the scope and complexity of the activities, as well as the incentive compensation practices, at LCBOs and smaller banking organizations. While firms of all sizes should manage the risks created by their incentive compensation policies, LCBOs also warrant special supervisory attention because the adverse effects of flawed approaches at these institutions are more likely to have adverse effects on the broader financial system. LCBO Horizontal ReviewThe horizontal review of practices at LCBOs is an important and major supervisory exercise. It is being led by a multidisciplinary coordinating group of Federal Reserve staff that includes supervisors, economists, and legal professionals. Overall, more than 150 staff members from the Federal Reserve System have participated in these reviews to date. In addition, early on we recognized the importance of including the other federal banking agencies in the process to promote full and consistent coverage of U.S. banking organizations. Representatives of each of the other federal banking agencies have been involved in the horizontal process, totaling more than 50 individuals so far. Supervisory teams have collected substantial information--through questionnaires, documentary requests, and interviews with key executives and managers--from each LCBO concerning the firm's existing incentive compensation practices and related risk-management and corporate governance processes. In addition, each LCBO was required to submit an analysis of shortcomings or "gaps" in its existing practices relative to the principles contained in the proposed guidance, as well as plans--including timetables--for addressing any weaknesses in the firm's incentive compensation arrangements and related risk-management and corporate governance practices. While our horizontal review is ongoing, and significant variations exist across and even within firms, some broad observations--both positive and negative--can be gleaned at this stage. On the positive side, many firms, spurred by supervisors, shareholders, and others, are reexamining their incentive compensation practices and analyzing, in ways they did not before, the potential links between compensation and risk-taking behavior. As a result, some firms already have implemented changes to make their incentive compensation arrangements more risk sensitive, and all LCBOs plan improvements to their incentive compensation practices. For example, most LCBOs have implemented measures that are designed to make the incentive compensation of senior executives more sensitive to risk, most commonly by increasing the share of executives' incentive compensation that is deferred and the share that is paid in equity or equity-linked instruments. A number of firms also have expanded or plan to expand the situations under which the incentive compensation of employees can be "clawed back" to include measures specifically related to risk. In addition, risk-management functions at many firms now have a greater role in the design of incentive compensation arrangements and in the evaluation of employee performance for compensation purposes, and at many firms the board of directors is becoming more actively engaged in overseeing compensation structures for non-executive employees. With the strong encouragement of the Federal Reserve, an important shift in philosophy and approach also appears to be spreading across LCBOs. In the past, many firms, perhaps reasonably, believed that strong risk-management and control systems were all that was needed to protect an organization from undue risks, including the risks arising from unbalanced incentive compensation arrangements. However, the clear lesson from the financial crisis is that incentive compensation can no longer be viewed as being completely separate and apart from risk management. Through our work in the horizontal process, we are reemphasizing to firms that poorly balanced incentive compensation arrangements may themselves be a source of risk, and management at many firms now appears to understand that sound compensation practices complement and, indeed, are part of strong risk-management and internal control functions. Nevertheless, it is clear that substantial changes at many firms likely will be necessary to fully conform their practices with principles of safety and soundness. For example, at many firms, the measures and systems needed to make the incentive compensation of non-executive employees appropriately risk sensitive are not well advanced. And, in some cases, the deferred compensation of senior executives is still not subject to downward adjustment based on the full range of potential risks facing the organization, such as liquidity or operational risk. In addition, few firms have processes in place that would allow them to compare incentive compensation payments to risk and risk outcomes. The lack of these processes can make it difficult for firms to effectively assess whether their efforts to better align risk incentives are successful, particularly where subjective and discretionary factors play an important role in determining incentive compensation awards. Given firms' relatively unsophisticated approach to risk incentives before the crisis, the unavoidable complexity of compensation issues, and the large numbers of employees who receive incentive compensation at large banks, it should not be surprising that time will be required to implement all the improvements that are needed. Each LCBO is expected to ensure that the organization's plans are adequate to achieve incentive compensation arrangements that are consistent with safety and soundness. The Federal Reserve also expects that the organization's plans will be fully implemented in an expeditious manner. Though it will be some time before all necessary improvements are fully implemented and tested, the Federal Reserve expects organizations to make significant progress to improve the risk sensitivity of incentive compensation at LCBOs for the 2010 performance year. Other OrganizationsAs mentioned earlier, the Federal Reserve is developing tailored supervisory initiatives for regional banking organizations that are not LCBOs and for small banking organizations. Experience to date suggests that incentive compensation arrangements at small banks are not nearly as complex or prevalent as those at larger institutions. In addition, smaller banking organizations tend to have fewer layers of management and less complex operations than at LCBOs, which can make it easier for the board of directors and senior management of a firm to monitor whether its incentive compensation practices may be encouraging excessive risk-taking and, where appropriate, make adjustments to those practices. As a result, reviews of incentive compensation practices at smaller firms are more easily integrated into the normal examination process. For each set of organizations, examiners will gather a consistent set of information through regularly scheduled examinations and the normal supervisory process. Information collected from regional organizations will encompass information on their incentive compensation practices and related risk-management and corporate governance processes. The focus of the data collection effort at community banks will be to identify the types of incentive plans in place, the job types covered, and the characteristics, prevalence, and level of documentation available for those incentive plans. After comparing and analyzing the information collected, supervisory efforts and expectations will be scaled appropriately to the size and complexity of the organization and its incentive compensation arrangements. For example, a large regional organization that uses incentive compensation arrangements extensively may require additional supervisory work to understand and assess the consistency of the organization's practices with principles of safety and soundness. If practice is as expected at community banks, it is likely that very limited, if any, targeted examination work or supervisory follow-up will be required at a large portion of these organizations. In any event, the compensation-related policies and systems at community banks should be substantially less extensive, formalized, and detailed than those of larger, more complex organizations. ConclusionThank you for the opportunity to testify on this important topic. The Federal Reserve is committed to moving the banking industry forward in developing and implementing incentive compensation practices that are consistent with prudent risk management and safety and soundness. We believe our proposed guidance and supervisory initiatives are important steps toward this goal, and we look forward to working with the Congress to achieve these objectives. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. Footnotes 1.See Institute of International Finance, Inc. (2009),Compensation in Financial Services: Industry Progress and the Agenda for Change(Washington: IIF, March).Return to text 2.See Financial Stability Forum (2009),FSF Principles for Sound Compensation Practices (87 KB PDF)(Basel, Switzerland: FSF, April), available on the Financial Stability Board's website; and Senior Supervisors Group (2009),Risk Management Lessons from the Global Banking Crisis of 2008(Basel, Switzerland: SSG, October), available at Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2009), "Senior Supervisors Group Issues Report on Risk Management Practices," press release, October 21. (The Financial Stability Forum was renamed the Financial Stability Board in April 2009.)Return to text 3.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Issues Proposed Guidance on Incentive Compensation," press release, October 22.Return to text 4.These organizations include all bank holding companies, financial holding companies, state member banks, and the U.S. operations of foreign banking organizations that have a branch, agency, or commercial lending company subsidiary in the United States.Return to text 5.See Financial Stability Forum,FSF Principles for Sound Compensation Practices, in note 2; and Financial Stability Board (2009),FSB Principles for Sound Compensation Practices: Implementation Standards (35 KB PDF)(Basel, Switzerland: FSB, September).Return to text 6."Bad tail" risks are risks that have a low probability of being realized, but would have highly adverse effects on the organization if they were to be realized. These risks warrant special attention from a safety-and-soundness perspective given the threat they pose to a banking organization's solvency and the federal safety net.Return to text 7.Horizontal examinations, which the Federal Reserve has used for many years, involve a coordinated review of particular risks or activities across a group of banking organizations.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meeting on January 25, 2010. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on January 26-27, 2010. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the January 26-27, 2010 meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. Summaries of economic projections are released on an approximately quarterly schedule. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJanuary 26-27, 2010:253 KB PDF|HTML
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a Prompt Corrective Action Directive with the consent of Marco Community Bank, Marco Island, Florida, a state chartered member bank. A copy of the Directive is attached.
Governor Kevin Warsh At the New York Association for Business Economics, New York, New York Thank you to the New York Association for Business Economics for hosting me. We remain in a period of great consequence for the U.S. economy. The policy judgments currently being considered are as significant as those made during the darkest days of the Panic.1And here, I am not only referring to the appropriate conduct of monetary policy.2Fiscal, trade, and regulatory policies may turn out to be no less determinative to the path of the U.S. economy. On fiscal matters, what size government is desired, and how should it be funded? Will low sovereign funding costs and accommodative financial markets make policymakers lax in developing a credible, fiscal exit regime? And, will the costs of implicit guarantees add to sovereign debt burdens? On matters of international trade, will policymakers push to extend the post-World War II bipartisan consensus favoring free trade? If the United States declines to talk and act forcefully on the merits of open, competitive markets, who will? Will our quiet be deemed acceptance by those pushing the false promise of protectionism? And, as I will explore in the balance of my remarks, are the financial regulatory policy prescriptions proposed during the past year sufficient for meaningful reform? Will these policies mitigate the risks of future financial crises? Will they support long-term economic growth? Now is not only a time of consequence for regulation and the U.S. economy. It is also a time for choosing. A Time for ChoosingNearly 30 years ago, at another critical time of choosing--in a period of economic malaise--policymakers were reminded from many quarters of the need to keep their wits about them in making policy. A leading intellectual of the time, Irving Kristol, remarked: "Our economic problems are not intractableEconomic policies that are just a bit more sensible, especially in the areas of taxation and regulation, can make a lot of difference for the future. On the other hand, once the idea gets around that we are in a profound crisis and that only drastic action' by Washington can save us--then it will be time to head for the storm cellars."3 The financial crisis conditions of the past two years have substantially abated. Those that headed to the storm cellars have returned to see what lies in its wake. And Washington has placed itself centrally in the clean-up efforts, seeking to repair the regulatory system. This is a wholly worthwhile task. Improvements in regulatory policy--if part of a broader review of the financial architecture--could herald greater prosperity for future generations. But, efficacy, not convenience, should be the foremost goal of policymakers. And we will have done ourselves no favors if what is billed as "comprehensive regulatory reform" over-promises and under-delivers. We need a broader understanding of what occurred, more basic changes in our financial architecture, and more useful tools in our arsenal for reform efforts to be worthy of the name and equal to the challenge. Prevailing Theory of the Case: Empowering RegulatorsThe prevailing theory has it that financial firms, particularly the largest and most systemically significant, engaged in practices that begat the financial crisis. To redress these wrongs, regulatory powers should be substantially expanded, the theory goes. The incumbent regulators lacked sufficient authorities, or were not up to the task. But the structure in which their successors operate will purportedly make them masters of the craft. Apparently, a new grant of broad and sweeping regulatory powers will treat the infirmities that ail us. In my view, this theory has some understandable appeal--and begins to shed light on some important truths--but the narrative and recommended reforms are still deficient. Let me explain. First, the Panic of 2008 that exacerbated the recession is the result of a multitude of flawed private and public practices, with regulatory error being only one part. Some meaningful blame should be placed at the doorstep of regulators, here and abroad. But the investigation should not cease at the first signs of fault. The mortgage finance system is owed far stricter scrutiny to gather a fuller appreciation of the causes of the crisis. The government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, for example, were given license and direction to take excessive risks. They were granted conflicting missions and governed by competing masters. And their funding backstop was predicated on "constructive ambiguity," which turned out to be neither constructive nor ambiguous. Money market mutual funds, too, managed their liquidity risks in an environment of unclear support. Ultimately, if the diagnosis of the crisis fails to account for some of the broader failings of public policy, of which the GSEs are just one part, the prescription is unlikely to be effective. Second, the regulatory reform discussion of the past year seems overly preoccupied with questions of institutional design. There are doubtless efficiencies to be gained in sharing best practices, integrating operations, and minimizing regulatory gaps among regulators. But, it is far from obvious that real regulatory reform hinges on figuring the optimal number of regulators, or the precise composition of an oversight council. I happen to believe that the Federal Reserve should play a critical role in the supervision of financial firms, but that should not obfuscate the larger point. If real reform were chiefly about the number of financial regulators in Washington--or even the precise relationships between financial regulation and the role of the central bank--we should find an institutional design among major financial centers around the world that lived up to its promise. We find no such example. Policymakers, in my view, should be more focused onwhatconstitutes effective prudential supervision, rather than be diverted to the less consequential discussion as towhoshould perform it. Third, some of the reform measures advocated over the past year could risk re-creating the status quoante. But the status quoantewill no longer do. There is no going home again. If policymakers had gone into the crisis with the resolution authority to shut down non-banks and complex bank holding companies quickly, we might well have had better options to ensure an orderly disposition of failing firms. Placing this arrow in our quiver now, however, is not enough to arm us for the challenges ahead. Granting new powers to resolve failing firms in the discretionary hands of regulators is unlikely, in the near-term, to drive the market discipline required to avoid the recurrence of financial crises. To be clear: New resolution authority is a welcome step forward, but its efficacy should not be overstated. And this authority could be made more credible by replicating, as much as practicable, well-understood bankruptcy protocols. This replication would provide clearer rules of the road for classes of creditors in advance of any resolution. Still, the financial architecture requires additional reforms to mitigate the too-big-to-fail problem. Preferred Theory of the Case: Resurrecting Market Discipline to Redress Too-Big-To-FailMoral hazard in the financial system is higher than any of us should countenance. There is a high burden on policymakers to mitigate it. Some newly-empowered and untested regulatory structure is not likely--in and of itself--to be sufficient to tackle institutions that are too-big-to-fail, particularly as memories of the crisis fade. Regulation is too important to be left to regulators alone. We must resurrect market discipline as a complementary pillar of prudential supervision. Otherwise, the too-big-to-fail problem--exacerbated by recent events--could undermine our financial system and do long-term harm to the real economy. The growing specter of government support threatens to weaken market discipline, confuse price signals, and create a class of institutions that operate under different rules of the game. This state is not acceptable. We need a system in which insolvent firms fail. Market discipline only works if governments can demonstrably and credibly commit to allow firms to fail. This system isn't just about giving government officials better options on Sunday nights. It is about making sure that market discipline is operative in the prior months and years to avoid altogether the proverbial Sunday night judgments. I don't preach the infallibility of market discipline in policing risks. Market discipline, like regulatory discipline, is imperfect. It too has a tendency to become lax late in economic booms and excessively tight in busts. But, a system must be designed so that market discipline works--not to the exclusion of regulatory discipline--but in support of it. They should serve as complementary pillars, bolstering one another as needed. So, how do we design a new financial architecture that--in addition to improved resolution authority--more squarely confronts the too-big-to-fail problem? It isn't simple or easy or ripe for a quick-fix. But, we cannot afford to be discouraged. The stakes are too high. First, in order to resurrect market discipline from the ash-heap of the recent crisis, stakeholders--that is, shareholders, creditors, and regulators alike--need better, more timely information about financial firms. Information-sharing is growing exponentially in all aspects of human endeavor. Financial firm disclosures should be no exception. Asset quality and funding sources for financial firms must be more understandable and readily comparable among peers. Stakeholders can then make better informed judgments of potential risks and rewards. Markets can help effectively discipline the behavior of firms by re-pricing funding costs as perceived risks change.4And regulators can use market prices and changes in funding mix, among other information, to evaluate whether firms are being evaluated independent of government backing. The stress tests led by the Federal Reserve in early 2009 were testament to the need for improved public information about firms' financial position. Market functioning and credit and capital availability improved markedly after the Federal Reserve's detailed, cross-firm comparisons were made public. This is no coincidence. Second, reforms must encourage robust competition. Market entry and market exit can be a more effective means of developing a stronger, more resilient financial system. The too-big-to-fail problem could be mitigated if smaller, dynamic firms seized market share from less nimble incumbents. This is no pipe dream in 2010. Many old relationships between firms and clients were uprooted during the crisis. Customers--institutional and retail--are seeking new ways of doing business and new firms with which to transact. The financial services industry is ripe for a healthy dose of creative destruction. But, this won't happen if policy divides firms that are too-big-to-fail from those that are not. It won't happen if select incumbents have permanent funding advantages. And, it won't happen if policy preferences deter would-be competitors from taking on the big guys. Policy for all firms must be anchored, not left adrift, for competition to take root. Competition is undermined when a privileged class of financial firms has the implicit support of the government. No firm ought to be entitled to favored consideration by regulators or government policy. No rating agency. No mortgage finance entity. No dealer or underwriter. And no bank. The tempting top-down approach to level the playing field is to bully or co-opt our largest, most interconnected firms. In my view, however, robust competition from the bottom-up is the better way forward. Third, stronger capital and liquidity buffers, more effective boards of directors, and more rigorous risk-management practices are important safeguards. And, here, there has been some substantial progress. But additionally, firms should have the burden of persuasion to demonstrate that they can fail without need for extraordinary government support. Simplifying corporate forms and structures so firms can quickly be unwound, particularly across borders, would be a welcome development. In a global economy with integrated financial markets, big is not bad. But, greater dispersion of assets and liabilities demands unprecedented international cooperation. U.S. leadership is critical to establish the new rules of a new financial architecture. Policy coordination with our Group of 20 colleagues should not take a backseat. Alternative Theory of the Case: If Too-Big-To-Fail PrevailsWe should not fool ourselves. Government interventions during the past couple of years, however necessary, revealed a set of policy preferences. Expectations hardened that governments will come to the rescue of large ailing markets and large failing firms. These expectations must be unlearned by market participants. And the government's role must be explicitly delineated. These changes won't happen overnight. But, eradicating the too-big-to-fail problem should be the predominant policy goal. If we fail to achieve this critical objective, the next-best regime may involve choosing a point between two competing models for systemically-significant firms: regulatingwhatfinancial institutions can do, and regulatinghowthey do it.5Clear rules--more focused on the "what"than the "how"--could liberate firms from the corridors of Washington so they can get back to business. Supervisors, of course, would still serve an important role, leaning against the prevailing winds, providing guidance to firms, and ensuring best practices. But, Washington would steer clear of managing the affairs of private firms. Obscuring the choice altogether--both directing the "what" and ordering the "how"--strikes me as imprudent. Washington finds itself perhaps too interested in scrutinizing the day-to-day management and operations of financial firms. Are they loaning too little to small businesses? Too much to big developers? Are loans to large corporations too cheap? And loans to consumers too expensive? The tendency by Washington to micromanage can harm an economy that desperately needs a competitive, vibrant, sustainable banking system. Rule-based regimes on issues of capital and liquidity--even on scope--are inevitably crude and imperfect. And to be effective, these rules would need to reduce systemic risks meaningfully. Still, this regime strikes me as superior to one in which our financial firms are micromanaged as quasi-public utilities, subject to the changing preferences of Washington and immunized from real competition. The U.S. economy runs grave risks if we slouch toward a quasi-public utility model. I worry that some systemically significant firms may end up willing to accept new, permanent government masters and supplementary public purposes in order to protect their status. Apportioning economic rents to appease the official sector may appear rational to some firms. But, it is destructive to the financial and economic system overall. We should not want clients of the state at the core of our financial system. We do not want some new social contract between government and large banks. Now more than ever, we need more private firms competing to serve client needs and make markets. ConclusionThe standing of market-oriented principles is being severely tested. Our policy response must be worthy of this challenge, and so should necessarily be broader in scope than some new team of financial regulators with new powers. We need a new financial architecture, one in which improved regulation and supervision play an important but co-extensive role with greater market discipline. The new architecture must stoke competition, allow failure, and reward innovation and success. The new architecture should establish the rules of the game without micromanaging the affairs of private firms. And the new architecture should not give perpetual license to select, incumbent firms to dominate the financial landscape. For in the new regime, no firm should be too big to fail. 1.Kevin Warsh (2009), "The Panic of 2008," speech delivered at the Council of Institutional Investors 2009 Spring Meeting, Washington, April 6.Return to text 2.Kevin Warsh (2009), "Longer Days, Fewer Weekends," speech delivered at the 12th Annual International Banking Conference, Chicago, Ill., September 25.Return to text 3.Irving Kristol (1980), "Two Economic Questions,"Wall Street Journal, June 26.Return to text 4.More understandable, frequent disclosures could also foster development of contingent capital securities. These securities could exertex antediscipline on firms, and then convert to common equity to absorb losses if a firm's capital position were to fall below a threshold.Return to text 5.See Paul Tucker (2009), "The Crisis Management Menu (139 KB PDF)," speech at the SUERF, CEPS and Belgian Financial Forum Conference: "Crisis Management at the Cross-Roads," held in Brussels, Belgium, November 16.Return to text
The federal financial regulatory agencies and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (the regulators) issued a statement today on prudent lending to creditworthy small business borrowers.1The regulators recognize that small businesses play an important role in the economy and know that some are experiencing difficulty in obtaining or renewing credit. The statement emphasizes that financial institutions that engage in prudent small business lending after performing a comprehensive review of a borrower's financial condition will not be subject to supervisory criticism for small business loans made on that basis. Financial institutions should understand the long-term viability of the borrower's business and focus on the strength of a borrowers' business plan to manage risk rather than using portfolio management models that rely primarily on general inputs, such as a borrower's geographic location or industry. The regulators are working with the industry and supervisory staff to ensure that supervisory policies and actions do not inadvertently curtail the availability of credit to sound small business borrowers. The statement builds upon principles in existing guidance, including theInteragency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers2issued in November 2008 and thePolicy Statement on Prudent Commercial Real Estate Loan Workouts3issued inOctober 2009. Attachment:Interagency Statement on Meeting the Credit Needs of Creditworthy Small Business Borrowers (38 KB PDF) 1.Financial institutions should apply the principles of this statement in accordance with their internal definitions of small business loans or as appropriate in their loan portfolios. Small business lending includes loans to small businesses and farms, such as working capital lines of credit, secured and unsecured term loans, as well as unsecured revolving credit.Return to text 2.http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20081112a.htmReturn to text 3.http://www.ffiec.gov/press/pr103009.htmReturn to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Bernanke presented identical remarks before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on February 25, 2010 Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the Federal Reserve's semiannualMonetary Policy Report to the Congress. I will begin today with some comments on the outlook for the economy and for monetary policy, then touch briefly on several other important issues. The Economic OutlookAlthough the recession officially began more than two years ago, U.S. economic activity contracted particularly sharply following the intensification of the global financial crisis in the fall of 2008. Concerted efforts by the Federal Reserve, the Treasury Department, and other U.S. authorities to stabilize the financial system, together with highly stimulative monetary and fiscal policies, helped arrest the decline and are supporting a nascent economic recovery. Indeed, the U.S. economy expanded at about a 4 percent annual rate during the second half of last year. A significant portion of that growth, however, can be attributed to the progress firms made in working down unwanted inventories of unsold goods, which left them more willing to increase production. As the impetus provided by the inventory cycle is temporary, and as the fiscal support for economic growth likely will diminish later this year, a sustained recovery will depend on continued growth in private-sector final demand for goods and services. Private final demand does seem to be growing at a moderate pace, buoyed in part by a general improvement in financial conditions. In particular, consumer spending has recently picked up, reflecting gains in real disposable income and household wealth and tentative signs of stabilization in the labor market. Business investment in equipment and software has risen significantly. And international trade--supported by a recovery in the economies of many of our trading partners--is rebounding from its deep contraction of a year ago. However, starts of single-family homes, which rose noticeably this past spring, have recently been roughly flat, and commercial construction is declining sharply, reflecting poor fundamentals and continued difficulty in obtaining financing. The job market has been hit especially hard by the recession, as employers reacted to sharp sales declines and concerns about credit availability by deeply cutting their workforces in late 2008 and in 2009. Some recent indicators suggest the deterioration in the labor market is abating: Job losses have slowed considerably, and the number of full-time jobs in manufacturing rose modestly in January. Initial claims for unemployment insurance have continued to trend lower, and the temporary services industry, often considered a bellwether for the employment outlook, has been expanding steadily since October. Notwithstanding these positive signs, the job market remains quite weak, with the unemployment rate near 10 percent and job openings scarce. Of particular concern, because of its long-term implications for workers' skills and wages, is the increasing incidence of long-term unemployment; indeed, more than 40 percent of the unemployed have been out of work six months or more, nearly double the share of a year ago. Increases in energy prices resulted in a pickup in consumer price inflation in the second half of last year, but oil prices have flattened out over recent months, and most indicators suggest that inflation likely will be subdued for some time. Slack in labor and product markets has reduced wage and price pressures in most markets, and sharp increases in productivity have further reduced producers' unit labor costs. The cost of shelter, which receives a heavy weight in consumer price indexes, is rising very slowly, reflecting high vacancy rates. In addition, according to most measures, longer-term inflation expectations have remained relatively stable. The improvement in financial markets that began last spring continues. Conditions in short-term funding markets have returned to near pre-crisis levels. Many (mostly larger) firms have been able to issue corporate bonds or new equity and do not seem to be hampered by a lack of credit. In contrast, bank lending continues to contract, reflecting both tightened lending standards and weak demand for credit amid uncertain economic prospects. In conjunction with the January meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), Board members and Reserve Bank presidents prepared projections for economic growth, unemployment, and inflation for the years 2010 through 2012 and over the longer run. The contours of these forecasts are broadly similar to those I reported to the Congress last July. FOMC participants continue to anticipate a moderate pace of economic recovery, with economic growth of roughly 3 to 3-1/2 percent in 2010 and 3-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent in 2011. Consistent with moderate economic growth, participants expect the unemployment rate to decline only slowly, to a range of roughly 6-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent by the end of 2012, still well above their estimate of the long-run sustainable rate of about 5 percent. Inflation is expected to remain subdued, with consumer prices rising at rates between 1 and 2 percent in 2010 through 2012. In the longer term, inflation is expected to be between 1-3/4 and 2 percent, the range that most FOMC participants judge to be consistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate of price stability and maximum employment. Monetary PolicyOver the past year, the Federal Reserve has employed a wide array of tools to promote economic recovery and preserve price stability. The target for the federal funds rate has been maintained at a historically low range of 0 to 1/4 percent since December 2008. The FOMC continues to anticipate that economic conditions--including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations--are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. To provide support to mortgage lending and housing markets and to improve overall conditions in private credit markets, the Federal Reserve is in the process of purchasing $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities and about $175 billion of agency debt. We have been gradually slowing the pace of these purchases in order to promote a smooth transition in markets and anticipate that these transactions will be completed by the end of March. The FOMC will continue to evaluate its purchases of securities in light of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in financial markets. In response to the substantial improvements in the functioning of most financial markets, the Federal Reserve is winding down the special liquidity facilities it created during the crisis. On February 1, a number of these facilities, including credit facilities for primary dealers, lending programs intended to help stabilize money market mutual funds and the commercial paper market, and temporary liquidity swap lines with foreign central banks, were allowed to expire.1The only remaining lending program for multiple borrowers created under the Federal Reserve's emergency authorities, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, is scheduled to close on March 31 for loans backed by all types of collateral except newly issued commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) and on June 30 for loans backed by newly issued CMBS. In addition to closing its special facilities, the Federal Reserve is normalizing its lending to commercial banks through the discount window. The final auction of discount-window funds to depositories through the Term Auction Facility, which was created in the early stages of the crisis to improve the liquidity of the banking system, will occur on March 8. Last week we announced that the maximum term of discount window loans, which was increased to as much as 90 days during the crisis, would be returned to overnight for most banks, as it was before the crisis erupted in August 2007. To discourage banks from relying on the discount window rather than private funding markets for short-term credit, last week we also increased the discount rate by 25 basis points, raising the spread between the discount rate and the top of the target range for the federal funds rate to 50 basis points. These changes, like the closure of most of the special lending facilities earlier this month, are in response to the improved functioning of financial markets, which has reduced the need for extraordinary assistance from the Federal Reserve. These adjustments are not expected to lead to tighter financial conditions for households and businesses and should not be interpreted as signaling any change in the outlook for monetary policy, which remains about the same as it was at the time of the January meeting of the FOMC. Although the federal funds rate is likely to remain exceptionally low for an extended period, as the expansion matures, the Federal Reserve will at some point need to begin to tighten monetary conditions to prevent the development of inflationary pressures. Notwithstanding the substantial increase in the size of its balance sheet associated with its purchases of Treasury and agency securities, we are confident that we have the tools we need to firm the stance of monetary policy at the appropriate time.2 Most importantly, in October 2008 the Congress gave statutory authority to the Federal Reserve to pay interest on banks' holdings of reserve balances at Federal Reserve Banks. By increasing the interest rate on reserves, the Federal Reserve will be able to put significant upward pressure on all short-term interest rates. Actual and prospective increases in short-term interest rates will be reflected in turn in longer-term interest rates and in financial conditions more generally. The Federal Reserve has also been developing a number of additional tools to reduce the large quantity of reserves held by the banking system, which will improve the Federal Reserve's control of financial conditions by leading to a tighter relationship between the interest rate paid on reserves and other short-term interest rates. Notably, our operational capacity for conducting reverse repurchase agreements, a tool that the Federal Reserve has historically used to absorb reserves from the banking system, is being expanded so that such transactions can be used to absorb large quantities of reserves.3The Federal Reserve is also currently refining plans for a term deposit facility that could convert a portion of depository institutions' holdings of reserve balances into deposits that are less liquid and could not be used to meet reserve requirements.4In addition, the FOMC has the option of redeeming or selling securities as a means of reducing outstanding bank reserves and applying monetary restraint. Of course, the sequencing of steps and the combination of tools that the Federal Reserve uses as it exits from its currently very accommodative policy stance will depend on economic and financial developments. I provided more discussion of these options and possible sequencing in a recent testimony.5 Federal Reserve TransparencyThe Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that the Congress and the public have all the information needed to understand our decisions and to be assured of the integrity of our operations. Indeed, on matters related to the conduct of monetary policy, the Federal Reserve is already one of the most transparent central banks in the world, providing detailed records and explanations of its decisions. Over the past year, the Federal Reserve also took a number of steps to enhance the transparency of its special credit and liquidity facilities, including the provision of regular, extensive reports to the Congress and the public; and we have worked closely with the Government Accountability Office (GAO), the Office of the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, the Congress, and private-sector auditors on a range of matters relating to these facilities. While the emergency credit and liquidity facilities were important tools for implementing monetary policy during the crisis, we understand that the unusual nature of those facilities creates a special obligation to assure the Congress and the public of the integrity of their operation. Accordingly, we would welcome a review by the GAO of the Federal Reserve's management of all facilities created under emergency authorities.6In particular, we would support legislation authorizing the GAO to audit the operational integrity, collateral policies, use of third-party contractors, accounting, financial reporting, and internal controls of these special credit and liquidity facilities. The Federal Reserve will, of course, cooperate fully and actively in all reviews. We are also prepared to support legislation that would require the release of the identities of the firms that participated in each special facility after an appropriate delay. It is important that the release occur after a lag that is sufficiently long that investors will not view an institution's use of one of the facilities as a possible indication of ongoing financial problems, thereby undermining market confidence in the institution or discouraging use of any future facility that might become necessary to protect the U.S. economy. An appropriate delay would also allow firms adequate time to inform investors through annual reports and other public documents of their use of Federal Reserve facilities. Looking ahead, we will continue to work with the Congress in identifying approaches for enhancing the Federal Reserve's transparency that are consistent with our statutory objectives of fostering maximum employment and price stability. In particular, it is vital that the conduct of monetary policy continue to be insulated from short-term political pressures so that the FOMC can make policy decisions in the longer-term economic interests of the American people. Moreover, the confidentiality of discount window lending to individual depository institutions must be maintained so that the Federal Reserve continues to have effective ways to provide liquidity to depository institutions under circumstances where other sources of funding are not available. The Federal Reserve's ability to inject liquidity into the financial system is critical for preserving financial stability and for supporting depositories' key role in meeting the ongoing credit needs of firms and households. Regulatory ReformStrengthening our financial regulatory system is essential for the long-term economic stability of the nation. Among the lessons of the crisis are the crucial importance of macroprudential regulation--that is, regulation and supervision aimed at addressing risks to the financial system as a whole--and the need for effective consolidated supervision of every financial institution that is so large or interconnected that its failure could threaten the functioning of the entire financial system. The Federal Reserve strongly supports the Congress's ongoing efforts to achieve comprehensive financial reform. In the meantime, to strengthen the Federal Reserve's oversight of banking organizations, we have been conducting an intensive self-examination of our regulatory and supervisory responsibilities and have been actively implementing improvements. For example, the Federal Reserve has been playing a key role in international efforts to toughen capital and liquidity requirements for financial institutions, particularly systemically critical firms, and we have been taking the lead in ensuring that compensation structures at banking organizations provide appropriate incentives without encouraging excessive risk-taking.7 The Federal Reserve is also making fundamental changes in its supervision of large, complex bank holding companies, both to improve the effectiveness of consolidated supervision and to incorporate a macroprudential perspective that goes beyond the traditional focus on safety and soundness of individual institutions. We are overhauling our supervisory framework and procedures to improve coordination within our own supervisory staff and with other supervisory agencies and to facilitate more-integrated assessments of risks within each holding company and across groups of companies. Last spring the Federal Reserve led the successful Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, popularly known as the bank stress tests. An important lesson of that program was that combining on-site bank examinations with a suite of quantitative and analytical tools can greatly improve comparability of the results and better identify potential risks. In that spirit, the Federal Reserve is also in the process of developing an enhanced quantitative surveillance program for large bank holding companies. Supervisory information will be combined with firm-level, market-based indicators and aggregate economic data to provide a more complete picture of the risks facing these institutions and the broader financial system. Making use of the Federal Reserve's unparalleled breadth of expertise, this program will apply a multidisciplinary approach that involves economists, specialists in particular financial markets, payments systems experts, and other professionals, as well as bank supervisors. The recent crisis has also underscored the extent to which direct involvement in the oversight of banks and bank holding companies contributes to the Federal Reserve's effectiveness in carrying out its responsibilities as a central bank, including the making of monetary policy and the management of the discount window. Most important, as the crisis has once again demonstrated, the Federal Reserve's ability to identify and address diverse and hard-to-predict threats to financial stability depends critically on the information, expertise, and powers that it has by virtue of being both a bank supervisor and a central bank. The Federal Reserve continues to demonstrate its commitment to strengthening consumer protections in the financial services arena. Since the time of the previousMonetary Policy Reportin July, the Federal Reserve has proposed a comprehensive overhaul of the regulations governing consumer mortgage transactions, and we are collaborating with the Department of Housing and Urban Development to assess how we might further increase transparency in the mortgage process.8We have issued rules implementing enhanced consumer protections for credit card accounts and private student loans as well as new rules to ensure that consumers have meaningful opportunities to avoid overdraft fees.9In addition, the Federal Reserve has implemented an expanded consumer compliance supervision program for nonbank subsidiaries of bank holding companies and foreign banking organizations.10 More generally, the Federal Reserve is committed to doing all that can be done to ensure that our economy is never again devastated by a financial collapse. We look forward to working with the Congress to develop effective and comprehensive reform of the financial regulatory framework. Footnotes 1.Primary dealers are broker-dealers that act as counterparties to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in its conduct of open market operations.Return to text 2.For further details on these tools and the Federal Reserve's exit strategy, see Ben S. Bernanke (2010), "Federal Reserve's Exit Strategy," statement before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, February 10.Return to text 3.The Federal Reserve has recently developed the ability to engage in reverse repurchase agreements in the triparty market for repurchase agreements, with primary dealers as counterparties and using Treasury and agency debt securities as collateral, and it is developing the capacity to carry out these transactions with a wider set of counterparties (such as money market mutual funds and the mortgage-related government-sponsored enterprises) and using agency mortgage-backed securities as collateral.Return to text 4.In December the Federal Reserve published a proposal describing a term deposit facility in theFederal Register(see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Board Proposes Amendments to Regulation D That Would Enable the Establishment of a Term Deposit Facility," press release, December 28). We are now in the process of analyzing the public comments that have been received. A revised proposal will be reviewed by the Federal Reserve Board, and test transactions could commence during the second quarter.Return to text 5.See Bernanke, "Federal Reserve's Exit Strategy," in note 2.Return to text 6.Last month the Federal Reserve said that it would welcome a full review by the GAO of all aspects of the Federal Reserve's involvement in the extension of credit to the American International Group, Inc. (see Ben S. Bernanke (2010),letter to Gene L. Dodaro (41 KB PDF), January 19). The Federal Reserve would support legislation authorizing a review by the GAO of the Federal Reserve's operations of its facilities created under emergency authorities: the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Money Market Investor Funding Facility, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, and the Term Securities Lending Facility.Return to text 7.For further information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Issues Proposed Guidance on Incentive Compensation," press release, October 22.Return to text 8.For further information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Proposes Significant Changes to Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) Intended to Improve the Disclosures Consumers Receive in Connection with Closed-End Mortgages and Home-Equity Lines of Credit," press release, July 23.Return to text 9.For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Approves Final Amendments to Regulation Z That Revise Disclosure Requirements for Private Education Loans," press release, July 30; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Announces Final Rules Prohibiting Institutions from Charging Fees for Overdrafts on ATM and One-Time Debit Card Transactions," press release, November 12; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), "Federal Reserve Approves Final Rules to Protect Credit Card Users from a Number of Costly Practices," press release, January 12.Return to text 10.For further information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve to Implement Consumer Compliance Supervision Program of Nonbank Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies and Foreign Banking Organizations," press release, September 15.Return to text
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke Before the Committee on Financial Services and Committee on Small Business, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairman Frank, Chairwoman Velzquez, Ranking Member Bachus, Ranking Member Graves, committee members, thank you for the invitation to today's joint committee hearing to discuss the availability of credit to small businesses as well as the steps being taken to help ensure that the credit needs of creditworthy borrowers are met. As you are well aware, the Federal Reserve has taken significant steps to improve financial market conditions, and has worked with the Treasury and bank and thrift supervisors to strengthen U.S. banking organizations. We remain attentive to the need for banks to remain in sound financial condition and to continue to lend prudently to creditworthy borrowers. Loans to small businesses are especially vital to our economy, as they employ nearly 40 percent of the private sector workforce. First, I will discuss the overall state of small business lending and address the causes of reduced lending to small businesses. I will then discuss the improving prospects for small business lending in 2010, key preconditions of which include a sustainable economic recovery, financial stability, and the overall safety and soundness of the banking system. Finally, I will discuss measures taken by the Federal Reserve, including recent guidance issued in cooperation with other bank regulators, to ensure that supervisory policies do not impede credit availability for creditworthy borrowers. The State of Small Business LendingWhile conditions in financial markets continue to improve, access to credit remains difficult for many small businesses that largely depend on banks for credit. Lending by commercial banks dropped precipitously in 2009. With the exception of consumer lending in the early part of the year, lending of all types declined. Between June 30, 2008, and June 30, 2009, outstanding small loans to businesses and farms declined by more than $14 billion, a reduction of nearly 2 percent. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans, including loans to small businesses, fell particularly rapidly, declining by double-digit percentages during 2009.1Commercial real estate (CRE) and credit card lending, categories that include loans to small businesses, also fell throughout the year. Notably, the contraction in lending has been less severe at smaller banks, which tend to cater to small businesses. For example, banks with less than $10 billion in total assets reduced their business loans (including C&I and CRE loans) at about a 12.8 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 2009, while at larger banks business loans dropped at a pace of more than 20 percent. Although the pattern of reduced lending differed across banks, in aggregate, banks of all sizes have reduced their business loan portfolios. This development is especially problematic for small businesses, given that they typically lack access to public capital markets. The terms of the small business loans that are being made also have tightened considerably since the beginning of the recession. Responses to the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) indicate that banks, on net, have significantly tightened credit standards on C&I loans to small firms over the past few years. In addition, the pricing of C&I loans to small businesses became more stringent last year. Data from the Federal Reserve's Survey of Terms of Business Lending show that interest rate spreads on loans between $100,000 and $1,000,000 increased by about 100 basis points during 2009, reaching their highest levels in more than a decade. However, pricing for large loans has tightened as well, with spreads on loans from $10 million to $25 million also increasing about 100 basis points in 2009. The Causes of Reduced Lending to Small BusinessesNumerous factors have contributed to the reduced lending to small businesses. For instance, for most commercial banks, the quality of existing loan portfolios continues to deteriorate even as levels of delinquent and nonperforming loans remain on the rise. Throughout 2009, loan quality deteriorated significantly for both large and small banks, and the latest data from the fourth quarter indicate continuing elevated loss rates across all loan categories. Anecdotal information suggests that, while consumer delinquencies may be close to peaking, other types of lending such as CRE and small business lending are likely to see delinquencies and charge-offs continue to rise for some time to come. In response to a special question in the January SLOOS, a large net fraction of banks reported that the credit quality of their existing C&I loans to small firms was worse than that for their loans to larger firms in the fourth quarter. In addition, respondents did not, on net, anticipate an improvement in the performance of their small loan portfolio over the next year. Accordingly, banks have reduced existing lines of credit sharply and tightened their standards and terms for new credit. While some businesses are being denied credit due to a recent history of payment problems, even businesses with excellent payment records may find credit restricted or unavailable due to weakened balance sheets, reduced revenues or falling real estate collateral values. Further, businesses that qualified for credit under more accommodative conditions may not meet new tighter standards. Credit conditions may be particularly tight for small businesses because their finances are, in many instances, very closely intertwined with the personal finances of their owners. Data from the Federal Reserve's 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances showed that approximately 11 percent of households own and actively manage a small business.2Of these households, about 18 percent used personal assets to guarantee or collateralize loans for their businesses and a similar fraction made at least one loan to the business.Thus, the condition of household net worth is often relevant to the ability of some small businesses to obtain credit. With declines in house prices since 2006 and consequent weakened household balance sheets, the ability of many small business owners to borrow has likely been impaired. Despite general improvements in financial market conditions and in bank stock prices and earnings during the second half of 2009, lending is likely inhibited by various problems afflicting many banks, both large and small. Banks with capital positions that have been eroded by losses or those with limited access to capital markets may be reducing risky assets to improve their capital positions, especially amid continued uncertainty about the economic outlook and possible future loan losses. Indeed, with the number of problem banks having risen to 702 institutions with $402.8 billion in assets, many firms are capital constrained and may be unable to increase lending. And, even though deposits are now plentiful, some banks have funding concerns. Bank funding markets were badly impaired for a time, and some banks have accordingly decided to hold larger buffers of liquid assets than before. A number of other factors are also likely in play. Higher deposit insurance assessments increase funding costs. Some securitization markets remain impaired, reducing an important source of funding for bank loans. Finally, changes to accounting rules, beginning in 2010, will require many banks to move a large volume of securitized assets back onto their balance sheets, perhaps putting further pressure on bank capital. During the financial crisis, a number of lending relationships have been severed as individual banks sought to reduce loan portfolios, or concentrations within those portfolios, or as banks failed or merged. Established banking relationships are particularly important to small businesses, who generally do not have access to the broader capital markets and for whom credit extension is often based on private information acquired through repeated interactions over time. When existing lending relationships are broken, time may be required for other banks to establish and build such relationships, allowing lending to resume. Some banks may be overly conservative in their small business lending because of concerns that they will be subject to criticism from their examiners. While prudence is warranted in all bank lending, especially in an uncertain economic environment, some potentially profitable loans to creditworthy small businesses may have been lost because of these concerns, particularly on the part of small banks. Indeed, there may be instances in which individual examiners have criticized small business loans in an overly reflexive fashion. As I will discuss later in my testimony, the Federal Reserve has worked with other bank and thrift supervisors to ensure that supervisory policy does not unnecessarily constrain credit to creditworthy borrowers. The reduction in the availability of credit, however, is not the whole story. There is also less demand for credit. The most severe economic downturn since the Depression, resulting in high levels of unemployment and following significant increases in personal debt levels during the past decade, has suppressed demand for goods and services produced by all businesses, including smaller firms. Many businesses are, in turn, reluctant to make new investments until they are confident that consumer demand will continue to strengthen. Business inventories, a key component of gross domestic product over the business cycle, unexpectedly declined 0.2 percent in December after rising by a revised 0.5 percent in November. It is notable that banks report utilization rates of existing lines of credit to be at historic lows, despite the fact that, in many cases, this credit is already approved and generally priced attractively. According to recent surveys conducted by the National Federation of Independent Businesses (NFIB), financing conditions continued to be ranked as the top business concern by only a modest fraction (less than 5 percent) of small businesses; in contrast, about one-third of respondents cited poor sales as their most important problem. Commercial bank responses to the SLOOS continue to indicate reduced demand for loans from small businesses. Similarly, a poll conducted by the Independent Community Bankers of America on January 8 revealed that a lack of loan demand was the factor most frequently cited by member institutions as constraining small business lending. Improving Prospects for Small Business Lending in 2010Improvement in a number of the conditions that depressed lending in 2009, however, lead me to be somewhat optimistic that we may begin to see an increase in bank loans later this year.First,economic conditions, the most important determinant in the demand for, and availability of, small business lending, have improved considerably since the early and middle part of last year. In particular, spending by businesses and households appears to have gained some momentum. However, unemployment remains high, and concerns about the pace of job creation this year may restrain the consumer spending that is essential to overall business confidence. Encouragingly, financial market conditions have become more supportive of economic growth, with notable declines in many risk spreads, some resumption of securitization activity, and a rebound of equity prices since their market low in early 2009. While financing conditions certainly remain tight for many small businesses, conditions would be considerably worse were it not for the action taken by the Federal Reserve and other government agencies in response to the financial crisis. Beginning in September 2007, the Federal Reserve sharply reduced its target for the federal funds rate, which influences interest rates throughout the economy, and since December 2008, the target has been near zero. To improve mortgage market functioning and support housing markets and economic activity more broadly, the Federal Reserve has purchased large amounts of debt and mortgage-backed securities issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae in addition to purchasing long-term Treasury securities to help improve conditions in private credit markets. In the context of the enormous stress in many markets that characterized the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve also established new lending facilities and expanded existing facilities to respond to the unusual absence of liquidity in important markets and thereby enhanced the flow of credit to businesses and households. In particular, the Federal Reserve has provided support to securitization markets, which had been an important source of funding for loans to households and businesses. Securitization markets (other than those for mortgages guaranteed by the government or government-sponsored enterprises) essentially shut down in mid-2008. In response, the Federal Reserve, with the support of the Treasury Department, developed the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF). The TALF promotes the issuance of securities backed by loans to households and small businesses, including auto loans, credit card loans, student loans, and loans guaranteed by the Small Business Administration (SBA). In 2009, the program was broadened to allow investors to use the TALF to finance both existing and newly issued commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS). The TALF helped restart securitization markets and increase the availability of credit to small businesses and consumers. To date, the TALF program has helped finance 480,000 loans to small businesses, 2.6 million auto loans, 876,000 student loans, more than 100 million credit card accounts, and 100,000 loans to larger businesses. Included among those business loans are 4,900 loans to auto dealers to help finance their inventories. About half of the SBA securities issued in recent months--corresponding to roughly $250 million in loans a month--were sold to investors that financed the acquisitions in part with TALF loans. In an encouraging sign, rate spreads for asset-backed securities (ABS) have declined significantly, and a substantial amount of ABS are now being brought to market and purchased by investors without TALF financing. Thus, the TALF and other Federal Reserve programs provided critical liquidity support to the economy until the financial system stabilized. With the extraordinary stress on liquidity in many markets having abated, many of these programs either have been or are scheduled to be wound down. Asecondreason to expect some improvement in credit conditions for small businesses is that bank attitudes toward lending, including small business lending, may be shifting. The January SLOOS showed that bank tightening of credit standards for small business C&I lending appeared to be nearing an end with similar numbers of banks reporting tightening and easing of their lending standards. There is also some tentative, anecdotal evidence that many bankers may be devoting considerably more energy toward extending new loans in 2010, as contrasted with their overwhelming preoccupation in 2009 with collecting on or writing down loans already on their books. With respect to small business lending in particular, some banks have instituted so-called "second look" programs that--as the name implies--involve a reconsideration of loan applications that would not be pursued based on a credit scoring model alone. Some banks are also increasing lending through the use of SBA guarantees. Finally, the more noticeable improvement that has already taken place in credit conditions for larger companies should, to some degree, pass through in the form of trade credit to the smaller suppliers or distributors for the larger firms. Still, as with improvement in macroeconomic conditions, the impact of the turnaround in bank attitudes and strategies will likely be gradual. As noted earlier, the January SLOOS also revealed that the credit quality of loans to small firms in the fourth quarter of 2009 was worse than for loans to larger firms, so many banks may move cautiously in making new loans. Additional Steps to Meet the Needs of Creditworthy Small Business BorrowersDespite these prospects for improvement, credit conditions for many small businesses are likely to remain challenging this year. That is why the Federal Reserve has been placing particular emphasis on ensuring that its supervision and examination policies do not inadvertently impede sound small business lending. If financial institutions retreat from sound lending opportunities because of concerns about criticism from their examiners, their long-term interests and those of small businesses and the economy in general could be negatively affected, as businesses are unable to maintain or expand payrolls or to make otherwise profitable and productive investments. On February 5, the banking agencies issued guidance to examiners that reinforced a simple message--institutions should strive to meet the credit needs of creditworthy small business borrowers, and the supervisory agencies will not hinder those efforts.3For the reasons noted earlier, we recognize that the ongoing financial and economic stress has resulted in a decrease in credit availability, including loans to small businesses, and has prompted institutions to review their lending practices. Although current loss rates would indicate that a measure of tightening was appropriate and necessary, some institutions may have become overly cautious in their lending practices. Thus, while prudence must remain the watchword for both banks and their supervisors, we do not want our examiners to take an overly mechanistic approach to evaluating small business lending. The Federal Reserve has directed examiners to be mindful of the effects of excessive credit tightening on the broader economy. As a general matter, we do not expect examiners to adversely classify loans based solely on a decline in collateral value where, for example, the borrower has stable revenue streams and thus the ability to repay the loan. We have implemented training for examiners and outreach to the banking industry to underscore this expectation. We are aware that bankers, as well as examiners, may become overly conservative in an attempt to ameliorate past weaknesses in lending practices, and are working to emphasize that it is in all parties' best interests to continue making loans to creditworthy borrowers. The most recent guidance is the latest in a series of actions taken by the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies to support sound bank lending and the credit intermediation process. In an effort to encourage prudent CRE loan workouts, the Federal Reserve led the development of interagency guidance issued in October 2009 regarding CRE loan restructurings and workouts.4That policy statement provides guidance for examiners and for financial institutions who are working with CRE borrowers experiencing diminished operating cash flows, depreciated collateral values, or prolonged delays in selling or renting commercial properties, particularly as the loans on those properties mature and need to be refinanced. The statement is especially relevant to small businesses because owner-occupied CRE often serves as collateral for small business loans. Prudent loan workouts are in the best interest of both financial institutions and borrowers, particularly during difficult economic conditions. Accordingly, the CRE policy statement details risk-management practices for loan workouts that support prudent and pragmatic credit and business decision making within the framework of financial accuracy, transparency, and timely loss recognition. We hope that the detailed examples in that guidance will be of particular use to examiners, who themselves face the difficult task of assessing bank credit practices in this uncertain environment. Immediately after the release of the CRE guidance, the Federal Reserve conducted a Systemwide teleconference with examiners to underscore the importance of this new guidance and promote its consistent application in all regions. In conjunction with the other federal and state banking agencies, Federal Reserve staff has participated in a number of teleconferences with various industry groups to discuss the guidance, which have reached several thousand bankers to date. Examiner training and industry outreach will continue, and specific activities related to the guidance issued in early February targeting small businesses will augment existing examiner training. In January, the Federal Reserve launched a comprehensive Systemwide training initiative to further underscore our expectations regarding CRE. These initiatives themselves build off of guidance that the Federal Reserve and other federal banking agencies issued in November 2008 to encourage banks to meet the needs of creditworthy borrowers--in a manner consistent with safety and soundness--and to take a balanced approach in assessing borrowers' abilities to repay and to make realistic assessments of collateral valuations.5Achieving this balance will not always be easy. We certainly do not want to lay the seeds for future bank problems by encouraging or permitting imprudent lending today. That is why we have emphasized to both bankers and our examiners the importance of careful analysis of the circumstances of individual borrowers. While aggregate figures are useful to policymakers in assessing overall trends in the financial system, they do not tell the whole story. Determining whether supervisory policies and practices are appropriately balanced also requires a close examination of specific circumstances--for example, through evaluating particular loans that banks were discouraged from making. Ongoing outreach will thus be essential as the regulatory agencies and the industry continue to work through the many difficult issues brought about by the financial crisis. Members of the Board and senior supervisory staff have met with bankers, including community bankers, to elicit examples of supervisory policies or actions that bankers believe may have inhibited prudent lending and to discuss in detail some examples of the supervisory agencies' responses to specific lending situations. It is important that we identify cases in which examiners may be too cautious and to further clarify our general guidance. It is equally important that we reinforce those cautious instincts where the circumstances of an application for credit indicate excessive risk. In addition to our outreach to banks and bank examiners, the Federal Reserve has conducted several forums in recent months to better understand the difficulties faced by small businesses. In mid-November, the Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, in conjunction with the SBA, held small business forums in San Francisco and Los Angeles. We are now conducting a series of meetings on small business access to credit hosted by the Reserve Banks. The meetings will be followed by a capstone event at the Board of Governors. These forums examine the evolving difficulties faced by small businesses and will inform additional efforts to help this important sector. Meetings this week focused on minority entrepreneurship and SBA lending. Some of these meetings will focus on a specific aspect of small business lending such as credit gaps with respect to small business credit products, types of financial institutions, or demographic groups (including minority borrowers). Others will employ a standard agenda in different parts of the country to ascertain regional differences in small business access to credit and support services. Finally, in your invitation letter you asked that we discuss actions taken by the Administration to assist small business owners. As you know, the Administration has undertaken a number of actions aimed at improving small businesses' access to credit. Since the signing of the American Reinvestment and Recovery Act in February 2009, SBA 7(a) and 504 loan volumes have increased quite substantially relative to the period immediately preceding the bill's passage. Most recently, the Administration announced a small business lending initiative to provide low-cost capital to community banks that submit a plan to increase their small business lending and to Community Development Financial Institutions that serve the hardest-hit communities. A number of these small business lending initiatives are new, and their effects on small business lending cannot yet be measured. Nonetheless, a number of programs have been established to assist small businesses and the regulatory agencies recently issued guidance that strongly encourages banks to meet the needs of creditworthy borrowers. We will closely monitor credit conditions to consider whether additional measures may be needed to ensure that the funding needs of qualified small businesses are met in the coming months. ConclusionWhile financial market conditions have improved in the United States, the overall lending environment remains strained, and significant concerns have been raised about the availability of credit to small businesses. The Federal Reserve, in collaboration with the other banking agencies, has worked to ensure that the banking system remains safe and sound and is able to meet the credit needs of our economy. We also have aggressively pursued monetary policy actions and have provided liquidity to help restore stability to the financial system and support the flow of credit to households and businesses. It will take time for the banking industry to fully recover and to serve as a source of strength for the real economy. The Federal Reserve is committed to working with the other banking agencies and the Congress to promote the concurrent goals of fostering credit availability for creditworthy borrowers and ensuring a safe and sound banking system. Thank you again for your invitation to discuss these important issues at today's hearing. I would be happy to answer any questions that you may have. Footnotes 1.The most recent data from the Federal Reserve'sFlow of Fundsreport indicate that, for example, C&I lending by commercial banks declined by about 24 percent. Declines for other categories of lending in the same period were about 9 percent for commercial real estate and residential real estate, and 5 percent for consumer lending.Return to text 2."Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2004 to 2007: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances,"Federal Reserve Bulletin,February 2009, page A35.Return to text 3.Interagency Statement on Meeting the Credit Needs of Creditworthy Small Business Borrowers(February 2010).Return to text 4.Interagency Policy Statement on CRE Loan Restructurings and Workouts(November 2009).Return to text 5.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers," joint press release, November 12.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Ceremonial Swearing-In, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. It is with considerable gratitude and not a little humility that I begin a second term as Chairman of the Board of Governors. I thank President Obama for the confidence he has shown in me by renominating me and the members of the Senate for confirming my nomination. The past four years have been an extraordinary time. In many respects, this period has shown this institution at its finest, as we moved rapidly, forcefully, and creatively to confront the deepest financial crisis since the Great Depression and help prevent a looming economic collapse. This swift and effective response would not have been possible without the remarkable dedication, professionalism, and personal sacrifices of the Federal Reserve staff. I would like to express my deep appreciation to all of you for your creativity and hard work. America and the world owe you a debt of gratitude. At the same time, this institution, like our country, faces enormous challenges, challenges that will demand continued commitment and professionalism from staff members in every division. On the economic front, the resumption of growth in the nation's output of goods and services is encouraging. But far too many people remain unemployed, foreclosures continue at record rates, and bank credit continues to contract. We at the Federal Reserve cannot hope to solve all these problems on our own--other policymakers and those in the private sector must do their part--but we must continue to do all that we can to ensure that our policies are helping to guide the country's return to prosperity in an environment of price stability. At the Federal Reserve and other agencies, the crisis revealed weaknesses and gaps in the regulation and supervision of financial institutions and financial markets. Working together, the Fed staff and the Board have made considerable progress in identifying problems and improving how we carry out our oversight responsibilities. We are restructuring our supervisory framework, for example, to incorporate a more systemic, multidisciplinary perspective. We are engaging with international colleagues to develop tough, comprehensive regulations to promote the safety and soundness of financial institutions, and we have developed and implemented strong new protections for consumers. We will continue to work with the Congress to develop an effective, comprehensive reform of financial regulation. As we move forward, we must continue to do all that can be done to ensure that our economy is never again devastated by a financial collapse. The Federal Reserve has been granted, both in law and in political tradition, considerable independence and autonomy. That independence serves important public objectives. Critically, it allows the Federal Open Market Committee to make monetary policy in the longer-term economic interests of the American people, rather than in the service of short-term political imperatives. It also allows the Federal Reserve to make supervisory decisions based on the facts of each case and the need to preserve financial stability, not on the basis of political considerations. In the interest of maintaining public confidence and promoting economic and financial stability, we must continue to protect our independence. At the same time, in a democratic society like our own, institutional independence brings with it fundamental obligations of transparency, responsiveness, and accountability. The Federal Reserve is already one of the most transparent and accountable central banks in the world, providing voluminous information and explanation concerning all of its activities. However, I believe that we should be prepared to do even more, to become even more transparent. It is essential that the public have the information it needs to understand and be assured of the integrity of all our operations, including all aspects of our balance sheet and our financial controls. We will continue to work with the Congress to ensure maximum transparency of America's central bank, without compromising our ability to conduct policy in the public interest. These are just some of the challenges that we will all face in the coming months and years. I thank you for the many expressions of support I received during the confirmation process, for your hard work and dedication, and for your service to your country. I look forward to continuing to work with all of you to strengthen our economy and to make the Federal Reserve as effective as it can possibly be in advancing the economic wellbeing of all Americans. Thank you.
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Economics Club of Hampton Roads, Norfolk, Virginia Thank you so much for being here. It's great to be home with so many friends, former colleagues, and former customers, and all of you who make Hampton Roads such a great place to live and do business. I am truly honored to receive the Economic Impact award from the Economics Club of Hampton Roads, joining such company as Paul Sarbanes, former senator from Maryland and coauthor of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, and Arthur Levitt, former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission. By honoring me, you recognize the extraordinary work of all the talented, knowledgeable, and dedicated men and women of the Federal Reserve System. So I would like to take this opportunity to express my admiration for the Fed staff and my colleagues on the Board of Governors, especially Chairman Ben Bernanke. I witnessed firsthand the leadership, the concern for the U.S. economy, and the political courage the chairman displayed as he led us through this tumultuous time. I wholeheartedly believe that without the actions taken by the Federal Reserve to fight the financial crisis, our financial system would have frozen and the outcome for the economy would have been unthinkable. It is hard to believe that it has only been 18 months since I left here. So I thought I would tell you a little about what I have been doing. I was officially sworn in as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on August 4, 2008, at 8 o'clock in the morning. Just a half hour later, I attended my first meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). (The FOMC, composed of the Board of Governors and the 12 Federal Reserve Bank presidents, is the body that makes decisions about interest rates and other aspects of monetary policy.) Six weeks later I attended my second FOMC meeting. Normally, the Board of Governors convenes right after the FOMC meeting for a quick vote on Reserve Bank requests to change the discount rate. My second such meeting was anything but routine. We voted to lend $85 billion to prevent the collapse of American International Group, Inc. (AIG), whose failure at such a fragile time could have had disastrous results. In between those two meetings were some of the darkest hours of the financial crisis. On September 7, the Treasury Department placed Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac into conservatorship, essentially putting the government in charge of the mortgage giants. On September 15, Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy protection. A day later, a prominent money market mutual fund "broke the buck"--that is, its share price went below $1--sparking fears that no investments were safe as the financial crisis rapidly spread around the globe. That was the same day we made the loan to AIG--not exactly a lot of time to ease into a new job. We realized that if we didn't act rapidly, the panic that we saw in financial markets--the worst in 80 years--could quickly trigger a global depression. In fighting the crisis, the Fed acted as a first responder of sorts using a wide range of tools, including lowering interest rates; maintaining a steady flow of dollars to meet demand abroad; providing liquidity to sound institutions to support faltering financial markets; and providing emergency loans to specific, troubled institutions whose failures would have had disastrous consequences for the financial system and the economy. Later, the Fed created additional programs to unlock lending, the lifeblood of the U.S. economy. While the economy today is by no means nearly as strong as we'd like it to be and some parts of the financial system are still not functioning smoothly, the forceful actions by the Federal Reserve in the fall of 2008 helped prevent the apocalyptic scenario that we all feared. I'd like to explain how we acted swiftly, responsibly, and effectively in response to the financial crisis. Lowering Interest RatesDuring more normal times, the Federal Reserve's policymaking is focused on short-term interest rates, our main tool for steering the economy. The Fed influences the costs of borrowing to buy everything from cars to condos to computers by controlling short-term interest rates. Interest rates can be lowered to stimulate borrowing and spending when demand is otherwise weak or raised to damp demand and curb inflation. Before I arrived, the Fed had already responded to the weakening in the economy by aggressively lowering its federal funds rate target from 5-1/4 percent in September 2007 to 2 percent. Two percent is extremely low for interest rates, but as the financial crisis intensified and the economic outlook grew more dire in the fall of 2008, the Fed continued to cut rates. For more than a year now, our policies have pushed down short-term interest rates close to zero. Once our main short-term interest rate lever was effectively at zero, we moved beyond traditional monetary policy to push down longer-term interest rates. In November 2008, the Fed began purchasing large volumes of longer-term, U.S. government debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, eventually increasing the commitment to more than $1.7 trillion. The added demand for these securities pushed up their prices, thus lowering their yields, and put downward pressure on other long-term rates, including those for home mortgages and corporate bonds. Such actions by the Federal Reserve have led to lower borrowing costs for consumers and businesses, including on business lines, credit cards, mortgages, and car loans. I have spoken to many small business owners in Hampton Roads and across the country who say that without such low interest rates, they might not have survived the severe economic downturn. In addition, in response to the Fed's moves, the nationwide average rate for a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage dropped from 6-1/2 percent to below 5 percent, the lowest level since the 1940s, and rates remain near historic lows. The low rates have helped some people buy a home for the first time and others to refinance. In 2009, millions of households refinanced their mortgages, thus reducing their monthly payments and giving them more money to spend, reduce debt, or save. For example, on a $200,000 30-year mortgage, refinancing from a 6.5 percent mortgage into one with a 5 percent rate saves the homeowner $190 a month, or nearly $2,300 a year--a significant difference. But, as we all know, lower interest rates only help if you can actually get a loan. And as the financial crisis unfolded, credit began to shut down for even the best borrowers. So while lowering interest rates helped, we knew we had to do more. Providing LiquidityI don't want to give you a full laundry list of all the actions we have taken to help restore the flow of credit--it's been tough keeping track of all the acronyms for the programs we have set up in response to the crisis--but I'll mention a few of the most important. For centuries, central banks have calmed financial crises by lending to financial institutions against good collateral. Because central banks step in when other sources of funds retreat, central banks acting in this capacity are known as lenders of last resort. Banks rely on short-term funding such as overnight interbank loans or customer deposits to make the longer-term loans their customers need. If funding becomes scarce, banks become less willing to extend credit. To maintain the flow of credit, the Federal Reserve has made clear that it will provide short-term credit to sound depository institutions as needed. The lending program, known as discount window borrowing or primary credit, is provided at an above-market rate so that banks use the facility only as a backup source of funds. In theory, it is the higher rate that keeps banks from using the discount window as a regular source of funds. In practice, bankers are quite suspicious that borrowing from the Federal Reserve will bring additional regulatory scrutiny. In my banking days, I always described it as being like borrowing from my father. I was always sure that at some point I would have to answer uncomfortable questions. And since bank borrowing in normal times is rare, markets would likely view any such borrowing as a sign of weakness. While the Fed doesn't release individual borrower information, it does publish the total amount of outstanding loans weekly. The sudden appearance of new discount window lending would likely send market participants scurrying to identify the borrower, and it would at a minimum lead to rumors about who was borrowing and why. The resulting negative view of the discount window is known as stigma. When uncertainty about the health of individual institutions or the industry as a whole increases, stigma intensifies as the market tries to identify the weaker players. The dilemma facing the Fed is that when discount window borrowing is most needed to keep credit flowing, it is most stigmatized. The discount window is the Fed's main tool for distributing money to the banking system in emergencies when bank-to-bank lending isn't functioning, which is precisely the situation that prevailed in late 2007. But because banks were very reluctant to use the window, that key tool was broken. To offset the stigma effect, the Fed took a number of steps. We reduced the spread--the difference between the primary credit rate and the federal funds target rate-- ultimately from 100 basis points to 25 basis points. And we increased the maximum term from overnight to 90 days. But banks' concerns about stigma still more than offset the attractiveness of the lower rate. In December 2007, the Fed went further, launching the Term Auction Facility, or TAF, which provided term loans to banks through regular competitive auctions. The competitive nature of the auction and the three-day deferred settlement of the TAF likely signaled that participants did not face an immediate shortage of funds. Thus, TAF loans did not carry the same stigma as primary credit. Finally, banks began to increase their usage of both primary credit and the TAF, perhaps due to lower spreads, longer terms, and reduced stigma, but no doubt in large part because market funding had become much less available. Unlocking Nonbank MarketsAs the crisis unfolded, it became clear that the normal tools of the Federal Reserve--lower interest rates and loans to banks--were not going to be enough to maintain the flow of credit to consumers and businesses. In today's world, much of the credit that acts as the lifeblood of the economy is no longer funded on banks' balance sheets. To sustain credit markets in the system outside the banks, the so-called shadow banking system, we employed the seldom-used emergency lending authority in section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. Congress originally approved the 13(3) authority in response to business lending problems during the Depression. It allows the Fed broad authority to lend to a wide range of borrowers using good collateral in unusual and exigent circumstances as long as at least five governors--all we currently have on the Board--approve. The circumstances were certainly unusual and exigent, and for the most part, the authority was used to target critical markets that performed the same function as bank lending but were outside the banking system. Initially, 13(3) was used to establish lending facilities for securities dealers around the time of the near failure of Bear Stearns. And when runs on money market mutual funds caused the funds to stop buying commercial paper, it was used to support the commercial paper market, a key source of funding for businesses. Section 13(3) was also used to support the market for asset-backed securities (ABS), which are made up of loans such as auto loans, credit cards, student loans, loans guaranteed by the Small Business Administration (SBA), and loans to businesses for equipment purchases. Many major lenders in these markets fund their lending by packaging the loans into securities and selling them to investors. In the fall of 2008, ABS issuance came to a standstill, which pushed up the cost of credit and greatly reduced its availability. As market after market started to freeze, we were swamped with stories from a steady stream of trade associations, businesses, individuals, lenders, and others about the consequences of problems with ABS. Knowing that families and firms need access to loans to pay for college, replace worn-out cars, or upgrade computer systems, staff at the Fed worked around the clock to develop a credit facility that would help individuals and small businesses by jump-starting new issuance of ABS. In late November 2008, the Federal Reserve, working with the Treasury, created the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF). Under the TALF, the Fed extends loans to investors to help finance their purchases of highly rated ABS. Banks and other intermediaries were then willing to renew their lending to consumers and small businesses because they knew that investors would purchase securities backed by the new loans. The TALF has helped encourage loans to households by facilitating a resumption of activity in securities made up of auto loans, student loans, and credit card loans. The TALF also helped enable mortgage modifications aimed at keeping people in their homes. Mortgage servicers need funds to make the payments on delinquent mortgages while the loans are being modified. Smaller servicers have been able to bundle the payment advances as TALF-eligible securities, easing the pressure on the servicers to foreclose. The TALF has also supported small business lending through equipment loans, fleet financing, SBA loans, and floor-plan financing for everything from automobiles to lawnmowers. In addition, thousands of small businesses were able to finance the purchase of property and casualty insurance by taking out insurance premium loans that were, in turn, securitized. In total, more than 3 million auto and student loans to households have been facilitated through the TALF as well as nearly half a million loans to small businesses and millions of credit card accounts to both consumers and businesses. TALF loans also have been used to finance purchases of commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), a market that until late 2009 had been completely frozen for more than a year. In fact, in November 2009, TALF funds were used to help bring to market the first new issue CMBS since June 2008. And since that first deal, two others have funded without assistance from the TALF, and several more are in various stages of development. We hope that our work in the commercial mortgage sector will help alleviate some of the strains in commercial real estate funding. As many of you know all too well, this sector is particularly troubled as layoffs and business closures have led to vacant retail, office, and industrial spaces across the United States and refinancing options for maturing loans remain quite limited. I have to admit, I was originally quite skeptical about the TALF. I was so skeptical, in fact, that I was asked to take the lead working with staff on its development. Those of you who have worked with me before know what a conservative lender I am. So you can imagine the effort required by staff to overcome every concern and objection that I had. In the end, we created a program that was really quite safe from the standpoint of the taxpayer, yet quite successful from the standpoint of those who found loans that otherwise would have been unavailable. As pleased as I was to see that the TALF worked, I am even more pleased to see that it is becoming unnecessary. In recent months, market conditions for auto and credit card ABS have improved so much that new issues are increasingly being funded by non-TALF sources. Moreover, even though TALF loans have three- and five-year terms, investors have already repaid almost one-fourth of TALF loans. Lending to AIGUndoubtedly, the most difficult actions and the least popular from the public's view were our assistance to individual firms, the so-called bailouts of investment bank Bear Stearns and insurance company AIG. I wasn't there for Bear Stearns, but I did have to vote on the AIG loan. And I can tell you it was the hardest decision I have ever made. Remember, as I mentioned earlier, the vote had to be unanimous. So let me see if I can put you in that moment. The government had already put Fannie and Freddie into conservatorship to preserve the mortgage market. Lehman had just failed, and we were getting the initial reports of the fallout, like reports of battlefield casualties, that market after market was damaged or frozen. Credit spreads, the difference between the rate in any given market and the risk-free rate, were blowing up, bringing financial activity to a near standstill. Panic was so heavy in the markets that it was almost a physical presence. I kept having this image in my head of the panic being like the monster called "the Blob" that I saw years ago in an old movie. Like the Blob, panic attacked one institution after another, and with each institution it ate, it grew bigger and stronger. We had just watched it eat Lehman. We could not stop it there because we are only authorized to lend against collateral, and Lehman did not have enough collateral. Now it was focused on AIG. Unlike the situation with Lehman Brothers, we were presented with an action we could take, a loan we could make to avoid the collapse of AIG. Our knowledge of the company was limited because we had never supervised AIG, but the loan could be secured with collateral. Based on our assessments of the collateral, we believed the risk of the loans to be limited. And while the risk of making the loan was limited, the risk of not making the loan--of letting AIG, which was significantly larger than Lehman, fail--was certain to be huge. And no other entity--not a private company, not a consortium of private companies acting together, not any other branch or agency of the governmentwas in a position to do anything. The clock was ticking, and default was imminent. There was no time to gather more information or find another solution. So I ask you, what would you have done? It was in this context that the Federal Reserve, with the full support of the Treasury, made a loan to AIG to prevent its failure. The loan imposed tough terms, senior management was replaced, and shareholders lost almost all of their investments. If I had to cast that vote again, even knowing all that followed, including the criticism that we have received, I wouldn't change it. I still believe that the consequences would have been far worse for all businesses and consumers if we had let AIG fail. Despite the claims by some that healthier Wall Street firms or even the small businesses and consumers on Main Street did not benefit from assistance to AIG, I would argue that no business or individual was immune to the effects of a sequential collapse of key financial intermediaries. As it was, we still had frozen credit markets that necessitated the facilities I discussed earlier. In the wake of the Lehman failure and the near failure of AIG, it was as if someone turned off a switch on business activity. Almost overnight, businesses went into full protection mode, halting all capital expenditures, shedding inventory, and slashing expenses. In the face of massive unemployment caused by layoffs and business failures, consumers stopped spending. This first became clear to me during the October 2008 board of directors meeting at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. The Federal Reserve System has 12 Reserve Banks, each with a board of directors representing the economy of the district. We rely upon these board members for real-time insight into conditions in the real economy. Usually, as they go around the room reporting on conditions in their industry or part of the region, you hear the full spectrum of emotion from gloom to caution to outright enthusiasm. But I will never forget the chill that went down my spine as every single person at that meeting talked about hunkering down and conserving cash. They were retailers, manufacturers, food and energy producers, providers of private capital, bankers, and nonprofit leaders. And they were spooked. Do you remember all the predictions for Y2K, when the fear was that the economy would be technologically unable to function? As the financial crisis unfolded, it seemed as if the economy was psychologically unable to function. Everyone was frozen with fear. Then, gradually, with the support of the liquidity facilities designed by the Fed, panic began to recede. With the funds approved by the Congress for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, also known as the TARP, and used by Treasury to inject temporary capital into viable banks of all sizes, the U.S. government reassured the world that it would not allow its financial system to collapse. To help markets better assess risk, the Federal Reserve led a horizontal review, popularly known as the stress test, of the 19 largest financial institutions to estimate the likely losses and capital requirements if economic conditions turned out to be even more severe than anticipated. After publication of the stress test results, those banks raised significant private capital, and confidence slowly returned to the markets. And, just as slowly, the economy began to function again. Putting the Tools Back on the ShelfIt's a bit quieter at the Fed these days. All of our emergency credit facilities except for the TALF and TAF were shut down by the beginning of this month in response to improving financial market conditions. The TALF and TAF, meanwhile, are winding down. The final TAF auction will take place in early March. The TALF will remain open until June for new CMBS, but the March subscriptions will be the last for all other ABS and previously issued CMBS. We are also tightening the term on primary credit as we return to normal discount operations. Earlier today, the Board announced that we had approved an increase in the discount rate, and that we are shortening the typical maturity for primary credit loans to overnight. With these changes, we expect that banks will use private sources for normal funding and only use primary credit as a backup source of funds. As I mentioned earlier, the discount rate is the rate we charge banks that borrow at our discount window. It is not the rate we target for monetary policy purposes. I'd emphasize that the changes are simply a reversal of the spread reduction we made to combat stigma and like the closure of a number of extraordinary credit programs earlier this month, represent further normalization of the Federal Reserve's lending facilities; they do not signal any change in the outlook for monetary policy and are not expected to lead to tighter financial conditions for households and businesses. If you look at all our liquidity facilities and add up the maximum levels reached by each, we loaned approximately $2 trillion to combat the crisis. Using the experience, knowledge, and ingenuity that were available throughout the Fed, we put together new facilities to meet new challenges as the crisis unfolded. We responded with care and with speed. Most of the funding was disbursed in a period of a few months, and now, roughly 18 months after the start of the crisis, the nearly $2 trillion in credit provided through the liquidity facilities have been paid down to slightly more than $100 billion. The funds were repaid without a single penny of loss, and we still expect to collect every dollar of the loans that remain outstanding. We also continue to expect that we will ultimately incur no losses on the credit we extended to support Bear Stearns and AIG. Lending such enormous sums under such extreme conditions and with such speed will always entail risk. But I believe the Federal Reserve was able to do it as safely as it could possibly be done. Since its inception, the Fed has been responding to crises. Indeed, the Federal Reserve was created in 1913 in response to a series of banking panics that occurred in the early part of the 20th century. In fighting the recent crisis, we made extensive use of the 13(3) authorities that were assigned to us after the trauma of the Great Depression when such tools were not initially available. Our ability to respond so quickly and so safely is due to the unique blend of experience and expertise developed as part of our normal activities. We have research economists who have spent a lifetime studying all the various markets that make up our economy. And in New York, where open market operations are conducted, we have market experts who interact with financial markets every day. We have the expertise to monitor transactions and evaluate payment infrastructure through our check-clearing and wire transfer operations in the Reserve Banks and our supervision of key clearinghouses. Through our supervisory activities, we have banking industry experts and bank examiners who continuously monitor the condition of financial institutions. We have personnel on site in the largest banks. So we knew our borrowers and were able to evaluate the collateral that secured the loans. Unusual and ExigentThe Federal Reserve has been entrusted with special authority to act in unusual and exigent circumstances. Webster's dictionary defines unusual as "not usual, uncommon, rare." It defines exigent as "requiring immediate aid or action." I sincerely hope that financial panics such as the one we just experienced remain rare and uncommon. But I am proud of the Federal Reserve's ability to take immediate and forceful action. As policymakers appropriately debate reforms to ensure that this never happens again, I hope they also ensure that if the unusual does happen, the Federal Reserve--or if not the Fed, some government entity--has all the tools and capabilities necessary to meet it head on. And I further hope that wherever the authority resides, there are men and women of the caliber of those with whom I have been so fortunate to work at the Federal Reserve. As for me, I am still hoping to find out what a normal time at the Fed feels like. Thank you for honoring me and, by extension, all my colleagues with this distinguished award.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between SunFirst Corporation, St. George, Utah, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Bankers' Bank of the West Bancorp, a registered bank holding company, Bankers' Bank of the West, a state chartered member bank, both of Denver, Colorado, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, and the Colorado Division of Banking. A copy of the Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Beach First National Bancshares, Inc., Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Citizens Bancorp, Nevada City, California, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Citizens Bancshares, Inc., a registered bank holding company, The Citizens Bank of Edmond, a state chartered member bank, both of Edmond, Oklahoma, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, and the Oklahoma State Banking Department. A copy of the Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Community First Bank-Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, a state chartered member bank, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Community National Bancorporation, Waterloo, Iowa, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between First National Corporation, Savannah, Georgia, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Heritage Commerce Corp, a registered bank holding company, Heritage Bank of Commerce, a state chartered member bank, both of San Jose, California, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, and the California Office of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Mercantile Bancorp, Inc., Quincy, Illinois, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Pacific State Bancorp, a registered bank holding company, Pacific State Bank, a state chartered member bank, both of Stockton, California, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, and the California Office of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Palm Desert Investments, Palm Desert, California, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Peoples, Inc., a registered bank holding company, Peoples Bank, a state chartered member bank, both of Lawrence, Kansas, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Rising Sun Bancorp, a registered bank holding company, NBRS Financial Bank, a state chartered member bank, both of Rising Sun, Maryland, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, and the Maryland Division of Financial Regulation. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between TCM Company, Crete, Nebraska, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.