The federal banking and thrift regulatory agencies today announced the final risk-based capital rule related to the Financial Accounting Standards Board's adoption of Statements of Financial Accounting Standards Nos. 166 and 167. These new accounting standards make substantive changes to how banking organizations account for many items, including securitized assets, that had been previously excluded from these organizations' balance sheets. Banking organizations affected by the new accounting standards generally will be subject to higher risk-based regulatory capital requirements. The rule better aligns risk-based capital requirements with the actual risks of certain exposures. It also provides an optional phase-in for four quarters of the impact on risk-weighted assets and tier 2 capital resulting from a banking organization's implementation of the new accounting standards. The final rule, issued by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of Thrift Supervision, will take effect 60 days after publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. Banking organizations may choose to comply with the final rule as of the beginning of their first annual reporting period after November 15, 2009. Federal Registernotice:HTML|161 KB PDF
The Federal Reserve Thursday released an advisory reminding depository institutions of supervisory expectations for sound practices in managing interest rate risk. This advisory, adopted along with the other financial regulators, reiterates the importance of effective corporate governance, policies and procedures, risk measuring and monitoring systems, stress testing, and internal controls related to the interest rate risk exposures of depository institutions. It also clarifies elements of existing guidance and describes interest rate risk-management techniques used by effective risk managers. The financial regulators recognize that some interest rate risk is inherent in the business of banking. At the same time, institutions are expected to have sound risk-management practices to measure, monitor, and control interest rate risk exposures. The financial regulators expect each depository institution to manage its interest rate risk exposures using processes and systems commensurate with its complexity, business model, risk profile, and scope of operations. The financial regulators remind depository institutions that an effective interest rate risk-management system does not involve only the identification and measurement of interest rate risk, but also addresses appropriate actions to control this risk. If an institution determines that its core earnings and capital are insufficient to support its level of interest rate risk, it should take steps to mitigate its exposure, increase its capital, or both. In an accompanying Supervision and Regulation letter to Reserve Bank heads of supervision, the Federal Reserve noted that although the advisory is targeted at depository institutions, the advice provided is also directly pertinent to bank holding companies. Bank holding companies are reminded of supervisory expectations that they should manage and control aggregate risk exposures, including interest rate risk, on a consolidated basis, while recognizing legal distinctions and possible obstacles to cash movements among subsidiaries. In addition to the Fed, the financial regulators include the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision, and the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council State Liaison Committee.
Jon D. Greenlee, Associate Director, Division of Banking Before the Congressional Oversight Panel Field Hearing, Atlanta, Georgia Chair Warren, and members Neiman, Silvers, Atkins and McWatters, I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss trends in the commercial real estate (CRE) sector and other issues related to the condition of the banking system. First, I will discuss overall credit conditions and bank underwriting standards, and I will briefly address conditions in Georgia. I will then describe current conditions in commercial real estate markets and outline Federal Reserve activities to enhance liquidity and improve conditions in financial markets to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, including certain activities that have a direct impact on CRE markets. Finally, I will discuss the ongoing efforts of the Federal Reserve to ensure the overall safety and soundness of the banking system, as well as actions taken to promote credit availability. BackgroundThe Federal Reserve has supervisory and regulatory authority for bank holding companies (BHCs), state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System (state member banks), and certain other financial institutions and activities. We work with other federal and state supervisory authorities to ensure the safety and soundness of the banking industry, foster stability of the financial system, and provide for the fair and equitable treatment of consumers in financial transactions. While the Federal Reserve is not the primary federal supervisor for the majority of commercial banks, it is the consolidated supervisor of BHCs, including financial holding companies, and conducts inspections of those institutions. Under existing law, the primary purpose of inspections is to ensure that the holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries do not pose a threat to the BHC's depository subsidiaries. In fulfilling this role, the Federal Reserve is required to rely to the fullest extent possible on information and analysis provided by the appropriate supervisory authority of the BHC's depository, securities, or insurance subsidiaries. The Federal Reserve is also the primary federal supervisor of state member banks, sharing supervisory responsibilities with state agencies. In this role, Federal Reserve supervisory staff regularly conduct on-site examinations and off-site monitoring to ensure the safety and soundness of supervised state member banks. The Federal Reserve is involved in both regulation, establishing the rules within which banking organizations must operate, and supervision, ensuring that banking organizations abide by those rules and remain safe and sound. Because rules and regulations in many cases cannot reasonably prescribe the exact practices each individual bank should use for risk management, supervisors set out policies and guidance that expand upon requirements set in rules and regulations and establish expectations for the range of acceptable practices. Supervisors rely extensively on these policies and guidance as they conduct examinations and assign supervisory ratings. Beginning in the summer of 2007, the U.S. and global economies entered a period of intense financial turmoil that has presented significant challenges for the financial services industry. These challenges intensified in the latter part of 2008 as the global economic environment weakened further. As a result, parts of the U.S. banking system have come under severe strain, with some banking institutions suffering sizable losses. The number of bank failures continues to rise, with some 140 banks having failed in 2009. Conditions in Financial Markets and the EconomyAlthough the nationwide unemployment rate remains very high and real estate markets remain weak, conditions in financial markets have improved in recent months. In particular, the functioning of interbank and other short-term funding markets has improved considerably, interest rate spreads on corporate bonds have narrowed significantly, prices of syndicated loans have increased, and some securitization markets have resumed operation. In addition, equity prices have increased sharply, on net, since their low in early 2009. Borrowing by households and businesses, however, has remained weak. Residential mortgage and consumer debt outstanding fell sharply in the first three quarters of last year, and the available data suggest that the decline continued in the fourth quarter. Nonfinancial business debt likely decreased again in the fourth quarter as decreases in commercial paper, commercial mortgages, and bank loans more than offset a solid pace of corporate bond issuance. Some of this reduction in debt represents reduced demand for credit from borrowers who would like to deleverage. However, access to credit also remains difficult, especially for households and small businesses that depend significantly on banks for financing. Indeed, the most recent results from the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices indicate that both the availability and demand for bank loans are well below pre-crisis levels. In October, more banks reported tightening their lending standards on consumer and business loans than reported easing, although the degree of net tightening continues to decline from peaks reached in the latter part of 2008. The survey also suggests that demand for consumer and business loans remains weak. Of note, decreased loan demand from creditworthy borrowers was the most common explanation given by respondents for the contraction of business loans this past year. Loan quality continued to deteriorate for both large and small banking institutions during the third quarter of 2009, the most recent period for which data are available. At the largest 50 bank holding companies, nonperforming assets continued to climb, raising the ratio of nonperforming assets to 4.8 percent of loans and other real estate owned on bank balance sheets. Most of the deterioration was concentrated in residential mortgages and CRE, but commercial loans also experienced rising delinquencies. Results of the banking agencies' Shared National Credits review, released in September, also document significant deterioration in the performance of large syndicated loans.1Similar trends are apparent at community and small regional banks: nonperforming assets increased to 4.6 percent of loans at the end of the third quarter of 2009, more than seven times the level for this ratio at year-end 2006, before the financial crisis began. Home mortgages and CRE loans accounted for most of the increase, but commercial loans have also shown marked deterioration during recent quarters. Credit losses at banking organizations continue to rise, and banks face risks of sizable additional credit losses given the likelihood that employment will take some time to recover. In addition, while housing prices appear to have stabilized in recent months, foreclosures and mortgage loss severities are likely to remain elevated. Moreover, the value of both existing commercial properties and land has continued to decline sharply, suggesting that banks face significant further deterioration in their CRE loans. In sum, banking organizations continue to face significant challenges, and credit conditions remain tight. Performance of the Banking SystemDespite these challenges, the stability of the banking system has improved over the past year. Importantly, the rigorous Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) stress test, a program that was led by the Federal Reserve helped to increase public confidence in the banking system during a period of high stress. In the months since, and with the strong encouragement of the federal banking supervisors, many of these largest institutions have raised billions of dollars in new capital, improving their ability to withstand possible future losses and to extend loans as demand for credit recovers. Depositors' concerns about the safety of their funds during the immediate crisis in the fall of 2008 have also largely abated. As a result, financial institutions have seen their access to core deposit funding improve. However, two years into a substantial economic downturn, loan quality continues to deteriorate across a number of asset classes, and, as noted earlier, has declined further as weakness in housing markets affects performance of residential mortgages and construction loans. Demand for commercial property, which is sensitive to trends in the labor market, has declined significantly and vacancy rates have increased. Hit hard by the loss of businesses and employment, an increasing amount of retail, office, and industrial space is standing vacant. In addition, many businesses have cut expenses by renegotiating existing leases. The combination of reduced cash flows and higher rates of return required by investors has lowered valuations, and many existing buildings are selling at a loss. As a result, credit conditions in CRE markets are particularly strained and commercial mortgage delinquency rates have increased rapidly. It is expected that all property types will continue to experience declining values and weak demand through the remainder of this year. In Georgia, the performance of banking organizations has deteriorated significantly over the past several quarters as the region's real estate expansion reversed course. Like their counterparts nationally, Georgia banks have seen a steady rise in non-current loans and provisions for loan losses, which have weighed on bank earnings and capital. Since the turmoil in financial markets emerged more than two years ago, 26 banks in Georgia have failed. Notably, almost all of the banks that have failed in Georgia thus far were located in the metro-Atlanta market and had a high percentage of total loans in land acquisition, development, and construction. Most of the lending activity at these failed banks was related to the region's housing boom in the first half of this decade. Also of note, many of the failed banks relied heavily on brokered deposit funding, rather than core deposits, to support what had been very strong asset growth. By the end of 2007, the average ratio of brokered deposit funds was 13 percent at banks in Georgia, compared to just 7 percent at the national level. In Atlanta, CRE conditions are largely dependent on employment trends and job losses have continued to rise as unemployment has risen above 10 percent in the region. Job losses are resulting in negative absorption rates for office, retail and warehouse space, with rents continuing to decline for all CRE property types. Business bankruptcies, a leading indicator for retail CRE performance, have risen 35 percent from a year ago. In addition, the rate of Home Price Appreciation (HPA) continues to erode in Atlanta while it appears to have stabilized in a number of major metropolitan areas. Current Conditions in Commercial Real Estate MarketsAll across the country, and in this region in particular, it is clear that significant financial challenges remain. Indeed, some large regional and community banking firms that have built up unprecedented concentrations in CRE loans will be particularly affected by conditions in real estate markets. The Federal Reserve has been focused on CRE exposures at supervised institutions for some time. In response to rising CRE concentrations, especially in some large regional and community banking firms in the early part of this decade, and the central role of CRE loans in the banking problems of the late 1980s and early 1990s, we led an interagency effort to develop supervisory guidance on CRE concentrations. The guidance was finalized in 2006 and published in the Federal Register in early 2007.2In that guidance, we emphasized our concern that some institutions' strategic- and capital-planning processes did not adequately recognize the risks arising from their CRE concentrations. We also outlined our expectations that institutions with concentrations in CRE lending needed to perform ongoing assessments to identify and manage concentrations through stress testing and similar exercises to identify the impact of adverse market conditions on earnings and capital. As weaker housing markets and deteriorating economic conditions have impaired the quality of CRE loans at supervised banking organizations, the Federal Reserve has devoted increasing resources to assessing the quality of CRE portfolios at regulated institutions. These efforts include monitoring the impact of declining cash flows and collateral values on CRE portfolios. Federal Reserve Banks that are located in more adversely affected geographic areas have been particularly focused on evaluating exposures arising from CRE lending. As job losses continue, demand for commercial property has declined, vacancy rates increased, and property values fallen. The higher vacancy levels and significant decline in the value of existing properties have placed particularly heavy pressure on construction and development projects that do not generate income until after completion. As a result, developers, which typically depend on the sales of completed projects to repay their outstanding loans, are finding their ability to service existing construction loans strained. Federal Reserve examiners are reporting a sharp deterioration in the credit performance of loans in banks' portfolios and loans in commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS). Of the approximately $3.5 trillion of outstanding debt associated with CRE, including loans for multifamily housing developments, about $1.7 trillion was held on the books of banks and thrifts, and an additional $900 billion represented collateral for CMBS, with other investors holding the remaining balance of $900 billion. Of note, more than $500 billion of CRE loans will mature each year over the next few years. In addition to losses caused by declining property cash flows and deteriorating conditions for construction loans, losses will also be boosted by the depreciating collateral value underlying those maturing loans. These losses will place continued pressure on banks' earnings, especially those of smaller regional and community banks that have high concentrations of CRE loans. Federal Reserve Activities to Help Revitalize Credit MarketsThe Federal Reserve has taken a number of actions to strengthen the financial sector and to promote the availability of credit to businesses and households. In addition to aggressively lowering short-term interest rates, the Federal Reserve has established a number of facilities to improve liquidity in financial markets. One such program is the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF), a joint Federal Reserve – Treasury program that was begun in November 2008 to facilitate the extension of credit to households and small businesses. Before the crisis, securitization markets were an important conduit of credit to the household and business sectors. Securitization markets (other than those for mortgages guaranteed by the government) essentially shut down in mid-2008, and the TALF was developed to promote renewed issuance. Under the TALF, eligible investors may borrow to finance purchases of the AAA-rated tranches of various classes of asset-backed securities. The program originally focused on credit for households and small businesses, including auto loans, credit card loans, student loans, and loans guaranteed by the Small Business Administration. The program was broadened to allow investors to use the TALF to purchase both existing and newly issued CMBS, which were included to help mitigate the refinancing problem in that sector. The TALF has been successful in helping restart securitization markets. Issuance has resumed and rate spreads for asset-backed securities have declined substantially, an indication that risk premiums are compressing. The TALF program has helped finance 2.6 million auto loans, 876,000 student loans, more than 100 million credit card accounts, 480,000 loans to small businesses, and 100,000 loans to larger businesses. Included among those business loans are 4,900 loans to auto dealers to help finance their inventories. Perhaps even more encouraging, a substantial fraction of Asset Backed Securities (ABS) is now being purchased by investors that do not seek TALF financing, and ABS-issuers have begun to bring non-TALF-eligible deals to market. By improving credit market functioning and adding liquidity to the system, the TALF and other Fed programs have provided critical support to the financial system and the economy. The current fundamental weakness in CRE markets is exacerbated by the fact that the CMBS market, which previously had financed about 30 percent of originations and completed construction projects, completely shut down for more than a year. Until mid-November 2009, when the first CMBS issuance came to market with financing provided by the Federal Reserve's TALF, essentially no CMBS had been issued since mid-2008. Investor demand for the new issuance was high, in part because of the improved investor protections put in place so that securities would be eligible collateral for TALF loans. In the end, non-TALF investors purchased almost 80 percent of the TALF-eligible securities. Shortly after this deal, two additional CMBS deals without TALF support came to market and were positively received by investors. Irrespective of these positive developments, market participants anticipate that CMBS delinquency rates will climb higher in the near term, driven not only by negative fundamentals but also by borrowers' difficulty in rolling over maturing debt. Availability of CreditIn an effort to encourage prudent CRE loan workouts, the Federal Reserve led the development of interagency guidance issued in October 2009 regarding CRE loan restructurings and workouts.3This policy statementprovides guidance for examiners and for financial institutions that are working with CRE borrowers who are experiencing diminished operating cash flows, depreciated collateral values, or prolonged delays in selling or renting commercial properties, particularly as the loans on those properties mature and need to be refinanced. The statement is especially relevant to small businesses because owner-occupied CRE often serves as collateral for many small business loans. The Federal Reserve recognizes that prudent loan workouts are often in the best interest of both financial institutions and borrowers, particularly during difficult economic conditions. Accordingly, the policy statement details risk-management practices for loan workouts that support prudent and pragmatic credit and business decision-making within the framework of financial accuracy, transparency, and timely loss recognition. Immediately after the release of this guidance, the Federal Reserve conducted a System-wide teleconference with examiners to underscore the importance of this new guidance. In addition, on November 20 of 2009, we participated in an industry outreach teleconference to discuss the guidance. Examiner training and industry outreach will be ongoing. This month, a comprehensive, System-wide training initiative was launched to further underscore our expectations. Prudent real estate lending depends upon reliable and timely information on the market value of the real estate collateral. This has been a cornerstone of the regulatory requirements for real estate lending and is reflected in the agencies' appraisal regulations. In that regard, the Federal Reserve requires a regulated institution to have real estate appraisals that meet minimum appraisal standards, including the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice, and contain sufficient information to support the institution's credit decision. Over the past several years, the Federal Reserve has issued several appraisal-related guidance to emphasize the importance of a bank's appraisal function and the need for independent and reliable appraisals. More recently, the Federal Reserve and the other federal agencies issued a proposal to revise the Interagency Appraisal and Evaluation Guidelines, which is expected to be finalized in the coming months. These guidelines reinforce the importance of sound appraisal practices. Given the lack of sales in many real estate markets and the predominant number of distressed sales in the current environment, regulated institutions face significant challenges today in assessing the value of real estate. We expect institutions to have policies and procedures for obtaining new or updated appraisals as part of their ongoing credit review. An institution should have appraisals or other market information that provide appropriate analysis of the market value of the real estate collateral and reflect relevant market conditions, the property's current "as is" condition, and reasonable assumptions and conclusions. The Federal Reserve has directed examiners to be mindful of the effects of excessive credit tightening in the broader economy, and we have taken steps, including additional examiner training and industry outreach, to underscore these intentions. We are aware that bankers may become overly conservative in an attempt to ameliorate past weaknesses in lending practices, and we are working to emphasize that it is in all parties' best interests to continue making loans to creditworthy borrowers. As part of our effort to help stimulate appropriate bank lending, the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies issued regulatory guidance in November 2008 to encourage banks to meet the needs of creditworthy borrowers, including small businesses.4The guidance was issued to encourage bank lending in a manner consistent with safety and soundness; specifically, by taking a balanced approach in assessing borrowers' abilities to repay and making realistic assessments of collateral valuations. This guidance has been reviewed and discussed with examination staff within the Federal Reserve System and ongoing training continues. ConclusionWhile financial market conditions have improved in the United States, the overall environment remains under stress, and some geographic areas are experiencing more difficulty than others, as is the case in Georgia. The Federal Reserve, working with the other banking agencies, has taken strong action to ensure that the banking system remains safe and sound and is able to meet the credit needs of our economy. We also have aggressively pursued monetary policy actions and have provided liquidity to help restore stability to the financial system and support the flow of credit to households and businesses. In our supervisory efforts, we are mindful of the risk-management deficiencies at banking institutions revealed by the financial crisis and are ensuring that institutions develop appropriate corrective actions. It will take some time for the banking industry to work through this current set of challenges and for the financial markets to fully recover. In order to promote credit availability, the Federal Reserve is encouraging banks to deploy capital and liquidity in a responsible way that avoids past mistakes and does not create new ones. The Federal Reserve is committed to working with other banking agencies and the Congress to promote the concurrent goals of fostering credit availability and a safe and sound banking system. Thank you again for your invitation to discuss these important issues at today's hearing. I would be happy to answer any questions that you may have. 1.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2009), "Credit Quality Declines in Annual Shared National Credits Review," joint press release, September 24.Return to text 2.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (2007), "Interagency Guidance on Concentrations in Commercial Real Estate," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 07‑1 (January 4).Return to text 3.Interagency Policy Statement on CRE loan Restructurings and Workouts(November 2009).Return to text 4.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers," joint press release, November 12.Return to text
On January 11, 2010, the Federal Reserve conducted an auction of $75 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Following are the results of the auction: The awarded loans will settle on January 14, 2010, and will mature on February 11, 2010. The stop-out rate shown above will apply to all awarded loans. Institutions that submitted winning bids will be contacted by their respective Reserve Banks by 11:30 a.m. EST on January 12, 2010. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on January 12, 2010, to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday approved a final rule amending Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) to protect consumers who use credit cards from a number of costly practices. Credit card issuers must comply with most aspects of the rule beginning on February 22. "This rule marks an important milestone in the Federal Reserve's efforts to ensure that consumers who rely on credit cards are treated fairly," said Federal Reserve Governor Elizabeth A. Duke. "The rule bans several harmful practices and requires greater transparency in the disclosure of the terms and conditions of credit card accounts." Among other things, the rule will: In December 2008, the Federal Reserve adopted final regulations prohibiting unfair credit card practices and improving the disclosures consumers receive in connection with credit card accounts. This rule amends aspects of those regulations to implement provisions of the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009 (Credit Card Act), which was enacted in May 2009. The final rule represents the second stage of the Federal Reserve's implementation of the Credit Card Act. On July 15, 2009, the Board issued an interim rule implementing the provisions of the Credit Card Act that went into effect on August 20, 2009. In addition to finalizing that interim rule, this rule implements the provisions of the Credit Card Act that go into effect on February 22, 2010. The remaining provisions of the Credit Card Act go into effect on August 22, 2010 and will be implemented by the Federal Reserve at a later date. Consumers can learn more about changes to their credit card accounts by accessing a new online publication. "What You Need to Know: New Credit Card Rules." It explains key changes consumers can expect from their credit card companies as a result of the new rules. The Board plans to release additional "What You Need to Know" publications in conjunction with other major rulemakings. The notices that will be published in theFederal Registerare attached. Technical Specifications Document (43 KB PDF) As of June 30, 2010, this updatedTechnical Specifications Document (134 KB PDF)replaces the previous Technical Specifications Document.As of December 31, 2010, this updatedTechnical Specifications Document (228 KB PDF)replaces the previous Technical Specifications Document. Federal Registernotices: Regulation Z, Final Rule:HTML|3.2 MB PDF Regulation Z, Final Rule, withdrawal:HTML|48 KB PDF Regulation AA, Final Rule:HTML|48 KB PDF
James SavageFSPC Spokesman(216) 579-3079[email protected] [email protected] Cleveland The Federal Reserve Banks today announced plans to conduct another series of studies to determine the current volume and composition of check and electronic payments in the United States. These studies will build on information gained from similar studies conducted by the Reserve Banks in 2001, 2004 and 2007. "The Fed's 2010 Payments Study is a continuation of an ongoing effort by the Federal Reserve System to measure trends in noncash payments in the United States," said Richard Oliver, executive vice president, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. "These studies underscore the ongoing evolution of check electronification while providing additional insight to help industry participants plan for the future." The 2010 Federal Reserve Payments Study consists of three research efforts commissioned to estimate the annual number, dollar value and composition of retail noncash payments in the United States. Together, the studies will provide aggregate estimates and current trends in the use of noncash payment instruments by U.S. consumers and businesses. Previous studies have revealed significant changes in the U.S. payments system over time, including a continuing decline in the use of checks and growing use of electronic payments, such as automated clearinghouse, electronic banking transactions, credit cards, debit cards and stored value cards. The Federal Reserve will work with the Global Concepts office of McKinsey & Company to conduct this research study. Preliminary results should be released by late 2010. "We appreciate the continued participation of financial institutions and other providers of payment services for sharing the information needed to conduct these studies and look forward to sharing the results with the industry," Oliver said. More information about Federal Reserve Financial Services can be found atwww.frbservices.org. This site also contains the2001 Retail Payments Research Report, the2004 Payments Research Studyand the2007 Federal Reserve Payments Study. * * * The Financial Services Policy Committee (FSPC) is responsible for the overall direction of financial services and related support functions for the Federal Reserve Banks, as well as for providing Federal Reserve leadership in dealing with the evolving U.S. payments system. The FSPC is composed of three Reserve Bank presidents and two Reserve Bank first vice presidents.
The Federal Reserve on Monday announced the availability of Electronic Applications, or "E-Apps," a new Internet-based system for financial institutions to submit regulatory filings. E‑Apps allows firms and their representatives to file applications online, eliminating the time and expense of printing, copying, and mailing the documents. Registered users can access the system at any time to upload additional documents or create new filings. There are no fees for using E-Apps. E-Apps has been designed to ensure the confidentiality of the data and the identity of individual filers. Institutions ready to start using E-Apps can find sign up forms athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/eappssignup.htm. Additional information and resources can be found on the Federal Reserve's website at:http://www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/eapps.htm.
On January 11, 2010, the Federal Reserve will offer $75 billion in 28-day credit through its Term Auction Facility. Additional information regarding the auction is listed below; the auction will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation A, and the terms and conditions of the Term Auction Facility (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm). Description of Offering and Auction Parameters Submission of BidsParticipants must submit bids by phone to their local Reserve Bank between the opening time and closing time on the bid submission date. NotificationSummary auction results will be published on the website of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/taf.htm) at approximately 10:00 a.m. EST on the notification date. Between 10:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. EST on the notification date, Reserve Banks will notify individual institutions in their districts that have submitted winning bids of their awards. Participants have until 12:30 p.m. EST on the notification date to inform their local Reserve Bank of any error. Rounding ConventionPro rata awards will be rounded to multiples of $10,000. Normal rounding convention will be used, except that awards under $10,000 will be rounded to $10,000.
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's Symposium on Interest Rate Risk Management, Arlington, Virginia I very much appreciate Chairman Bair's invitation to participate in this symposium. Interest rate risk management is an especially important topic in light of current market realities. Following its meeting earlier this week, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) repeated its expectation that rates would remain at exceptionally low levels for an extended period. I will say little about the outlook for interest rates, particularly just a few days after an FOMC meeting, but it is obvious that as the economic recovery gains traction, it will be appropriate at some point for the FOMC to raise rates. One of my messages today is that the response of interest rates across the maturity spectrum to an actual or expected tightening of monetary policy is always hard to predict, but is especially so in current circumstances. The usual uncertainty about changes in policy interest rates is compounded by uncertainties related to the possible special effects of the historically low level of interest rates in the current recession, as well as the unprecedented increases in the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet and bank reserves as a result of our credit programs and large-scale asset purchases. This run-up in Federal Reserve assets and bank reserves will also need to be unwound over time, with possible consequences for the structure of interest rates.1 Another message I hope to convey today is that many banks, thrifts, and credit unions may be exposed to an eventual increase in short-term interest rates. As the interest rate risk advisory issued by each of the financial regulators earlier this month recognized, interest rate risk is inherent in the business of banking. But it is especially important now for institutions to have in place sound practices to measure, monitor, and control this risk. They must not become distracted from this critical task by their efforts to deal with credit problems, nor can they think that assuming greater interest rate risk is a sound strategy for compensating for the losses they are taking on their loan portfolios. The recent crisis has been a stark reminder that borrowing short and lending long is an inherently risky business strategy. As the financial markets became disrupted, the liquidity risks of this strategy became painfully evident. Intermediaries need to be sure that as the economy recovers, they aren't also hit by the interest rate risk that often accompanies this sort of mismatch in asset and liability maturities. Interest Rate MovementsInterest rates are difficult to forecast in the most settled or normal of times, and their path is especially uncertain in the current circumstances. Short-term rates will rise at some point, but when, how quickly, and by how much will depend on the outlook for economic activity and inflation as the Federal Reserve pursues its objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. The historical record shows that short-term rates have moved in a variety of patterns in economic recoveries from recession: Sometimes rates began to rise shortly after the economy turned around; at other times it took a while for policy tightening to begin; and in other instances, rates continued to decline even after the economic recovery took hold, as during the 1991-92 period and, to a much lesser extent, during the 2002-03 period. We are now just beginning to recover from the deepest recession since World War II. Most economists expect only moderate growth and a slow decline in the unemployment rate over the next few years, importantly because it will take time for banks to rebuild their capital and begin competing more vigorously for loan business again. Clearly, we are in uncharted waters for monetary policy and the financial markets. When the Federal Reserve begins to raise short-term rates, the yield curve usually flattens--but not always. Longer-term rates can respond in a multitude of ways, with important implications for financial intermediaries. Recall that in 1994, long-term rates actually rose more than short-term rates for a time, steepening the yield curve and imposing substantial capital losses on market participants exposed to rising bond yields. By contrast, in the second half of 2004, long-term rates hardly rose, and in 2005 they actually declined when the Federal Reserve tightened monetary policy. In my view, the decline in long-term rates partly reflected a strong demand for dollar-denominated assets, especially from countries running current account surpluses, which were, in effect, greatly adding to the global pool of savings seeking higher returns. Extremely low interest rate volatility probably also contributed to investors' willingness to extend duration. No one knows what will happen to long-term rates over coming years, but the Group of 20 leaders have focused on emerging from this recession with better-balanced global growth, which suggests that foreign capital could be less plentiful for the United States. And volatilities are unlikely to return to their previous quiescent state. Banks and other investors cannot count on a repeat of the most recent experience--the absence of capital losses when short-term rates rise. In addition, the behavior of intermediate- and longer-term interest rates over coming years could well be influenced by a number of unusual elements in the current circumstances. Short-term rates have been close to zero for a year and, if the economy follows the trajectory expected by the Federal Reserve, are likely to stay there for an "extended period." One of the purposes of those very low short-term rates is to induce investors to buy longer-term and riskier assets than they were buying over the past year, thus reducing borrowing costs for households and businesses. How people will react to increases in expected, and then actual, short-term interest rates after such a period is hard to tell. Moreover, to counter the financial forces weighing on the economy, the Federal Reserve purchased large quantities of long-term agency, agency mortgage-backed, and Treasury securities, putting significant downward pressure on longer-term interest rates. We are now winding down those purchases. The effects on rates of the cessation of our purchases are likely to be modest, but that judgment is subject to considerable uncertainty. Moreover, the purchases created a large volume of excess reserves in the banking system. The reserves themselves could begin to affect the pattern of interest rates if depositories try to diversify out of reserves into other assets. When it comes time to absorb those reserves and raise interest rates, the Federal Reserve has a variety of tools at its disposal, ranging from increasing the rate it pays on excess reserves, to absorbing reserves by engaging in reverse repurchase agreements or offering term deposits to depository institutions, to selling the assets on its balance sheet. The possible mix of and sequencing in the use of those tools is under active consideration by the FOMC. We will choose the combination best suited to meeting our macroeconomic objectives, and those choices will influence not only the general level of interest rates, but also the relationships among them. Finally, intermediate- and longer-term interest rates fluctuate in response to many forces in addition to changes in the stance of monetary policy; yield curves have shifted considerably at times in the past when monetary policy has been relatively inactive. For example, the path of the federal budget deficit is likely to be an important influence over coming years. As you know, under current law, the deficit is on track to remain quite large even as the economy recovers, pushing up the ratio of federal debt to gross domestic product substantially. Unless the trajectory is changed, the competition for savings between the government, on the one hand, and households and businesses, on the other, could be significant as households and businesses begin to borrow and spend in the recovery, putting upward pressure on interest rates. Moreover, a number of institutions have an unusually large amount of debt to roll over in the next few years as a consequence of the shortening of the maturity of borrowing that naturally occurred under the pressure of financial market turmoil. I'm confident that sound institutions will find credit readily available to them, but the cost could be affected by the increasing competition for funds. Interest Rate Movements and the Performance of Financial IntermediariesIn light of the uncertain course of interest rates, financial intermediaries face significant challenges in managing their interest rate exposures. Clearly, the impact of changes in market rates depends on the maturity and re-pricing mismatches embedded in institutions' assets, liabilities, and off-balance-sheet positions. In general, those institutions whose assets are expected to re-price faster than their liabilities--referred to as "asset-sensitive"--would be expected to benefit from a rise in rates, because higher rates, holding everything else constant, should increase their net interest margins. Conversely, the net interest margins of "liability-sensitive" institutions--those whose asset durations are longer than their liability durations--would be expected to be negatively affected by a rise in market interest rates. Of course, there are more than 15,000 U.S. banks, thrifts, and credit unions, and the interest rate risk exposures faced by individual institutions are much more complex than these simple characterizations might lead us to believe. Each institution has its own unique funding structure and asset-liability re-pricing mismatches, based not only on the structural characteristics of its particular market and product offerings, but also on the impact of the current crisis and government countermeasures on its credit and liquidity risk exposures. For example, many large banking organizations have publicly disclosed that they have asset-sensitive positions, suggesting an ability to benefit from increases in short-term rates. Such characteristics are no doubt influenced by their significant holdings of excess reserves and other short-term liquid assets taken on during the crisis. Monetary policy tightening will entail draining excess reserves at some point, and as institutions reconsider their liquidity management‑‑subject to new, stronger liquidity requirements from supervisors, to be sure--their current asset-sensitivity might be expected to decline. And the behavior of various types of customers and instruments may be difficult to predict as the economy and financial markets emerge from this highly unusual period. Thus, even larger asset-sensitive institutions may need to deal with more complex and difficult interest rate risk issues than might be thought. On the liability side of the balance sheet, banks and other depositories may be facing unusual uncertainties about the future behavior of non-interest-bearing and low-interest deposits. As you are well aware, these types of deposits help boost the net interest income of depository institutions. A number of institutions, both large and small, posted increases in such deposits over the past two years as a result of a "flight to quality" by consumers and small businesses from less-sound intermediaries, money market funds, and other short-term investments. Moreover, banks themselves, aided by the expansion of deposit insurance, have competed heavily for such deposits as potentially more stable sources of funds in a crisis environment. Importantly, such newly acquired low-cost "core" deposits may not be as stable or as interest rate insensitive as similar deposits may have been in the past. Without a doubt, consumers and small businesses are eager to raise their returns on short-term deposits, and institutions may have to compete even more strongly for such deposits once short-term rates begin to move higher. Forecasting the behavior of depositors and the business strategies of other intermediaries has always been a challenge for depository institutions and will be even more challenging as we exit from the current policy and interest rate environment. These challenges would seem even greater for liability-sensitive institutions--and a significant number of community banks appear to fall into that category. As competition for low-cost deposits has increased, many community banks have been forced to increase their reliance on wholesale funds, including brokered deposits, which are significantly more interest rate sensitive and less stable than traditional core deposits. At the same time, many community banks--in competition with securitization markets and larger institutions for consumer and small business loans--face challenges in acquiring good-quality short- and intermediate-duration assets to match their shorter-term liabilities. Many community banks have increased their holdings of longer-term mortgage assets, including mortgage securities guaranteed by Ginnie Mae and the government-sponsored enterprises, in an effort to enhance both credit quality and earning asset yields. While such holdings advance public policy interests in reviving the mortgage market, they nevertheless pose the potential for increasing interest rate risk exposures, in part because of the embedded options in residential mortgages. Additionally, some banks appear to be assuming more-complex exposures to interest rate risk through purchases of structured products. The recent crisis has focused attention on the problems and complexity of structured products in the form of collateralized debt obligations, which carved up the credit risk of underlying assets into various tranches--a product that, it turned out, too few investors understood. But similar lessons were learned with regard to interest rate risk management in the early 1990s when many institutions purchased various types of structured collateralized mortgage obligations (CMOs) with embedded interest-rate options that were not fully understood--and then incurred substantial and unexpected losses when interest rates rose in 1994. Many CMOs turned out to have durations that fluctuated sharply in response to even small changes in market rates, resulting in significant declines in the value of the instruments and in many cases increasing the asset-liability mismatches they were intended to mitigate. Capital losses as longer-term interest rates rise are a risk facing even asset-sensitive banks. As bankers prepare to meet the uncertainties that lie ahead, they must not forget these hard-learned lessons and must make sure they fully understand how the securities they purchase will perform in different economic and financial market environments, including an environment of rising short- and long-term interest rates. Importance of Robust Interest Rate Risk Management at All Banking OrganizationsBecause of the potential complexity of interest rate risk exposures at individual institutions, supervisors have, for many years, pointed out the need for bankers to use sound practices for managing these exposures. Employing sound practices becomes even more critical in light of the current uncertainties surrounding the timing and impacts of changes in interest rates. It was concern about the risks to banks from interest rate changes that led the supervisors to issue the recent advisory on interest rate risk management. That advisory reminded institutions of guidance dating back to mid-1990s. Other speakers at this symposium will no doubt summarize and expand upon the guidance discussed in that advisory, but the key principles of risk management apply to interest rate risk, as they do to the management of other risks. These principles articulate the need for (1) appropriate corporate governance, including actively engaged boards of directors and senior managers; (2) adequate policies, procedures, and limits to guide the institution's interest rate risk management process; (3) robust interest rate risk measurement and reporting systems that focus heavily on stress testing of both alternative interest rate scenarios and the effect of key behavioral assumptions on the results of such tests; and (4) strong internal controls structured to ensure the integrity of all elements of the interest rate risk management process. As the recent crisis has emphasized, senior managers must actively engage in the measurement and assessment of risk exposures. Given today's technology, even some small banks are using reasonably sophisticated measurement techniques to assess the impact of different interest rate scenarios on the different types of interest rate risk that these institutions are exposed to. These risks include basic re-pricing mismatches that are most sensitive to changes in the level of rates; exposures to different yield curve shifts, twists, and slopes; basis risks, which arise from re-pricing differences in instruments with similar maturities; and the risks that both explicit and embedded interest rate options can pose to the performance and safety and soundness of an institution. Clearly, every financial institution, regardless of size, must understand the risks it is taking, and how to control and mitigate those risks. We have seen too well and too painfully in the past several years, in the largest banks and in the smallest, what happens when systems and management understanding are not commensurate with the risks being taken. The consequences fall not only on bank owners, staff, and customers, but potentially on the entire economy. We cannot allow that experience to be repeated, and this conference is one step in making sure that interest rate risk does not undermine the safety and soundness of our nation's most important lenders--banks, thrifts, and credit unions. Footnotes 1.The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the FOMC. Jim Embersit andEgon Zakrajsekof the Board's staff contributed to these remarks.Return to text
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December suggests that economic activity has continued to strengthen and that the deterioration in the labor market is abating. Household spending is expanding at a moderate rate but remains constrained by a weak labor market, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit. Business spending on equipment and software appears to be picking up, but investment in structures is still contracting and employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. Firms have brought inventory stocks into better alignment with sales. While bank lending continues to contract, financial market conditions remain supportive of economic growth. Although the pace of economic recovery is likely to be moderate for a time, the Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability. With substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and with longer-term inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. To provide support to mortgage lending and housing markets and to improve overall conditions in private credit markets, the Federal Reserve is in the process of purchasing $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities and about $175 billion of agency debt. In order to promote a smooth transition in markets, the Committee is gradually slowing the pace of these purchases, and it anticipates that these transactions will be executed by the end of the first quarter. The Committee will continue to evaluate its purchases of securities in light of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in financial markets. In light of improved functioning of financial markets, the Federal Reserve will be closing the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, and the Term Securities Lending Facility on February 1, as previously announced. In addition, the temporary liquidity swap arrangements between the Federal Reserve and other central banks will expire on February 1. The Federal Reserve is in the process of winding down its Term Auction Facility: $50 billion in 28-day credit will be offered on February 8 and $25 billion in 28-day credit will be offered at the final auction on March 8. The anticipated expiration dates for the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility remain set at June 30 for loans backed by new-issue commercial mortgage-backed securities and March 31 for loans backed by all other types of collateral. The Federal Reserve is prepared to modify these plans if necessary to support financial stability and economic growth. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman; James Bullard; Elizabeth A. Duke; Donald L. Kohn; Sandra Pianalto; Eric S. Rosengren; Daniel K. Tarullo; and Kevin M. Warsh. Voting against the policy action was Thomas M. Hoenig, who believed that economic and financial conditions had changed sufficiently that the expectation of exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period was no longer warranted.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings on November 23 and December 14, 2009. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 15-16, 2009. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm Minutes of Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 15-16, 2009:318 KB PDF|HTML
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, Atlanta, Georgia The financial crisis that began in August 2007 has been the most severe of the post-World War II era and, very possibly--once one takes into account the global scope of the crisis, its broad effects on a range of markets and institutions, and the number of systemically critical financial institutions that failed or came close to failure--the worst in modern history. Although forceful responses by policymakers around the world avoided an utter collapse of the global financial system in the fall of 2008, the crisis was nevertheless sufficiently intense to spark a deep global recession from which we are only now beginning to recover. Even as we continue working to stabilize our financial system and reinvigorate our economy, it is essential that we learn the lessons of the crisis so that we can prevent it from happening again. Because the crisis was so complex, its lessons are many, and they are not always straightforward. Surely, both the private sector and financial regulators must improve their ability to monitor and control risk-taking. The crisis revealed not only weaknesses in regulators' oversight of financial institutions, but also, more fundamentally, important gaps in the architecture of financial regulation around the world. For our part, the Federal Reserve has been working hard to identify problems and to improve and strengthen our supervisory policies and practices, and we have advocated substantial legislative and regulatory reforms to address problems exposed by the crisis. As with regulatory policy, we must discern the lessons of the crisis for monetary policy. However, the nature of those lessons is controversial. Some observers have assigned monetary policy a central role in the crisis. Specifically, they claim that excessively easy monetary policy by the Federal Reserve in the first half of the decade helped cause a bubble in house prices in the United States, a bubble whose inevitable collapse proved a major source of the financial and economic stresses of the past two years. Proponents of this view typically argue for a substantially greater role for monetary policy in preventing and controlling bubbles in the prices of housing and other assets. In contrast, others have taken the position that policy was appropriate for the macroeconomic conditions that prevailed, and that it was neither a principal cause of the housing bubble nor the right tool for controlling the increase in house prices. Obviously, in light of the economic damage inflicted by the collapses of two asset price bubbles over the past decade, a great deal more than historical accuracy rides on the resolution of this debate. The goal of my remarks today is to shed some light on these questions. I will first review U.S. monetary policy in the aftermath of the 2001 recession and assess whether the policy was appropriate, given the state of the economy at that time and the information that was available to policymakers. I will then discuss some evidence on the sources of the U.S. housing bubble, including the role of monetary policy. Finally, I will draw some lessons for future monetary and regulatory policies.1 U.S. Monetary Policy, 2002-2006I will begin with a brief review of U.S. monetary policy during the past decade, focusing on the period from 2002 to 2006. As you know, the U.S. economy suffered a moderate recession between March and November 2001, largely traceable to the ending of the dot-com boom and the resulting sharp decline in stock prices. Geopolitical uncertainties associated with the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and the invasion of Iraq in March 2003, as well as a series of corporate scandals in 2002, further clouded the economic situation in the early part of the decade. Slide 1shows the path, from the year 2000 to the present, of one key indicator of monetary policy, the target for the overnight federal funds rate set by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The Federal Reserve manages the federal funds rate, the interest rate at which banks lend to each other, to influence broader financial conditions and thus the course of the economy. As you can see, the target federal funds rate was lowered quickly in response to the 2001 recession, from 6.5 percent in late 2000 to 1.75 percent in December 2001 and to 1 percent in June 2003. After reaching the then-record low of 1 percent, the target rate remained at that level for a year. In June 2004, the FOMC began to raise the target rate, reaching 5.25 percent in June 2006 before pausing. (More recently, as you know, and as the rightward portion of the slide indicates, rates have been cut sharply once again.) The low policy rates during the 2002-06 period were accompanied at various times by "forward guidance" on policy from the Committee. For example, beginning in August 2003, the FOMC noted in four post-meeting statements that policy was likely to remain accommodative for a "considerable period."2 The aggressive monetary policy response in 2002 and 2003 was motivated by two principal factors. First, although the recession technically ended in late 2001, the recovery remained quite weak and "jobless" into the latter part of 2003. Real gross domestic product (GDP), which normally grows above trend in the early stages of an economic expansion, rose at an average pace just above 2 percent in 2002 and the first half of 2003, a rate insufficient to halt continued increases in the unemployment rate, which peaked above 6 percent in the first half of 2003.3Second, the FOMC's policy response also reflected concerns about a possible unwelcome decline in inflation. Taking note of the painful experience of Japan, policymakers worried that the United States might sink into deflation and that, as one consequence, the FOMC's target interest rate might hit its zero lower bound, limiting the scope for further monetary accommodation. FOMC decisions during this period were informed by a strong consensus among researchers that, when faced with the risk of hitting the zero lower bound, policymakers should lower rates preemptively, thereby reducing the probability of ultimately being constrained by the lower bound on the policy interest rate.4 Evaluating the Tightness or Ease of Monetary PolicyAlthough macroeconomic conditions certainly warranted accommodative policies in 2002 and subsequent years, the question remains whether policy was nevertheless easier than necessary. Since we cannot know how the economy would have evolved under alternative monetary policies, any answer to this question must be conjectural. One approach used by many who have addressed this question is to compare Federal Reserve policies during this period to the recommendations derived from simple policy rules, such as the so-called Taylor rule, developed by John Taylor of Stanford University (Taylor, 1993). This approach is subject to a number of limitations, which are important to keep in mind.5Notably, simple policy rules like the Taylor rule are only rules of thumb, and reasonable people can disagree about important details of the construction of such rules. Moreover, simple rules necessarily leave out many factors that may be relevant to the making of effective policy in a given episode--such as the risk of the policy rate hitting the zero lower bound, for example--which is why we do not make monetary policy on the basis of such rules alone. For these reasons, even strong proponents of simple policy rules generally advise that they be used only as guidelines, not as substitutes for more complete policy analyses; and that, to ensure robustness, the recommendations of a number of alternative simple rules should be considered (Taylor, 1999a). That said, as much of the debate about monetary policy after the 2001 recession has made use of such rules, I will discuss them here as well. The well-known Taylor rule relates the prescribed setting of the overnight federal funds rate--the interest rate targeted by the FOMC in its making of monetary policy--to two factors: (1) the deviation, in percentage points, of the current inflation rate from policymakers’ longer-term inflation objective; and (2) the so-called output gap, defined as the percentage difference between current output (usually defined as real GDP) and the “normal” or “potential” level of output. In symbols, the standard form of the Taylor rule is given by the equation shown inSlide 2.In this equation,itis the prescribed value of the policy interest rate in a given periodt;πt—πt*is the deviation of the actual inflation rateπfrom its target π*in periodt;and yt— yt*, the “output gap,” is the deviation of actual real outputyfrom potential output y*in periodt. The parametersaandbare positive numbers that describe how strongly the policy rate should respond to deviations of inflation from its target and of output from its potential. As we would expect, the Taylor rule tells policymakers that interest rates should be higher when inflation is above target, (πt— πt*)> 0 , or when output is above its potential, (yt— yt*)> 0.Taylor (1993) estimated the long-run real value of the federal funds rate to be about 2 percent. The equation for the Taylor rule accordingly shows that when inflation and output are equal to their targets, the federal funds rate--which is expressed here in nominal terms--should equal 2 plus the rate of inflation. Equivalently, when inflation and output equal their targets, the real value of the federal funds rate should equal 2 percent. To make the Taylor rule equation shown in Slide 2 operational, one needs to specify numerical values for the coefficientsaandb,choose appropriate indicators of inflation and output, and specify a target rate for inflation and a measure of potential output. In his 1993 paper introducing his eponymous rule, Taylor suggested setting bothaandbequal to 0.5. So, for example, according to the original Taylor rule, if output rises 1 percent relative to its potential, then, all else equal, the Federal Reserve should raise its policy rate by 0.5 percent, or 50 basis points. Following Taylor's suggestions for parameter values, in Slide 3 we show by the dashed red line the values of the federal funds rate implied by the Taylor rule for the period from 2000 to the present, with inflation measured by the consumer price index (CPI), the Fed's assumed inflation target set to 2 percent, output measured by real GDP, and the output gap as estimated retrospectively by the Federal Reserve's primary forecasting model, the FRB/US model. The Taylor rule prescription is juxtaposed with the actual path of the policy rate taken from Slide 1, again shown in blue. The comparison displayed inSlide 3provides the most commonly cited evidence that monetary policy was too easy during the period from 2002 to 2006, as the actual federal funds rate is below the values implied by the Taylor rule--by about 200 basis points on average over this five-year period (Taylor, 2007). Of course, the validity of that conclusion depends on whether the specific assumptions and measurements used to construct the Taylor rule's policy prescription are appropriate. Room for disagreement exists. For example, some empirical and simulation evidence suggests that the responsiveness of policy to the output gap, given by the parameterbin the Taylor rule equation, should be higher than the value of 0.5 originally chosen by Taylor.6Higher values ofblead the Taylor rule to recommend somewhat lower policy rates during recessions and their aftermaths. The prescriptions of the Taylor rule may also depend sensitively on how inflation and the output gap are measured. The difficulties in measuring the output gap, particularly in real time, are well known. The choice of inflation measure may also be consequential. In his original 1993 paper, Taylor chose to measure inflation using the GDP deflator. As noted, the Taylor rule policy prescription shown in Slide 3 is based on the familiar CPI measure of inflation. For its part, during the past decade, the FOMC has typically focused on inflation as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), because that measure is less dominated than is the CPI by the imputed rent of owner-occupied housing, and for other technical reasons. As it happens, the choice of inflation measure matters for the interpretation of this episode, as alternative measures gave policymakers somewhat different signals. Notably, core PCE inflation for 2003 was initially reported, in the first quarter of 2004, as having slowed to about 1percent, and it appeared to be on a steep downward trajectory.7These data heightened concerns about deflation on the FOMC. In contrast, the CPI data released at the same time showed core inflation for 2003 of about 2 percent. In this case, data revisions ultimately raised estimates of PCE inflation for that period, implying that deflation was less of a risk than was thought at the time. But that such revisions would occur could not be known in advance, and policy decisions, of course, must be made based on the information available at the time. For my purposes today, however, the most significant concern regarding the use of the standard Taylor rule as a policy benchmark is its implication that monetary policy should depend oncurrently observedvalues of inflation and output. In particular, the Taylor rule recommendation shown in Slide 3 relates the prescribed policy interest rate to the inflation rate and output gap that correspond to the same quarter in which the policy decision was made.8However, because monetary policy works with a lag, effective monetary policy must take into account theforecastvalues of the goal variables, rather than the current values. Indeed, in that spirit, the FOMC issues regular economic projections, and these projections have been shown to have an important influence on policy decisions (Orphanides and Wieland, 2008). The distinction between current and forecast values does not always matter much, as (for example) high levels of inflation or output today may signal high levels of those variables in the future. However, over the past decade, the distinction between current and forecast inflation has been an important one. On several occasions during this period, surges in energy prices led to increases in overall inflation. According to the standard Taylor rule, whose policy prescription depends on the current value of inflation, these episodes should have led to a significant tightening of monetary policy. However, both the FOMC and private forecasters expected these increases in energy prices to subside--correctly, as it turned out--and therefore did not much adjust their medium-termforecastsfor inflation. Consequently, policy was not tightened as much as would have been called for by the standard Taylor rule. Put another way, the standard Taylor rule makes no distinction between increases in inflation expected to be temporary and those expected to be longer lasting. In practice, however, policymakers have responded less to increases in inflation that they expect to be temporary, a reasonable strategy given that monetary policy affects inflation only with a significant lag. Slide 4shows the quantitative implications of this point. The actual paths of the policy rate, in blue, and the policy prescription implied by the standard Taylor rule, the dashed red line, are the same as in Slide 3. Also shown, as a dotted green line, is the monetary policy path prescribed by an alternative version of the Taylor rule that replaces the current rate of inflation on the right-hand side with a forecast of inflation over the current and subsequent three quarters. Forecasts are those that were actually made in real time, that is, at the time at which the corresponding policy rate was chosen. For the period through 2004, these forecasts are the staff forecasts (the so-called Greenbook forecasts) that were prepared for each policy meeting. Because Greenbook forecasts for the period after 2004 are not yet publicly available, from 2005 on the forecasts are constructed from the publicly released, contemporaneous projections of FOMC participants, using methods developed by Athanasios Orphanides and Volker Wieland (2008).9In addition, consistent with the practices of the FOMC, inflation is measured by the PCE price index as was available in real time, instead of by the CPI.10 As Slide 4 shows, the alternative Taylor rule prescribes a path for policy that is much closer to that followed throughout the decade, including recent years. In other words, when one takes into account that policymakers should and do respond differently to temporary and longer-lasting changes in inflation, monetary policy following the 2001 recession appears to have been reasonably appropriate, at least in relation to a simple policy rule. Which version of the Taylor rule--the standard version, that uses current values of inflation, or the alternative version, that employs inflation forecasts--is the more reliable guide? I have explained my preference for using inflation forecasts rather than actual inflation in the policy rule: Monetary policy works with a lag, and therefore policy decisions must be forward looking. One might still prefer the simplicity of the standard Taylor rule that uses current inflation values. However, note from Slide 4 that a proponent of the standard rule would have recommended that the FOMC raise the policy rate to a range of 7 to 8 percent through the first three quarters of 2008, just after the recession peak and just before the intensification of the financial crisis in September and October--a policy decision that probably would not have garnered much support among monetary specialists. In contrast, Slide 4 shows that the version of the Taylor rule based on forecast inflation (in green dots) explains both the course of monetary policy earlier in the past decade as well as the decision not to respond aggressively to what did in fact turn out to be a temporary surge in inflation in 2008. This comparison suggests that the Taylor rule using forecast inflation is a more useful benchmark, both as a description of recent FOMC behavior and as a guide to appropriate policy. Although monetary policy from 2002 to 2006 appears to have been reasonably consistent with the Federal Reserve's mandated goals of maximum sustainable employment and price stability, we have not yet addressed the possibility that accommodative policies--though perhaps appropriate for achieving medium-term inflation and output goals--inadvertently contributed to the housing bubble. I turn now to that question. Monetary Policy and the Housing BubbleTo set the stage for the discussion,Slide 5shows the annual increase in nominal house prices from 1978 to the present.11After some years of slow growth, U.S. house prices began to rise more rapidly in the late 1990s. Prices grew at a 7 to 8 percent annual rate in 1998 and 1999, and in the 9 to 11 percent range from 2000 to 2003. Thus, the beginning of the run-up in housing prices predates the period of highly accommodative monetary policy. Shiller (2007) dates the beginning of the boom in 1998. On the other hand, the most rapid price gains were in 2004 and 2005, when the annual rate of house price appreciation was between 15 and 17 percent. Thus, the timing of the housing bubble does not rule out some contribution from monetary policy. To try to assess the importance of that possible contribution, in the remainder of my remarks I will consider briefly two related questions. First, the cumulative increase in housing prices shown in Slide 5 is quite large. Can accommodative monetary policies during this period reasonably account for themagnitudeof the increase in house prices that we observed? If not, what does account for it? Second, house prices rose significantly during this period in many industrialized countries, not just in the United States. If monetary policy was an important source of house price appreciation in the United States, it seems reasonable to expect that, in an international comparison, countries with easier monetary policies should have been more likely to have significant rises in house prices as well. Is that the case? With respect to the magnitude of house-price increases: Economists who have investigated the issue have generally found that, based on historical relationships, only a small portion of the increase in house prices earlier this decade can be attributed to the stance of U.S. monetary policy.12This conclusion has been reached using both econometric models and purely statistical analyses that make no use of economic theory. To demonstrate this finding in a simple way, I will use a statistical model developed by Federal Reserve Board researchers that summarizes the historical relationships among key macroeconomic indicators, house prices, and monetary policy (Dokko and others, 2009). The statistical technique employed in this model, known as vector autoregression, is familiar to econometricians who seek to analyze the joint evolution of a collection of data series over time. The model incorporates seven variables, including measures of economic growth, inflation, unemployment, residential investment, house prices, and the federal funds rate, and it is estimated using data from 1977 to 2002.13For our purposes, the value of such a model is that it can be used to predict the behavior of any of the variables being studied, assuming that historical relationships hold and that the other variables in the system take on their actual historical values. Slide 6illustrates the application of this procedure to the federal funds rate and housing prices over the period from 2003 to 2008. In the left panel of the figure, the solid line shows the actual history of the federal funds rate. The shaded area in the figure is constructed using the results of the statistical model; it shows the range of possible outcomes that would be considered "normal" for the federal funds rate, assuming that the other six variables included in the model took their actual values during the years 2003 through 2008. Values of the federal funds rate that fall in the shaded area are relatively "close to" (technically, within 2 standard deviations of) the corresponding forecast values. In line with our earlier discussion, the left panel of the figure suggests that, although monetary policy during the period following the 2001 recession was accommodative, it was not inconsistent with the historical experience, given the macroeconomic environment of the time. The right panel of the figure shows the forecast behavior of house prices during the recent period, taking as given macroeconomic conditions and the actual path of the federal funds rate. As you can see, the rise in house prices falls well outside the predictions of the model. Thus, when historical relationships are taken into account, it is difficult to ascribe the house price bubble either to monetary policy or to the broader macroeconomic environment. A possible objection to this conclusion is that, because of changes in methods of housing finance, the responsiveness of house prices to monetary policy may have been different in the past decade than it was in the 1980s and 1990s. For example, during 2003 and 2004, about one-third of mortgage applications were for adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) products. Low policy rates feed through to monthly mortgage payments more directly when the mortgage interest rate is adjustable and tied to short-term rates. This linkage could rationalize a stronger effect of monetary policy on house prices in the more recent period (Iacoviello and Neri, forthcoming). Some evidence on this question is provided inSlide 7, which shows illustrative initial monthly mortgage payments for a median-priced house for different types of mortgages.14The interest rates used in calculating these payments are actual averages for prime borrowers for the period from 2003 to 2006, as provided by Freddie Mac. A comparison of the initial monthly payment for a fixed-rate 30-year mortgage and an ARM shows that the ARM payment is about 16 percent lower, a consequential but not dramatic difference. The ARM payment is not substantially lower than the fixed-rate payment because it includes amortization of principal and a spread over the index interest rate.15Moreover, less accommodative monetary policy would not have had a substantial effect on ARM payments. Using the Board's principal macroeconometric model, staff simulated the effects on the economy and on mortgage rates of a monetary policy that followed the original 1993 Taylor rule, taking into account the feedback effects from tighter policy to the economy.16Under this scenario, they found that the initial ARM rate would have been about 0.71 percentage point higher than in the baseline and that the initial monthly payment for an ARM borrower would have increased by only about $75. This result does not suggest that moderately tighter monetary policy would have dissuaded many potential ARM borrowers. Slide 7 also shows initial monthly payments for some alternative types of variable-rate mortgages, including interest-only ARMs, long-amortization ARMs, negative amortization ARMs (in which the initial payment does not even cover interest costs), and pay-option ARMs (which give the borrower considerable flexibility regarding the size of monthly payments in the early stages of the contract). These more exotic mortgages show much more significant reductions in the initial monthly payment than could be obtained through a standard ARM. Clearly, for lenders and borrowers focused on minimizing the initial payment, the choice of mortgage type was far more important than the level of short-term interest rates. The availability of these alternative mortgage products proved to be quite important and, as many have recognized, is likely a key explanation of the housing bubble.Slide 8shows the percentage of variable-rate mortgages originated with various exotic features, beginning in 2000. As you can see, the use of these nonstandard features increased rapidly from early in the decade through 2005 or 2006. Because such features are presumably not appropriate for many borrowers, Slide 8 is evidence of a protracted deterioration in mortgage underwriting standards, which was further exacerbated by practices such as the use of no-documentation loans. The picture that emerges is consistent with many accounts of the period: At some point, both lenders and borrowers became convinced that house prices would only go up. Borrowers chose, and were extended, mortgages that they could not be expected to service in the longer term. They were provided these loans on the expectation that accumulating home equity would soon allow refinancing into more sustainable mortgages. For a time, rising house prices became a self-fulfilling prophecy, but ultimately, further appreciation could not be sustained and house prices collapsed. This description suggests that regulatory and supervisory policies, rather than monetary policies, would have been more effective means of addressing the run-up in house prices. I will return to this point in my conclusion. Let me turn now to the international evidence on the link between monetary policy and house price appreciation. Some cross-country evidence on this link is shown inSlide 9. The figure is drawn from a recent study of 20 industrial countries by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (Fatás and others, 2009) and replicated by Board staff. The vertical axis of the figure shows the change in real (inflation-adjusted) house prices in each country from the fourth quarter of 2001 until the third quarter of 2006, a period that spans the sharpest period of price appreciation in most countries. Countries represented by diamonds that are further "north" in Slide 9 had relatively greater house price appreciation over this period. You can see from the figure that house price appreciation in the United States, though of course large in absolute terms, was actually less than that in the majority of countries in the sample. The horizontal axis of the figure, following the IMF study, shows the degree of monetary policy ease or tightness in each country, measured by the average deviation of policy in each country from the prescriptions of a standard version of the Taylor rule over the corresponding period. Countries shown further to the left in the figure had more accommodative monetary policies over the period, relative to the predictions of the Taylor rule. The United States is shown as having a relatively accommodative policy, as you can see; however, that conclusion is driven in part by the use of current rather than forecast inflation in the Taylor rule, the point I discussed earlier. Interestingly, essentially all of these countries had monetary policies easier than that prescribed by the Taylor rule, as shown by the fact that every country is situated on or to the left of the vertical axis in the figure.17 As Slide 9 shows, the relationship between the stance of monetary policy and house price appreciation across countries is quite weak. For example, 11 of the 20 countries in the sample had both tighter monetary policies, relative to the standard Taylor-rule prescriptions, and greater house price appreciation than the United States. The overall relationship between house prices and monetary policy, shown by the solid line, has the expected slope (tighter policy is associated with somewhat slower house price appreciation). However, the relationship is statistically insignificant and economically weak; moreover, monetary policy differences explain only about 5 percent of the variability in house price appreciation across countries. What does explain the variability in house price appreciation across countries? In previous remarks I have pointed out that capital inflows from emerging markets to industrial countries can help to explain asset price appreciation and low long-term real interest rates in the countries receiving the funds--the so-called global savings glut hypothesis (Bernanke, 2005, 2007). Today is not the appropriate time to revisit that hypothesis in any detail, but I would like to take a moment to show that accounting for capital inflows is likely to prove fruitful for explaining cross-country differences.Slide 10, which is analogous to Slide 9, shows the relationship between capital inflows and house price appreciation for the same set of countries as in the previous slide. Also as in the previous slide, house price appreciation is shown on the vertical axis of the figure. The horizontal axis shows the increase in the current account (equivalently, the increase in capital inflows) for each country, measured as a percentage of GDP. The downward slope of the relationship is as expected--countries in which current accounts worsened and capital inflows rose (shown in the left half of the figure) had greater house price appreciation over this period.18However, in contrast to the previous slide, the relationship is highly significant, both statistically and economically, and about 31percent of the variability in house price appreciation across countries is explained.19This simple relationship requires more interpretation before any strong conclusions about causality can be drawn; in particular, we need to understand better why some countries drew stronger capital inflows than others. I will only note here that, as more accommodative monetary policies generally reduce capital inflows, this relationship appears to be inconsistent with the existence of a strong link between monetary policy and house price appreciation. Conclusions and Policy ImplicationsMy objective today has been to review the evidence on the link between monetary policy in the early part of the past decade and the rapid rise in house prices that occurred at roughly the same time. The direct linkages, at least, are weak. Because monetary policy works with a lag, policymakers' response to changes in inflation and other economic variables should depend on whether those changes are expected to be temporary or longer-lasting. When that point is taken into account, policy during that period--though certainly accommodative--does not appear to have been inappropriate, given the state of the economy and policymakers' medium-term objectives. House prices began to rise in the late 1990s, and although the most rapid price increases occurred when short-term interest rates were at their lowest levels, the magnitude of house price gains seems too large to be readily explainable by the stance of monetary policy alone. Moreover, cross-country evidence shows no significant relationship between monetary policies and the pace of house price increases. What policy implications should we draw? I noted earlier that the most important source of lower initial monthly payments, which allowed more people to enter the housing market and bid for properties, was not the general level of short-term interest rates, but the increasing use of more exotic types of mortgages and the associated decline of underwriting standards. That conclusion suggests that the best response to the housing bubble would have been regulatory, not monetary. Stronger regulation and supervision aimed at problems with underwriting practices and lenders' risk management would have been a more effective and surgical approach to constraining the housing bubble than a general increase in interest rates. Moreover, regulators, supervisors, and the private sector could have more effectively addressed building risk concentrations and inadequate risk-management practices without necessarily having had to make a judgment about the sustainability of house price increases. The Federal Reserve and other agencies did make efforts to address poor mortgage underwriting practices. In 2005, we worked with other banking regulators to develop guidance for banks on nontraditional mortgages, notably interest-only and option-ARM products. In March 2007, we issued interagency guidance on subprime lending, which was finalized in June. After a series of hearings that began in June 2006, we used authority granted us under the Truth in Lending Act to issue rules that apply to all high-cost mortgage lenders, not just banks. However, these efforts came too late or were insufficient to stop the decline in underwriting standards and effectively constrain the housing bubble. The lesson I take from this experience is not that financial regulation and supervision are ineffective for controlling emerging risks, but that their execution must be better and smarter. The Federal Reserve is working not only to improve our ability to identify and correct problems in financial institutions, but also to move from an institution-by-institution supervisory approach to one that is attentive to the stability of the financial system as a whole. Toward that end, we are supplementing reviews of individual firms with comparative evaluations across firms and with analyses of the interactions among firms and markets. We have further strengthened our commitment to consumer protection. And we have strongly advocated financial regulatory reforms, such as the creation of a systemic risk council, that will reorient the country's overall regulatory structure toward a more systemic approach. The crisis has shown us that indicators such as leverage and liquidity must be evaluated from a systemwide perspective as well as at the level of individual firms. Is there any role for monetary policy in addressing bubbles? Economists have pointed out the practical problems with using monetary policy to pop asset price bubbles, and many of these were illustrated by the recent episode. Although the house price bubble appears obvious in retrospect--all bubbles appear obvious in retrospect--in its earlier stages, economists differed considerably about whether the increase in house prices was sustainable; or, if it was a bubble, whether the bubble was national or confined to a few local markets. Monetary policy is also a blunt tool, and interest rate increases in 2003 or 2004 sufficient to constrain the bubble could have seriously weakened the economy at just the time when the recovery from the previous recession was becoming established. That said, having experienced the damage that asset price bubbles can cause, we must be especially vigilant in ensuring that the recent experiences are not repeated. All efforts should be made to strengthen our regulatory system to prevent a recurrence of the crisis, and to cushion the effects if another crisis occurs. However, if adequate reforms are not made, or if they are made but prove insufficient to prevent dangerous buildups of financial risks, we must remain open to using monetary policy as a supplementary tool for addressing those risks--proceeding cautiously and always keeping in mind the inherent difficulties of that approach. Clearly, we still have much to learn about how best to make monetary policy and to meet threats to financial stability in this new era. Maintaining flexibility and an open mind will be essential for successful policymaking as we feel our way forward. References Ahearne, Alan, Joseph Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, Steven Kamin, and others (2002). "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Papers 72. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Ahearne, Alan, John Ammer, Brian Doyle, Linda Kole, and Robert Martin (2005). "House Prices and Monetary Policy: A Cross-Country Study," International Finance Discussion Papers 841. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Bernanke, Ben S. (2005). "The Global Savings Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit," speech delivered at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Va., March 10. Bernanke, Ben S. (2007). "Global Imbalances: Recent Developments and Prospects," at the Bundesbank Lecture, Berlin, Germany, September 11. Del Negro, Marco, and Christopher Otrok (2007). "99 Luftballons: Monetary Policy and the House Price Boom across U.S. States,"Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.4, pp. 1962-85. Dokko, Jane, Brian Doyle, Michael T. Kiley, Jinill Kim, Shane Sherlund, Jae Sim, and Skander Van den Heuvel (2009). "Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2009-49. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal System, December. Edge, Rochelle M., Michael T. Kiley, and Jean-Philippe Laforte (2008). "The Sources of Fluctuations in Residential Investment: A View from a Policy-Oriented DSGE Model of the U.S. Economy (298 KB PDF)," paper presented at the 2009 American Economic Association annual meeting, held January 3-5. Eggertsson, Gauti, and Michael Woodford (2003). "The Zero Interest-Rate Bound and Optimal Monetary Policy,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,vol. 1, pp.139-211. Fatás, Antonio, Prakash Kannan, Pau Rabanal, and Alasdair Scott (2009). "Lessons for Monetary Policy from Asset Price Fluctuations," inWorld Economic Outlook(Fall), chapter 3. Washington: International Monetary Fund. Fuhrer, Jeffrey C. and Brian F. Madigan, 1997. "Monetary Policy When Interest Rates Are Bounded at Zero,"The Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 79 (November), pp 573-85. Iacoviello, Matteo, and Stefano Neri (forthcoming). "Housing Market Spillovers: Evidence from an Estimated DSGE Model,"American Economic Journals: Macroeconomics. Jarociński, Marek, and Frank R. Smets (2008). "House Prices and the Stance of Monetary Policy," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Review, vol. 90 (July/August), pp.339-65. Kohn, Donald L. (2007). "John Taylor Rules," speech delivered at "Conference on John Taylor's Contributions to Monetary Theory and Policy," Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Dallas, Tex., October 12. Orphanides, Athanasios, and Volcker Wieland (2008). "Economic Projections and Rules of Thumb for Monetary Policy (220 KB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Review, vol.90 (July/August), pp. 307-24. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Era," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series, pp.936-78. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. Shiller, Robert J. (2007). "Understanding Recent Trends in House Prices and Homeownership," inProceedingsof the symposium "Housing, Housing Finance, and Monetary Policy." Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp.89-123. Taylor, John B. (1993). "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214. Taylor, John B. (1999a). "An Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Taylor, John B., ed. (1999b).Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Taylor, John B. (2007). "Housing and Monetary Policy," NBER Working Paper Series 13682. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, December. Woodford, Michael (2007). "The Case for Forecast Targeting as a Monetary Policy Strategy,"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 21 (4), pp. 3-24. 1.My remarks will rely heavily on material drawn from Dokko and others (2009). However, neither those authors nor my other colleagues in the Federal Reserve System are responsible for the interpretations and conclusions I draw in these remarks.Return to text 2.In January 2004, the Committee expressed an intention to be "patient" regarding the removal of monetary policy accommodation. In May 2004, a month before the Committee began to increase its target for the federal funds rate, it said that accommodation was likely to be removed at a pace that would be "measured." For discussions of the potential benefits of such communication, particularly in the face of possible deflationary risks, see Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Woodford (2007).Return to text 3.Many saw the relatively weak recovery as reflecting a "capital overhang" left over from the rapid pace of investment in information technology during the boom. According to this view, the capital overhang both inhibited new capital investment and, by leading to ongoing productivity improvements, also limited the need for employers to add workers to meet the relatively moderate increases in final demand that were forthcoming. As noted in the text, geopolitical uncertainties as well as corporate scandals added to the uncertainties faced by employers.Return to text 4.For discussion of the Japanese experience and appropriate policies near the zero bound, see Fuhrer and Madigan (1997), Reifschneider and Williams (2000), and Ahearne and others (2002).Return to text 5.Kohn (2007) discusses some of these limitations and anticipates some of the points made in my remarks today.Return to text 6.Taylor (1999b) contains a set of studies comparing economic performance in a range of economic models under alternative rules and parameter settings.Return to text 7.Inflation measures are on a four-quarter basis. Core inflation excludes the prices of food and energy. Because it excludes the most volatile components of the price index, core inflation was often used by the FOMC as an indicator of the underlying trend of inflation.Return to text 8.More precisely, because inflation is measured on a four-quarter basis, the current inflation rate corresponds to the rate of price increase over the current quarter and the prior three quarters.Return to text 9.FOMC projections between 2005 and 2007 are obtained fromMonetary Policy Report to the Congress, published in February and July; projections for core inflation are converted to projections for headline inflation based on staff calculations that in turn rely on energy futures prices. Starting in 2008, FOMC inflation forecasts, for both core and headline inflation, become available four times each year in theSummary of Economic Projections(see, for example, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Minutes of Federal Open Market Committee, January 9, 21, and 29-30, 2008," press release, February 20).Return to text 10.In the same spirit, we also replace the output gap as measured retrospectively by the FRB/US model with the output gap from that model as measured in real time. This change has no significant effect on the policy prescriptions over most of the period.Return to text 11.These data are based on repeat sales of specific homes, which helps to correct for changes in the composition of home sales, and include information on homes financed outside of the government-sponsored enterprises, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.Return to text An important, and perhaps underappreciated, issue is that measurement of house prices has improved considerably since the early part of the past decade. The LoanPerformance index on which Slide 5 is based corrects for changes in the composition of sales through the use of repeat sales, as noted in the text. During the first half of the past decade, however, the only publicly available house price indexes making that important correction were based on data taken from mortgages purchased by the government-sponsored enterprises, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. However, because they were based on homes purchased using so-called conforming mortgages, these indexes missed price movements in many houses financed with jumbo, alt-A, and subprime mortgages. See Dokko and others (2009). 12.See, for example, Del Negro and Otrok (2007), Jarocinski and Smets (2008), Edge, Kiley, and Laforte.Return to text (2009), and Iacoviello and Neri (forthcoming). 13.See Dokko and others (2009) for details. The authors stop the sample in 2002 to exclude the period in question.Return to text 14.Calculations are for a house price of $225,000 and a 20 percent down payment.Return to text 15.The figures in Slide 7, which are for prime borrowers, also take no account of the fact that subprime borrowers using ARM products typically faced both higher interest rates and additional fees.Return to text 16.The simulation covered the period from 2003 through 2005. The year 2006 was excluded because actual policy and that prescribed by the 1993 Taylor rule were not significantly different in that year. When the 1993 Taylor rule is assumed to govern monetary policy, the simulated federal funds rate averages 2.6 percent from 2003 to 2005, 70 basis points higher than in the baseline. The increase in the federal funds rate is less than the difference shown in Slide 4 because of feedback effects working through the economy; a less accommodative policy rule reduces output and inflation, which in turn limits the increase in rates implied by the policy rule.Return to text 17.Note that the figure ascribes different degrees of monetary ease to different countries within the euro area; although these countries share the common monetary policy of the European Central Bank, differences across countries in inflation and output gaps imply that the degree of policy accommodationrelative to economic conditions in each countrycan differ. In particular, holding constant the interest rate set by the European Central Bank, the Taylor rule will tend to impute easier monetary policies to countries with strong economies. Of course, all else equal, a strong economy, even if its strength is unrelated to monetary policy, should experience more robust house prices. Consequently, the relationship shown in Slide 9 could potentially overstate the causalrelationship between monetary policy and house price appreciation. For the group of euro-zone countries included in Slide 9, the slope of the relationship between house prices and monetary policy accommodation is economically more consequential but not statistically significant (t= -1.55,R2= 0.23).Return to text 18.Ahearne and others (2005) obtain similar results.Return to text 19.The slope coefficient of -3.93 is statistically significant at the 1 percent level (t= -2.84,p= 0.0109).Return to text
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Brimmer Policy Forum, American Economic Association Annual Meeting, Atlanta, Georgia I'm pleased to participate in this year's Brimmer Policy Forum. Governor Brimmer and I did not overlap at the Board, but I admired his work from my perch at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, where I began my career in the System. And my colleagues at the Federal Reserve and I have benefited greatly since then from his analytical approach to difficult public policy issues. This morning I thought it might be useful for me to review the course of monetary policy through the crisis and highlight a few issues for policy in the future. I'd like to make two important clarifications before I get started: First, despite the title of the Forum, what I am about to discuss is not President Obama's monetary policy--it is the Federal Reserve's. Fortunately, the Administration has been careful to respect the independence of the Federal Reserve in the conduct of monetary policy. It recognizes that the Federal Reserve's insulation from short-term political pressures is essential for fostering achievement of its legislative objectives of stable prices and maximum employment over time. Second, the views you are about to hear are my own and not necessarily those of any other member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Monetary Policy PastAs a prelude to discussing where we are now and issues for the future, I thought it would be helpful to summarize the actions that we took over the past two years. In August 2007, we recognized that we were coping with a potentially serious disruption in financial markets that could feed back adversely on the economy and job creation. With liquidity in key funding markets drying up and some securitization markets closing down, lower policy interest rates alone were not going to be enough to keep financial conditions from tightening severely for households and businesses. In the end, we had to operate on multiple fronts to stabilize the financial markets and foster a rebound in the economy. Expanding liquidity facilities.Our first actions were to ease the access of depository institutions to Federal Reserve liquidity. But, as the crisis worsened, it became apparent that these actions would be insufficient. Securities markets had come to play a prominent role in channeling credit in our economy, and severe disruptions outside the U.S. banking sector were threatening to reduce economic activity. To counter the financial shocks hitting the economy and support the flow of credit to households and businesses, we then needed to extend liquidity support to a range of nonbank institutions and to some financial markets. As we expanded the reach of our liquidity facilities, we generally followed the time-honored precepts of central bank behavior in a crisis: Extend credit freely to solvent institutions at a penalty rate against adequate collateral. By making liquidity available more broadly, we were trying to break the vicious spiral of uncertainty and fear feeding back on asset values and credit availability, and from there to the economy. We also found we needed to innovate by making liquidity available through auctions as well as standing facilities to overcome firms' reluctance to borrow from the Federal Reserve out of concern that the borrowing could be inferred by market participants and viewed as an indication of financial weakness. Lowering policy interest rates.In view of the likelihood that financial developments would lead to a weakening of aggregate demand, we began to lower the federal funds rate in September 2007, well before any hard evidence had become available regarding the magnitude of the restraint that it might impose on economic activity. As it became increasingly evident over the course of 2008 that the financial disruptions were sending the U.S. economy into recession, we picked up the pace of reductions in our federal funds rate target. Importantly, our ability to move aggressively was enhanced by an environment of already low inflation and stable inflation expectations. Buying longer-term assets.To ease financial conditions further even after our policy interest rates had approached zero, we needed to operate directly on longer-term segments of the financial markets. Even though various types of debt securities are ordinarily quite substitutable, our purchases of agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS), agency debt, and Treasury securities evidently were successful in reducing long-term interest rates, partly because during the crisis, private-sector participants had a very marked preference for short-term assets. Interest rate guidance.In this highly unusual situation, and with the normal response of monetary policy interest rates constrained by the zero lower bound, we consider it especially important that we convey as clearly as possible our policy intentions to market participants as they formulate their own expectations for the future path of interest rates. To help in this regard, we have noted in the statements we have released at the conclusion of each FOMC meeting our expectation that exceptionally low rates will likely be warranted for an extended period. Inflation forecasts and objectives.Keeping inflation expectations anchored is always important but especially so in current circumstances, given the potential effects of the unprecedented economic developments and policy actions of the past two years on households' and businesses' views of the price outlook. To provide more information to the public about our own expectations and objectives, we have extended the horizon of the published projections of FOMC participants to five years and have supplemented these projections by reporting the long-term inflation rates Committee participants view as most consistent with satisfying our dual mandate. Stabilizing systemically important institutions.In the absence of any other governmental agency having the authority to fill the role, we have lent to stabilize several systemically important institutions, any one of which--had it failed--would have posed a serious threat to the financial system and the economy. These actions, while necessary, were not well suited for a central bank, and we have urged the Congress to enact other means of safeguarding financial stability in such circumstances while imposing costs on shareholders, management, and, whenever possible, creditors. Monetary Policy PresentThe broad suite of monetary, financial, and fiscal policies that have been applied, along with the natural resilience of the economy, has led to a marked improvement in financial markets and the beginnings of a recovery in economic activity. Financial markets are performing much better now than they were in early 2009. Our liquidity facilities, the reduction of uncertainty about the capital and liquidity needs of the largest banks after the results of our capital assessment were published in May, and the emerging stabilization of the housing and other key sectors of the economy have helped a number of financial markets resume more normal functioning.1As a consequence, borrowing from the Federal Reserve has dropped dramatically. In addition, many securitization markets appear to be functioning more normally, partly reflecting the support provided by the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility that we implemented in early 2009 with the support of the Treasury Department. As we affirmed at the December FOMC meeting, the Federal Reserve is in the process of winding down and closing most of our extraordinary liquidity windows. Our announcements of purchases of agency MBS, agency debt, and Treasury securities helped to lower long-term interest rates and increase the availability of mortgages to households and bond financing to businesses. In addition, our near-zero policy rate and the improving economic outlook have induced shifts by private investors into longer-term and riskier assets, helping to reverse a portion of the previous spike in spreads that occurred as the economy and financial markets deteriorated. With markets improving and the economy expanding, the FOMC has also indicated that it is tapering down its purchases of Treasury, MBS, and agency securities. But the cost of credit remains relatively high and its availability relatively limited for many borrowers. Although many long-term interest rates are fairly low, spreads in bond markets are somewhat elevated--not surprising, perhaps, as many borrowers are still under stress with the unemployment rate quite high and utilization of the capital stock still very low. Some securitization markets continue to be effectively closed or severely impaired, including those for larger home mortgages and commercial real estate loans. Under these circumstances, some borrowers will be more dependent than in the past on banks for credit, but banks are still reluctant and very cautious lenders. Banks have been reducing their book of loans for about a year; in part, this drop reflects weaker demand as businesses have cut back on inventories and households have been rebuilding their balance sheets by increasing saving. But the weakness in bank lending also results from cutbacks in supply. Our surveys show that through late 2009, banks continued to tighten terms and standards for lending and to raise the rates they charge relative to benchmark rates. I expect bank credit to turn around only slowly as banks rebuild capital and become less uncertain about economic prospects. Lingering credit constraints are a key reason why I expect the strengthening in economic activity to be gradual and the drop in the unemployment rate to be slow. Even as the impetus from fiscal policy and the inventory cycle wanes later in 2010, however, private final demand should be bolstered by further improvements in securities markets and the gradual pickup in credit availability from banks. In addition, spending on houses, consumer durables, and business capital equipment should rebound from what appear to be exceptionally low levels. We have already seen some hints of this increase in private demand in recent months. But, understandably, households and businesses and bank lenders remain very cautious, and the odds are that the pickup in spending will not be very sharp. In an environment of considerable persisting slack in labor and product markets, and with productivity having increased substantially in recent quarters, cost and price inflation should remain quite subdued. In the short run, headline inflation will be driven importantly by movements in energy and food prices; judging from the structure of futures prices, markets are not expecting a further sharp rise in those prices, and thus headline inflation should retreat toward core inflation. Inflation outside of the food and energy sectors has been declining slowly, held up by relatively stable inflation expectations. Some further slowing is possible if the economic rebound is as gradual as I think it is likely to be. As I have already noted, keeping inflation expectations anchored will be critical for achieving our objectives for prices and output. The FOMC has recently reiterated its expectation that the considerable remaining slack in labor and product markets and subdued trends in inflation and inflation expectations are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. Monetary Policy FutureThe Federal Reserve will face a number of challenges in the conduct of monetary policy in the period ahead. I will discuss two of them: further exit from our extraordinary measures, including the large volume of reserves, our outsized portfolio of MBS, agency, and Treasury securities, and our near-zero policy interest rate; and evaluating any lessons from the recent experience for the conduct of policy--in particular, the potential role of financial stability and asset prices in monetary policy formulation. Exit. I'mnot going to discuss the technical aspects of an exit from our extraordinary measures; the Federal Reserve has kept the public apprised of the development of our exit tools, and the appropriate use and sequencing of these tools is under active discussion by the FOMC. But I do want to make some general strategic points. First, we have no shortage of tools for firming the stance of policy, and we will be able to unwind our actions when and as appropriate. Because we can now pay interest on excess reserves, we can raise short-term interest rates even with an extraordinarily large volume of reserves in the banking system. Increasing the rate we offer to banks on deposits at the Federal Reserve will put upward pressure on all short-term interest rates. In addition, we are developing and testing techniques for draining large volumes of reserves through reverse repurchase agreements and through term deposits at the Federal Reserve. And we can sell portions of our holdings of MBS, agency debt, and Treasury securities if we determine that doing so is an appropriate approach to tightening financial conditions when the time comes. Second, the fiscal situation will not impede timely tightening. The trajectory of the federal budget is a serious economic issue that must be addressed to promote sustained and balanced economic growth. But a large and growing federal deficit will not stop the Federal Reserve from exiting from current policies when that's needed to keep prices stable and the economy on a path to sustained high employment. The alternative of letting inflation rise would be inconsistent with our mandate and would only cause greater volatility, uncertainty, and inefficiencies that would reduce the growth of our economy over time. Higher interest rates could complicate an already difficult fiscal trajectory, and this possibility further underscores the critical importance of maintaining Federal Reserve independence from short-term political pressures. Third, because monetary policy typically acts with long lags on the economy and price level, the choice of when and how to exit will depend on forecasts. We will need to begin withdrawing extraordinary monetary stimulus well before the economy returns to high levels of resource utilization. The FOMC has been clear that its expectations for the stance of monetary policy depend on economic conditions, including resource utilization, inflation, and inflation expectations. Accordingly, the judgment as to when to begin initiating steps to withdraw stimulus will depend on the outlook for these variables. Finally, it is well to remember that we are still in uncharted waters. We do not have any recent experience with financial disruptions of the breadth, persistence, and consequences of those that we have experienced over the past several years. And we have no experience with most of the sorts of actions the Federal Reserve has taken to counter the shock. The calibration of our exit from these policies is complicated by a paucity of evidence on how unconventional policies work. We will need to be flexible and adjust as we gain experience. Financial stability and asset prices. The past few years have illustrated two lessons about the relationship between macroeconomic stability and financial stability. First, macroeconomic stability doesn't guarantee financial stability; indeed, in some circumstances, macroeconomic stability may foster financial instability by lulling people into complacency about risks. And second, some shocks to the financial system are so substantial, especially when they weaken a large number of intermediaries, that decreases in aggregate demand can be large, long lasting, and not quickly or easily remedied by conventional monetary policy. Given the heavy costs that have resulted from the financial crisis, the question naturally arises as to whether the circumstances that caused the crisis could have been avoided. Among other crucial policy issues, we now need to reexamine, with open minds, whether conventional monetary policy should be used in the future to address developing financial imbalances as well as the traditional medium-term macroeconomic goals of full employment and price stability. The key question is whether we are likely to know enough about asset price misalignments and the likely effects of policy adjustments to give us the confidence to deliberately tack away for a time from exclusive pursuit of fostering aggregate price stability and high employment. Obviously preventing situations like the current one would be very beneficial. But against this important objective we need to balance the potential costs and uncertainties associated with using monetary policy for that purpose, especially in light of the difficulty in judging the appropriateness of asset valuations. One type of cost arises because monetary policy is a blunt instrument. Increases in interest rates damp activity across a wide variety of sectors, many of which may not be experiencing speculative activity. Moreover, monetary policy generally operates with one instrument--a short-term interest rate--and using it to damp asset price movements implies more medium-term variability in output and inflation around their objectives. Among other things, inflation expectations could become less well anchored, diminishing the ability of the central bank to counter economic fluctuations. In the current situation, with output expected to be well below its potential for some time and inflation likely to be under the 2 percent level that many FOMC participants see as desirable over the long run, tightening policy to head off a perceived threat of asset price misalignment could be expensive in terms of medium-term economic stability. Furthermore, small policy adjustments may not be very effective in reining in speculative excesses. Our experience in 1999 and 2005 was that even substantial increases in interest rates did not seem to have an effect on dot.com stock speculation in the first instance, and housing price increases in the second. And larger adjustments would incur greater incremental costs. Policy adjustments need to damp speculation; if higher rates just weaken output and inflation without damping speculation, the economy could be even more vulnerable when the speculative bubble bursts. We do not have good theories or empirical evidence to guide policymakers in their efforts to use short-term interest rates to limit financial speculation. For all these reasons, my strong preference would be to use regulation and supervision to strengthen the financial system and lean against developing problems. Given our current state of knowledge, monetary policy would be used only if imbalances were building and regulatory policies were either unavailable or had been shown to be ineffective. But, of course, we should all be working to improve our state of knowledge, so as to better understand economic and financial behavior and to further expand the range of policy tools that can be employed to enhance macroeconomic performance. That objective is one that Governor Brimmer has worked hard to promote. Footnotes 1.For more on the results of the capital assessment, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009),The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program: Overview of Results (40 KB PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, May 7).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of a Prompt Corrective Action Directive with the consent of Barnes Banking Company, Kaysville, Utah, a state chartered member bank. A copy of the Directive is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of a Prompt Corrective Action Directive with the consent of Sun American Bank, Boca Raton, Florida, a state chartered member bank. A copy of the Directive is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a Prompt Corrective Action Directive with the consent of Old Southern Bank, Orlando, Florida, a state chartered member bank. A copy of the Directive is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced preliminary unaudited results indicating that the Reserve Banks provided for payments of approximately $46.1 billion of their estimated 2009 net income of $52.1 billion to the U.S. Treasury. This represents a $14.4 billion increase over the 2008 results ($31.7 billion of $35.5 billion of net income). The increase was primarily due to increased earnings on securities holdings during 2009. Under the Board's policy, the Reserve Banks are required to transfer their net income to the U.S. Treasury after providing for the payment of statutory dividends to member banks and equating surplus to paid-in capital. In 2009, statutory dividends totaled $1.4 billion and approximately $4.6 billion of earnings were used to equate surplus to paid-in capital. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2009 net earnings were derived primarily from $46.1 billion in earnings on securities acquired through open market operations (U.S. Treasury securities, government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) debt securities, and federal agency and GSE mortgage-backed securities), $5.5 billion in net earnings from consolidated limited liability companies (LLCs), which were created in response to the financial crisis, and $2.9 billion in earnings on loans extended to depository institutions, primary dealers, and others. The significant increase in earnings on securities was primarily due to increased securities holdings as a result of the Federal Reserve's response to the severe economic downturn. Net earnings from currency swap arrangements, which have been established with 14 central banks, and investments denominated in foreign currencies totaled $2.6 billion. Additional net earnings of $1.5 billion were derived primarily from fees of $0.7 billion for the provision of priced services to depository institutions. Operating expenses of the twelve Reserve Banks, net of amounts reimbursed by the U.S. Treasury and other entities for services the Reserve Banks provided as fiscal agents, totaled $3.4 billion in 2009. In addition, the interest paid to depository institutions on reserve balances totaled $2.2 billion. The Reserve Banks were assessed for Board expenditures, including the cost of new currency, totaling $0.9 billion. The preliminary results include valuation adjustments through September 30 for loans and consolidated LLCs. The final results, which will be presented in the Reserve Banks' annual financial reports and the Board of Governors' Annual Report, will reflect valuation adjustments through December 31.
Governor Elizabeth A. Duke At the Economic Forecast Forum, Raleigh, North Carolina I am very pleased to be here today to discuss the economic outlook. The opening of a new year is traditionally an opportunity to take stock of where we have been and where we are headed. This year, such an assessment is particularly appropriate because, as we enter 2010, the U.S. economy has begun to emerge from the prolonged period of economic turmoil that began about two years ago. After a year and a half of decline, real GDP turned up in the third quarter of 2009. Recent data on production and spending suggest that economic activity continued to increase at a solid rate during the final months of last year. I expect to see a continued moderate recovery in economic activity in 2010, supported by a further healing in financial markets and accommodative monetary policy. The decisive actions taken by policymakers beginning in the fall of 2008 were instrumental in stabilizing financial markets and laying the groundwork for this recovery. However, while the restraint on economic activity from the financial shocks appears to be easing, any realistic assessment of the economic outlook must take into account prospects for conditions in credit markets, which will be a critical element shaping the recovery. Thus, I plan to discuss how I see these developments influencing the economy over the coming year. Before I begin, I want to emphasize that the views that I will be presenting are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Recent Economic and Financial DevelopmentsThe recent news on employment, production, and spending has been encouraging. The November labor market report showed the smallest loss in payroll jobs since early 2008, and in recent weeks the number of new claims for unemployment insurance has continued to trend down. Nonetheless, while layoffs have started to recede, hiring remains weak, and unemployment is still both high and unusually concentrated among the long-term unemployed, with nearly 6 million individuals out of work for at least six months. During the first half of 2009, firms cut production sharply in order to align inventories with rapidly declining sales. As demand has improved, firms have increased production levels closer to those of final sales and slowed the pace of inventory liquidation. Our Federal Reserve index of industrial production, which turned up in the middle of last year, has now been rising for five months. The recovery in the motor vehicle industry has been an important contributor to the turnaround in manufacturing, but a range of other industries also appears to be benefiting from the improvement in demand here and abroad. In particular, exports posted a second large monthly increase in October, with substantial gains in shipments of capital goods and consumer goods. The data for October and November showed an encouraging continuation of the positive trend in domestic spending that was reported in the third quarter. In the household sector, purchases of new motor vehicles rose further in November, and other retail spending posted solid increases in recent months. Sales of existing homes, which had been on the rise since the beginning of the year, showed further strong gains from September through November, likely the result of the combination of bargain hunting, low mortgage rates, the new homebuyer tax credit, and an influx of investors sensing a market bottom. By comparison, improvement in the market for new single-family homes has been disappointing, and construction of new single-family homes, which turned up over the first half of last year, seemed to flatten out in the second half. The slow improvement in new homebuilding is a reminder that the housing market is still being weighed down by a number of factors including the high level of foreclosures, the tight credit conditions faced by some builders, and reduced mortgage availability for some households, especially those not meeting the criteria required for their mortgages to be eligible for securitization in government-insured pools. Competition from lower-priced resales and foreclosures could lead new home sales to lag relative to existing homes for some time. In the business sector, spending on equipment and software has also firmed. The third quarter saw a pickup in purchases of motor vehicles as well as high-tech equipment and software. More recently, shipments and orders for other types of nondefense capital goods have turned up. Meanwhile, construction outlays on nonresidential buildings have continued to fall sharply, as that sector faces extremely unfavorable economic and financial conditions. Turning to developments in the financial sector, many markets recovered significantly last year from the widespread dislocations that occurred in the second half of 2008. Functioning in interbank and other short-term funding markets has improved considerably, interest rate spreads on corporate bonds have narrowed significantly, prices of syndicated loans have increased, and some securitization markets have resumed operation. Equity prices have increased sharply since their low in early 2009, and consensus forecasts of year-ahead corporate earnings have been rising. Reflecting the very accommodative stance of monetary policy, borrowing rates for many households and businesses remain low. Additionally, Federal Reserve purchases of longer-term Treasury and agency securities, including agency mortgage-backed securities, helped to lower rates on mortgages and other instruments. The Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) has helped to facilitate a resumption of activity in securitization markets for consumer auto and credit card loans. In addition, the TALF has supported small business lending through equipment loans, floor plan financing for automobiles and boats, fleet financing, financing of small business insurance premiums, and receivables for independent mortgage servicers, enabling them to make additional loan modifications. More than 3 million auto and student loans to households have been facilitated through the TALF as well as more than 480,000 loans to small businesses and millions of credit card accounts. TALF loans also have been used to fund purchases of commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), and recently appear to be providing a catalyst for the new- issue CMBS market. Still, access to credit for many households and smaller businesses that largely depend on banks for credit remains difficult. Risk spreads on some types of loans at banks have continued to rise, and the decline in bank loans outstanding has been stark. For example, our data show that total loans on banks' books fell at an annual rate of more than 11 percent during the third quarter of 2009, with all major loan categories contributing to the decline. In addition, unused credit lines at commercial banks have dropped almost 25 percent from their peak at the end of 2007; unused credit card lines, the biggest category, are nearly $1 trillion below their peak. A number of factors are at work in explaining the reduction in bank loans. For instance, for most commercial banks, the quality of existing loan portfolios continues to deteriorate as levels of delinquent and nonperforming loans are still rising. In response, banks have reduced existing lines of credit sharply and tightened their standards and terms for new credit. In addition, banks with capital positions that have been eroded by losses or those with limited access to capital markets may be reducing risky assets to improve their capital positions, especially amid continued uncertainty about the economic outlook and possible future loan losses. During this financial crisis, a number of lending relationships have been severed as individual banks sought to reduce loan portfolios or concentrations within those portfolios or as banks failed or merged. Established banking relationships are particularly important to small businesses, who generally do not have access to broader capital markets and for whom credit extension is often based on private information acquired through repeated interactions over time. When existing lending relationships are broken, time may be required for other banks to establish and build such relationships, allowing lending to resume. The reduction in the availability of credit, however, is not the whole story. There is also less demand for credit. As businesses reduced inventory levels and capital spending, they tended to pay down debt and build cash positions. Moreover, large firms replaced bank debt by accessing the bond market in considerable volume last year. Even small businesses, in a survey by the National Federation of Independent Business, report that while loans remain difficult to get, their most important business problem is lack of customer demand, a factor that has likely restrained their demand for funds. Furthermore, some consumers, perhaps in particular those who are highly leveraged, may be trying to pay down debt and rebuild their balance sheets. While some potential borrowers seek less credit, others are ineligible to borrow. Weakened balance sheets, reduced income, falling real estate collateral values, and in some cases, a recent history of payment problems, presumably have made it difficult for some businesses and consumers to qualify for loans, especially under current stricter standards. My conversations with bankers in recent weeks, however, lead me to be somewhat optimistic that we may begin to see an increase in bank loans later this year. Nearly all the bankers with whom I have talked report that their business plans for 2010 are based on achieving increases in loan volumes. Most are expecting that loan losses will peak later this year, as the bottoming of the housing market becomes clearer and the economic recovery takes firmer hold. And a few bankers are beginning to report renewed competition for new loans. The Federal Reserve has been working with banks to foster improved access to credit and prudent underwriting of new loans, and we will continue to do so. I believe that the considerable support that we have given to bank lending through accommodative monetary policy and our borrowing facilities has been critically important. In addition, on the regulatory side, in November 2008, the Federal Reserve along with the other banking agencies issued supervisory guidance that emphasized the importance of continuing to meet the credit needs of creditworthy borrowers, while maintaining appropriate prudence in lending decisions.1More recently, the banking agencies jointly issued guidance encouraging banks to work with borrowers to restructure troubled commercial real estate (CRE) loans in a prudent manner, and reminded examiners that--absent other adverse factors--a loan should not be classified as impaired based solely on a decline in collateral value.2We continue to work with the large banks that participated in the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (popularly known as the stress tests) to ensure that they have sufficient capital to support lending, even as many of these institutions repay their government capital. The OutlookIn my view, the outlook for economic activity depends importantly on our ability to build on the progress to date in improving the operation of financial markets and restoring the flow of credit to households and businesses. Although household wealth has received a boost from the gains in the stock market over the last nine months and from the stabilization in house prices, household balance sheets remain weak. In 2009, household income received some temporary support from the tax cuts and transfer payments enacted with the fiscal stimulus package and from the extensions of unemployment insurance. Over the coming year, households should begin to see gains in income associated with an improvement in the labor market, and the drag on spending from past declines in real net worth should ease. As their income and balance sheets improve, consumers should have better access to credit. Favorable trends in income and employment should also bolster consumer confidence, although one risk I see to the outlook for household spending is the possibility of a rise in the personal saving rate as consumers choose to shore up their balance sheets rather than spend. While good in the long run, increased saving means consumers are providing less of a short-run boost to the economy. The outlook for homebuilding will depend critically on the continuation of the uptrend in the demand for housing that began in early 2009. I anticipate that low mortgage rates and house prices that are still very low compared with the recent past will continue to provide important support for demand. And a shift in expectations from falling house prices to modest appreciation should encourage buyers to invest in houses. That said, the headwinds in housing and mortgage markets remain relatively strong and are likely to restrain the pace at which the residential construction sector recovers. Many of the existing homeowners who face payment problems are having trouble restructuring their loans, and the large backlog of foreclosed properties will likely take several years to resolve. Tighter standards for government-backed loans and still-restrictive credit conditions in private loan markets are also likely to slow the housing recovery. Nevertheless, with the inventory of new homes having been worked down to a relatively low level, even a gradual strengthening of demand should lead to an upturn in homebuilding. Prospects for a recovery in business investment are getting better as we move into 2010. Typically, business confidence builds as firms see a sustained increase in sales and output. Various indicators of business sentiment rebounded over the second half of 2009 as economic activity accelerated, and the latest surveys of capital spending plans have been more positive. That said, the amount of unused capacity in the business sector is substantial, which implies that the recovery in spending on equipment and software will likely be more gradual than typically occurs during a cyclical recovery. While firms to date seem to have been cautious about undertaking any expansion, they appear in a good position to act as confidence returns. After slashing investment and reducing costs during the recession, nonfinancial corporations have built substantial internal funds, and firms with access to capital markets have been finding them generally receptive. Corporate bond issuance for both investment-grade and high-yield issues remained quite solid through November. My expectation is that the interaction of an ongoing recovery in economic activity and improved credit conditions will over time produce a moderate acceleration in equipment and software investment. Unfortunately, the outlook for commercial real estate is much less favorable. Hit hard by the loss of businesses and employment, a good deal of retail, office, and industrial space is standing vacant. In addition, many businesses have cut expenses by renegotiating existing leases. The combination of reduced cash flows and higher rates of return required by investors leads to lower valuations, and many existing buildings are selling at a loss. As a result, credit conditions in this market are particularly strained. Commercial mortgage delinquency rates have soared. According to our October survey of senior loan officers, banks continued to tighten standards on CRE loans and, presumably in light of the poor economic outlook for the sector, appear to have been reluctant to refinance maturing construction and land development loans. In addition, the CMBS market has only just recently seen its first activity in a year and a half. In this environment, a turnaround in CRE is likely to lag the improvement in overall economic activity. However, compared with the situation in the early 1990s, the problems in this sector now appear to be due largely to poor business fundamentals rather than widespread overbuilding, suggesting that the performance of the CRE sector will gradually begin to improve as the economy continues to strengthen. An important element of a sustained economic recovery will be an improvement in labor market conditions. Employment gains typically lag the recovery in sales and production in the early months of an economic upturn. In many cycles, the lag occurs because businesses need to restore productivity and are reluctant to hire until they are more confident that any pickup in sales will be maintained. In this cycle, the reductions in jobs and hours of work have been so deep, and the pressure to cut costs has been so strong, that businesses in the aggregate have already realized solid gains in productivity. As a result, I expect that businesses will begin to add jobs this year, but I anticipate that they will do so cautiously in order to hang on to their cost savings and efficiency gains. Even as the unemployment rate begins to decline later this year, it likely will remain high by historical standards. Based on the experience of the last two economic recoveries, net gains of roughly 100,000 payroll jobs each month are needed to reduce the jobless rate by 0.1 percentage point. Currently, at 10 percent, the unemployment rate is almost 4 percentage points higher than its peak after the 2001 recession, and a sustained recovery will be required to reduce it significantly. Similarly, other measures of resource utilization are likely to show considerable, albeit diminishing, margins of slack for some time. In that environment, product markets will be highly competitive, businesses will have little pricing power, and the incentives to control costs will remain strong. Both overall consumer price inflation and the core rate, which excludes food and energy costs, look to have been about 1-1/2 percent in 2009 after having been closer to 2 percent in 2008. To be sure, recent readings on overall consumer price inflation have been boosted by another run-up in energy prices. But those increases marked a reversal of some of the large declines that occurred in late 2008 and early 2009. More fundamentally, with substantial resource slack likely continuing to restrain cost pressures and with longer-term inflation expectations stable, I anticipate that the subdued trend in inflation that we have seen for the past two years will continue. Summary and Policy OutlookCombining the various factors likely to influence the path of economic activity this year, including importantly the outlook for financial markets, I expect that the economic recovery will continue at a moderate pace. As the year goes on, I anticipate that we will see more signs that the improvements in financial markets, credit conditions, and business sales are reinforcing each other, leading to greater confidence and improving the prospects for 2011. Even as economic activity strengthens, however, levels of resource utilization are likely to remain below historical norms for some time. As a result, cost pressures should be contained, inflation expectations should continue to be stable, and inflation is likely to remain subdued. In the current environment, the FOMC continues to anticipate that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. Such policy accommodation is warranted to provide support for a return over time to more desirable levels of real activity and unemployment in the context of price stability. In addition, the Federal Reserve is committed to continue working with banks and bank holding companies to facilitate the flow of credit to consumers and businesses. Of course, if economic conditions and the economic outlook were to change significantly, the outlook for policy would need to be adjusted as well. We have a wide range of tools for removing monetary policy accommodation when that becomes appropriate. The Committee will evaluate the appropriate stance of policy in light of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in financial markets, with the aim of fostering maximum employment and price stability. Footnotes 1.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), “Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers,” joint press release, November 12.Return to text 2.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), “Federal Reserve Adopts Policy Statement Supporting Prudent Commercial Real Estate (CRE) Loan Workouts,” press release, October 30.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Heritage Bancshares, Orange Park, Florida, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between American Bank of Baxter Springs, Baxter Springs, Kansas, a state chartered bank that is a member of the Federal Reserve System, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Bank of Virginia, a state chartered member bank, Midlothian, Virginia, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, and the Virginia Bureau of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Community Financial Holding Company, Inc., Duluth, Georgia, a registered bank holding company, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and the Banking Commissioner of the State of Georgia. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Cornerstone Bancshares, Inc., a registered bank holding company, Cornerstone Bank, a state chartered bank that is a member of the Federal Reserve System, both of Overland Park, Kansas, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, and the Kansas Office of the State Bank Commissioner. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among First Cherokee Bancshares, Inc., Woodstock, Georgia, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Guaranty Bancorp, a registered bank holding company, Guaranty Bank and Trust Company, a state chartered member bank, both of Denver, Colorado, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, and the Colorado Division of Banking. A copy of the Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among North Valley Bancorp, a registered bank holding company, North Valley Bank, a state chartered member bank, both of Redding, California, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Northfield Bancshares, Inc., a registered bank holding company, Community Resource Bank, a state member bank, both of Northfield, Minnesota, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Prime Pacific Financial Services, Inc., Lynnwood, Washington, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Riverside Banking Company, Fort Pierce, Florida, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Saehan Bancorp, Los Angeles, California, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Sunshine Bankshares, Inc., Port Orange, Florida, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Tamalpais Bancorp, San Rafael, California, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between The ShoreBank Corporation, Chicago, Illinois, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Wakulla Bancorp, Crawfordville, Florida, a registered bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.